--- 
title: "VOL X, No 4 [ Spring 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## The Blendsational Language of Contemporary Commerce
*Barbara Hunt Lazerson, Illinois State University*

Businessmen are busting their @#$%&cent;@ to sell us goods
and even save us money.  The products they sell are
plentiful, automatic, delicious, terrific, fantastic, and sensational.
Participating in the marketplace is a fun thing to do; it
is, in fact, an act of celebration.  At least, that is what some of
the terminology of contemporary commerce would lead us to
believe.

We are bombarded daily by advertisements that encourage
us to buy!  buy!  buy!  Many of the wordsmiths who would
influence the way we spend the limited number of dollars we
have are masters of the neologism.  That is, they are skilled at
producing from everyday words novel, attention-grabbing
blends that jump out at us from billboards, television screens,
and the pages of newspapers and magazines and exhort us to
purchase blendsational products.

The adjectives *delicious, terrific, fantastic*, and *sensational*
have been part of the English language for centuries.  In the
past few years, they have been overworked in describing
products and therefore have lost most of their impact.  Nevertheless,
merchants often actually do want prospective customers
to think of their products as being delicious, terrific,
fantastic, or sensational.  What can be done to convey the
desired image without resorting to the use of a tired, overly
familiar term?  The answer is simple.  Create a blend that
employs a clipped form of *delicious, terrific, fantastic*, or
*sensational* as the second element.

The blend *Apple-licious* was created to name an apple-flavored
drink made by Pepsi Cola General Bottlers.  *Bubblicious*
is the name of a bubble gum produced by American
Chicle.  Honey Bran cereal by Ralston has been described as
*honeylicious.*  Two bundt cake mixes by Pillsbury are said to be
*tunnelicious.*  Thornton's English Chocolate Shop has exhorted
people to buy their truffles, because these chocolates are—what
else?— *Truffle-icious*!

K-Mart once had an *Easterrific* sale; Zayre Department
Store, a *Zayre-iffic* sale; and Sears, a *Toy-rific* toy sale.  A
restaurant in Milwaukee offers its customers a *Lobsterrific*
special when it sells lobster dinners at a reduced price.  Taco
John's, a fast-food restaurant that sells tacos and other Mexican
foods, claims that its products are *Tacorrific.*  Dean Foods of
Illinois sells a chocolate drink that is named *Choco-rrific.*

*Funtastic* has been used to describe a number of vacation
trips offered by various travel agencies.  A trip from New York
to Amsterdam via Finnair has been labeled *Finntastic*, although
*fin-tastic* values are what a St. Louis seafood market claims to
offer its customers.  *CRANtastic* has been used to describe a
cranberry cocktail drink.  A real-estate ad describing a 152-acre
modern cattle farm bore the headline *Farm-tastic*.  *Silksational*
is the name of a dress sold by Saks Fifth Avenue.  Perfume by
Nina Ricci has been advertised as *Scentsational.  Sunsational*
has been used to describe vacations, summer clothes, and a
suntanned Barbie doll.  A billboard near Chicago proclaimed a
mixture of Seagram's 7 Crown and cola to be *Sevensational.*
*Soundsational* has been used to describe stereo equipment.

As the preceding terms demonstrate, blending allows an
effete laudatory adjective such as *delicious, terrific, fantastic*, or
*sensational* to be combined with another word, thereby producing
a neologism that is tailor-made to suit the need of the
merchant.

As opposed to our ancestors, who were forced to live by
the sweat of their brow, we contemporary consumers want and
expect products that will give us maximum results for minimum
effort.  The notion that a product is a labor-saving device
can be conveyed by calling it automatic: automatic coffeemaker,
automatic egg cooker, automatic washer, etc.  But
such terms lack pizzazz!  How can they be endowed with
greater eye-appeal and still get the most-for-least idea across?
The solution is to transform these pedestrian terms into blends.
Thus, we can cook our food in a microwave oven that has
*Menu-Matic*, a device that reads programmed recipe cards and
cooks automatically; prepare our coffee in a General Electric
*Coffeematic*, which brews coffee automatically; cook our eggs
in *Egg-A-Matic*, a ceramic device that shuts off automatically to
give us eggs that are boiled, poached, scrambled, or shirred just
the way we like them; pop our corn in *ButterMatic*, which
butters the corn as it pops; scrub our floors with *Roll-O-Matic*,
a self-wringing mop and waxer; sit on *Inflat-A-Matic*, a cushion
that requires only the press of a finger to inflate and deflate;
create one-of-a-kind designs with *Art-A-Matic*, a spin painting
set; wash our clothes in *Wash-O-Matic*, a portable electric
clothes washer; pull in our pot bellies by wearing a *Reduce-O-Matic*
Slimmer Belt; protect our eyes with Ray-Ban
*AmberMatic* sunglasses, which automatically change color to
help us see better in any weather; extinguish our cigarettes in
*Snuff-A-Matic*, an ashtray that puts out cigarettes automatically
in less than ten seconds; fasten our garden gates with an
*Adjust-O-Matic* latch; and gamble easily and conveniently via
*Lottomatic*, a system that automatically enters numbers in the
weekly draw.  The list goes on and on.

In spite of the poverty that exists in this country, we tend
to think of the United States as the land of plenty.  Consequently,
merchants find it to their advantage to project the
image of offering their customers a cornucopia of goods from
which to choose.  The notion of plenitude can be conveyed by
employing the term *panorama* 'an unlimited view in all
directions' in a promotional blurb.  Thus, Bloomingdale's
offered its customers a *panorama of pillows*, thereby suggesting
that there were pillows, pillows, everywhere, as far as the eye
could see.  More common than phrases of this sort, however, are
blends in which the second element is a clipped form of
*panorama*.  For example, under the rubrics *Grape-a-rama*, *Plum-a-rama,
Apple-a-Rama, Pear-a-rama*, and *Roll-a-rama*, Eisner
Food Stores presented their customers with eleven kinds of
grapes, eight kinds of plums, six kinds of apples, four kinds of
pears, and five kinds of rolls from which to choose.  Other
merchants have used *Sports-A-Rama, Fan-orama, Coat-a-rama*,
and *Plant-O-Rama* to entice people to come into their stores to
select from a wide array of sporting goods, fans, coats, and
plants.  Although these blends vary somewhat orthographically,
the message to the prospective customer is the same in each
case: If you come into our store, you will have a plethora of
merchandise from which to choose!

In contemporary English, *marathon* may be used to refer
to an event that is &ldquo;characterized by great length or concentrated
effort&rdquo; [*Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary*].
Therefore, a businessman who wants to convey the notion that
he is working very hard on your behalf can hold a marathon
sale that lasts thirty-seven hours, four days, or some other
seemingly great length of time.  However, the phrase *marathon
sale* is often changed to the blend *Sale-a-thon*.  Even more
popular is *Sell-a-thon*, which leaps out at us from one advertisement
after another.  In fact, the ubiquity of both *Sale-a-thon*
and *Sell-a-thon* has cost them their novelty value.  As a result,
wordsmiths have found it necessary to create other blends to
convey the image of a businessman who is working hard on
your behalf.  *Save-a-thon* and *Deal-a-thon* convey this idea and
simultaneously suggest that the customer will save money.
Other blends call attention to the product that the merchant is
working so hard to sell: *Ford-a-thon, Boat-a-thon, Toyotathon,
Shoe-a-thon, Shock-a-thon* (a sale of shock absorbers), *Videothon*
(a sale of video equipment), *Plant-a-thon* (a sale of plants
and plant accessories).

While *Sale-a-thon* and *Sell-a-thon* suggest that a merchant
is going to marathon lengths to provide his customers with an
opportunity to buy, *Sale-a-bration* and *Sell-a-bration* convey the
notion that visiting a car dealer, furniture store, or whatever is
an act of celebration.  However, *Sale-a-bration* and *Sell-a-bration*,
like *Sale-a-thon* and *Sell-a-thon*, have lost their novelty
value as a result of frequent use.  Consequently, neologisms
such as *Summer-bration* (used by a Chicago restaurant to call
attention to summer specials), *Sail-abration* (promoting a sale
held on Columbus Day), and *Stella-bration* (headlining an
advertisement for Stella Buick of Chicago) have been created
in an effort to retain the festive image inherent in *Sale-a-bration*
and *Sell-a-bration* while providing the attention-grabbing
novelty the latter two blends have lost.

These terms represent only a small fraction of the blends
that have been employed by the mavens of marketing in their
efforts to influence the buying behaviour of prospective customers.
It seems highly likely that an ever-increasing number of
commercial blends will be created in the future: it is no
exaggeration to say that the blending process can never exhaust
the English lexicon as a source of potential neologisms.
Although it is true that not every pair of words can be merged
into an acceptable blend, within the constraints imposed by the
language, a skilled wordsmith can always create just the right
neologism to fill the advertising need of the moment.

Novelty is, of course, a major advantage of using blends to
sell!  sell!  sell!  Since the average consumer is inundated by
commercial messages from both the print and the electronic
media, the merchant needs any edge he can get to capture the
attention of a potential customer.  Hence, *Easterrific sale* rather
than *terrific Easter sale, Coffeematic* rather than *automatic
coffee maker*, and *Stella-bration* rather than *Stella Buick
Celebration.*

Another advantage of commercial blends is that they can
be tailored to the specific needs of a particular merchant at a
particular time.  If, for example, a merchant wants to emphasize
the fact that he has many plants from which you may choose,
he can advertise a *Plant-O-Rama*.  If, on the other hand, he
prefers to emphasize that he is working very hard to provide
you with an opportunity to buy plants, he can advertise a
*Plant-a-thon*.  The merchant might choose to emphasize the
name of the company (*Stella-bration, Zayre-iffic*), the product
being sold (*Ford-a-thon, Toy-rific, Truffle-icious*), the material of
which the product is made (*Silksational*), some quality of the
product (*Scentsational*), or what the product does (*Butter-Matic*).
Blends allow the merchant to convey two messages for
the &ldquo;price&rdquo; of one word.

Finally, blends are compatible with the *Zeitgeist* of contemporary
commerce, which emphasizes the quick, the easy,
and the disposable.  If they are well constructed, blends created
from English words are understood the first time they are
encountered in context.  In this sense, they are quick and easy,
like instant coffee, Minute Rice, cake mixes, frozen dinners,
fast-food restaurants, and microwave ovens.  And, like
Styrofoam cups, plastic knives and forks, paper plates, no-return
cans and bottles, and disposable lighters and razors,
blends in general and commercial blends in particular are the
throw-away words of the language: *Easterrific, honeylicious*,
and *Deal-a-thon* will never become entries in any dictionary.
Neologisms such as these are created for the nonce; once their
usefulness has faded, they are cast aside like a crushed beer can
or a dirty paper plate.


#### EPISTOLA {Harold Levy}

An open letter to Elaine Chailza, author of &ldquo;RhoDislan Says It
Differnt&rdquo; [[x,3]:

Deah Doctah Chaiker,

Thea only problem regahding the pronounciation and
spelling of the ah sequence is that theah are as many changes
in sound as there are errors in change from one set of examples
to anothah.  Although *RhoDislan Says It Different*, &ldquo;the south
will nevah rise again.&rdquo;  I would rathah give an extreme example
of the ah; then the ah; than the ah aw ah.  If the ah is owed to
ah language, aw if the o is ahd or even odd, then what would
our language do with an extra missing letta, like el for example?
Ah liquids ah impawtant, ahn't they?  Awe liquids ah
impawtant, ahn't they?

Sinceahly yaws,  
*Rochrster, New York*

*[Harold Levy, Rochester, New York]*

## Around the World by Dictionary
*Stephen E. Hirschberg, Elmsford, New York*

Excavating the roots of toponyms, words derived from place
names, reveals the conjunction of language, history, and
geography.  Often the toponyms have outlasted their ancient
progenitors, or the vagaries of language evolution have obscured
the word origins.

Toponym etymologies are tidbits which may be devoured
avidly by footnote-gourmands of divers professions.  Thus, the
archaeologist learns that the southern Italian region of level
fields, Campania, was the source of metal from which bells
were made; thence were derived *campanile* 'bell tower' and
*campanology* 'the art or study of bell ringing and casting.'  The
same root evolved through French to *campaign* 'military
operations &ldquo;in the field&rdquo; ' and *champaign* 'level and open
country.'  The economist discovers that a mint in 16th-century
Bohemia, at Sankt Joachimsthal, produced a coin, the *Joachimsthaler*,
shortened by German to *taler*, the ancestor of the *dollar*.
The philologist finds that the corruption of language dates from
ancient times: *solecism* originally referred to the violation of
proper Attic dialect by the Athenian colonists at Soloi in
Cilicia.  The architect notes that the lower-case *attic* evolved
from the construction style of ancient Attica, which placed a
small order (colonnade and entablature) above a much taller
one.  The decorative band of the entablature—the *frieze*—
resembled the famed embroidery of Phrygia, in Asia Minor.

If one could *meander* (from Maiandros, a wandering river
of Phrygia) through both space and time, the dictionary would
be an excellent Baedeker, indicating places not to be missed, as
well as those better avoided.  Go to Rome to see the residences
of the emperors—*palaces*—on the Palatine Hill.  See, before its
destruction in the 14th century, the ancient wonder, the
lighthouse at Pharos (now generic for a conspicuous, guiding
beacon).  Visit Arcadia (whence *arcadian*), the region of ancient
Greece regarded as a pastoral paradise.  The activities at the
fair at Donnybrook, Ireland are not likely to be so peaceful.
Take care, too, while touring Cerreto (near Spoleto, Italy)—a
town once so famed for its quacks and frauds that its native
*ciarlatano* was the prototype *charlatan*.  Unless one enjoys the
company of large, hairy arachnids, skip Taranto, Italy, and the
creatures so common there—*tarantulas*.  For entertainment,
tarry in the 15th-century valley of Vire, France *(vau-de-Vire)*,
to hear the satiric songs which evolved into *vaudeville*.  If
fatigued by the tour, consider recovering in Sybaris, the
ancient Greek city of luxury in southern Italy; the less *sybaritic*
traveler might be satisfied by the archetypal waters of Spa,
Belgium.  For quiet excursions, select, of course, from the horse-drawn
carriages named for their places of first manufacture:
*coach* (Kocs, Hungary), *surrey* (England), *berlin* or *landau*
(Germany).  The pace for such relaxed journeys naturally is a
*canter* (after the easy gait of mounted pilgrims on their way to
Canterbury).

Geologists may prefer the immortality of becoming eponyms
for minerals, but they often name a find for the place of
its discovery.  Among the locales so represented are the Amazon
River *(amazonite)*, Aragon *(aragonite)*, Fort Benton, Montana
*(bentonite)*, Norway *(norite)*, Turkestan *(turquoise)*, Tripoli,
Libya *(tripoli)*, Sardis, Asia Minor *(sard)*, Badhakhshan, Iran
*(balas*—a semiprecious spinel), and Alabanda, Asia Minor
*(almandine)*.  The weight of the gold extracted from the ore
*calaverite* (Calaveras County, California) might be expressed in
*troy* weight, after Troyes, France, a mercantile center where
weight standards were established.

Chemists, too, have been generous in glorifying places.
Marie Curie honored her homeland, Poland, with her discovery,
*polonium*.  The artificial elements *berkelium, californium*,
and *americium* were produced at Berkeley, California.  *Copper*
was named by the ancients for Cyprus, then its most noted
source, and *magnesium* for Magnesia, a metal-rich region of
Thessaly.  The chemical element toponym champion is Ytterby,
Sweden, where first were found *ytterbium, yttrium, erbium*,
and *terbium.*

Creation of a new fabric may not have been what put a
place on the map, but it often put the place in the dictionary.
The more familiar of these toponyms include *angora* (Ankara,
Turkey); *calico* (Calicut, East Indies); *damask* (Damascus,
Syria); *denim* (from the French *serge de Nimes*); *duffel* (Duffel,
Belgium); *dungaree* (Dungri section of Bombay, India); *lisle*
(Lisle, later Lille, France); *muslin* (Mosul, Iraq); *oxford*
(Oxford, England); *paisley* (Paisley, Scotland); and *cashmere*
(Kashmir).  *Suede* is or resembles the leather from which
Swedish gloves (French, *gants de su&egrave;de*) were made.

Care to *spruce* up (probably from the fineness of *Prussian*
leather)?  A wardrobe of toponyms contains headwear *(fez,*
Morocco; *homburg*, Germany); neckwear *(ascot*, England; *cravat*,
a Croatian, *Cravate* in French, who would wear a
neckband while serving as a French mercenary); formal wear
*(tuxedo*, popularized at a country club in Tuxedo Park, New
York); outer wear (*ulster,* Ireland; *mackinaw,* traded in the 19th
century on Mackinac Island, Michigan); footwear *(galosh*, from
the Latin *gallica solea*, 'Gaulish sandal'); and almost-no-wear
*(bikini*, after its effects, supposedly similar to those of the
atomic bomb tests at Bikini, in the Marshall Islands).

Most toponymic animals remain proper nouns *Labrador
retriever, Guernsey* and *Holstein* cattle, et al.  Among the lower-case
fauna, the *canary* was directly named for its native
Canary Islands, but back another etymological generation are
still other creatures—the large dogs (Latin *canes*) for which the
islands were named.  The curator of a toponym zoo could show
us a *curassow* (of Curacao), *leghorn* (of Leghorn, Italy), *spaniel*
(of Spain) and *rottweiler* (originally bred in Rottweil, Germany);
but the star attraction would have to be the
*baluchithere*, a huge, rhinoceroslike (and extinct) mammal of
Baluchistan, Pakistan.

Menus are peppered with toponyms.  A *sherry* (Jerez,
Spain) to open the meal?  *Amontillado* (a sherry of Montilla,
Spain) perhaps.  A salad of *cos* (lettuce originally exported from
the Greek isle, Kos) may be topped with *mayonnaise* (according
to the *American Heritage Dictionary,* possibly a French
commemoration of the capture of *Mahon*, Minorca, in 1756, by
the Duke of Richelieu).  The soup: *vichyssoise* ('cream of
Vichy,' France).  Entrees include the obvious *bologna* (Bologna,
Italy), *hamburger* and *frankfurter* (Hamburg and Frankfurt,
Germany).  *Finnan haddie* was once *findhorn* (Findhorn, Scotland)
haddock.  *Turkey* is actually a misnomer: the Portuguese
imported, via Turkey, *guinea fowl* (after Guinea, Africa),
known as turkey cocks; the American birds—now turkeys—were
erroneously identified with these.  Have your dish cooked with
onions *lyonnaise* style, (after Lyon, France), *shallots* or *scallions*
(both from Ascalon, a port in southern Palestine), or
*currants* (Corinth).  For drinks, select from *bourbon* (Bourbon
County, Kentucky), *bock* beer (Eimbeck, Germany), *champagne*
(Champagne, France), *malmsey* (white wine of
Monembasia, Greece), *scuppernong* (wine of grapes from the
Scuppernong River basin, North Carolina), or *mocha* (coffee
exported from Mocha, Yemen).  Still hungry?  Have some fruit: a
*peach* (Latin, *persicum malum* 'Persian apple'), *quince* (Latin
*cydoneum malum* 'Cydonian apple'; Cydonia is now Canea,
Crete), or a *mac&eacute;doine* 'a mixture of fresh cut fruit or
vegetables in jelly' (a French metaphoric toponym, the population
of Macedonia being a mixture of various peoples).

The athletic word-historian will appreciate that *badminton*
is named for Badminton, the seat of the Duke of Beaufort in
Gloucestershire, where the game was introduced to England in
the 1870s.  The modern *marathon,* created for the 1896
Olympic Games, memorializes the run to Athens with the news
of the Greek victory over the Persians at Marathon, in 490 B.C.

World trade brought new goods to market and new words
to the language.  The importer (later, the maker) of women's
finery, originally produced in *Milan,* was a *milliner.*  From
Macassar (on Celebes) came oils manufactured into hair
pomade in the 19th century; chair backs required *antimacassars*
for protection from this product.  Fine porcelain ware
brought to Europe in the 16th century was named for its
origin, *China* (the imitation, *delft*, came from Delft, Netherlands).
Lack of adequate crews for the China trade led to the
American custom of rendering senseless and kidnaping sailors
to man the ships to Shanghai; one compelled in such a manner
was *shanghaied.*

A toponym demonstrates that American political rhetoric
has not changed much since the early days of the republic.
During the critical 1820 House of Representatives debate on
the question of slavery in states newly admitted to the Union,
Representative Felix Walker of Buncombe County, North
Carolina, made a speech of such nonsense and verbosity (and
admittedly directed to his constituents rather than to the
House) that a &ldquo;speech for Buncombe&rdquo; *(bunkum or bunk)*
became synonymous with claptrap.

Thus the dictionary can take one around the world and
into its past.  Henry Ford said, &ldquo;History is bunk,&rdquo; but to the
logophile, mere &ldquo;bunk&rdquo; is history.


#### EPISTOLA {Kenneth P. Pulliam}

The source of the name *Chloe* for the recoverable vehicle
used on aircraft carriers to test the aircraft launching catapult
(in your review of *Sea Jargon*, [X, 4]) is probably the song of
the same name.  The only lines

>Through the darkest night  
I gotta go where you are  
If it's wrong or right  
I gotta go where you are  
...  
...   
If you live I'll find you  
...

Spike Jones did a version which contains the line (not in
the original), &ldquo;Where are you, you old bat?&rdquo;

I would surmise that the test vehicle is sometimes difficult
to locate.

*[Kenneth P. Pulliam, Pfafftown, North Carolina]*

*[Hadn't thought of it, though I know it.  I was dredging for
a classical reference—Editor]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Words: The Evolution of Western Languages*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/words-evolution-western-languages/author/victor-stevenson/first-edition/)
Victor Stevenson, ed., foreword by Philip Howard, (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983), 224pp.

As its subtitle indicates, *Words* is an introduction to the
historical study of the Indo-European languages, with brief
notice of the non-Indo-European languages of Europe.  After
the long lack of attention to historical linguistics in works for
the general public, we can only welcome its publication.

The book is elegantly designed, with many maps and
illustrations.  The editor allotted his space well, giving 57 pages
to the Germanic languages, 54 to the Romance, 22 to the
Slavic, and lesser amounts to the sub-branches with fewer
speakers.  If the book were not focused on Europe, we might
deplore the short section of 12 pages on Indo-Iranian, especially
since half of it is devoted to Romany, the language of the
Gypsies.  The material is readily accessible through an excellent
index, indicating in boldface more than 1000 words for which
origins are included.  Although professonal linguists may
deplore its brevity—scarcely more than 100 pages available for
text other than illustrations—*Words* may attract a large audience,
helping to bring attention once again to the historical
study of language.

The text sketches the external history of each sub-branch,
with comments on the lexicon.  Of phonological matters,
Grimm's law and the High German Consonant Shift receive
brief mention; morphology gets only occasional comment, as on
the &ldquo;shedding&rdquo; of noun and verb endings in late Old English.
Especially welcome are the carefully designed maps indicating
language and dialect areas, as for the Indo-Iranian, Celtic,
Romance, Germanic, and Slavic languages and for the Spanish,
West Germanic, and Old English dialects.  These maps with
explanatory material, followed up by maps on &ldquo;Europe's
national languages&rdquo; in themselves make the work a valuable
handbook at the elementary and secondary school levels and as
a supplementary text for general college and university courses.

The material is generally accurate.  It is a pleasure to have
the &ldquo;Indo-European homeland&rdquo; placed north of the Black and
Caspian Seas, rather than in Central Europe, as was done in
the most recent widely published article on the Indo-European
family, Thieme's in the *Scientific American* of October 1959,
since reprinted.  Further, technical advances of the Indo-European
speakers, centered on &ldquo;the horse and the wheel,&rdquo; are
related to the extension of the languages and their maintenance,
illustrated in excellent charts.  The individual accounts
of the sub-branches describe their status up to the present day,
often with illustrations of their impact on English.

Yet the book is not without its flaws.  One even wonders
whether Lockwood and Robins, who are credited for assistance,
saw the final version.  It contains errors, makes overstatements,
and provides generalizations, often with troublesome
flamboyance.

Selection of a nonlinguist as editor may well have brought
a lively style.  But with it came statements that the consultants
did not remove.  It is unfortunate to perpetuate further the
confusion of sounds and letters, language and writing systems
by a statement like &ldquo;the letter *p*... became*f* or *v&rdquo;* (14).  This
confusion also allows the statement that &ldquo;the greatest single
influence on all European languages during the sixteenth
century was the introduction of the printing press&rdquo;—this in the
lifetime of Luther and the period of increased international
contacts of Britain, France, Spain, and others.

Some errors can be readily eliminated, such as *vader* as
the form of 'father' in German, the labeling of a Hittite
hieroglyphic inscription as a &ldquo;Hittite clay tablet&rdquo; (15), identification
of the Indo-European Hittites with the Hittites of the
Bible (16), the statement that Sanskrit, not Hittite, was the
&ldquo;first Indo-European language to be written down&rdquo; (18), and
identification of *Tiwas* as the greatest of the Germanic gods
(118).  And one wonders where the notion arose that the
Slavonic languages were spread by &ldquo;peaceful farmers&rdquo; rather
than &ldquo;warriors&rdquo; (173).  It would have been welcome news to
the peoples living in the Balkan peninsula, to the monasteries
of central Europe, and to the Baltic countries, not to speak of
the Caucasus and Siberian areas.

Such statements apparently arise from an aim to answer
all questions, whatever the state of our knowledge.  Thus,
Phrygian was the language of Homer's Trojans (17), the
Armenians destroyed &ldquo;whatever was left of the Hittite
Empire&rdquo; (17), and the Old High German Consonant Shift
resulted from Celtic influence, &ldquo;as if the English ... of the
west chose ... to speak English throughout England with a
Welsh accent&rdquo; (134).

Attempts at folksy learning may well be owed to the
influence of the literary editor of *The Times* (London)—Philip
Howard—who gives a precise, if qualified, figure on the number
of languages spoken today: 2,759 (6); yet India and adjacent
countries are said to have &ldquo;500 mother tongues&rdquo; (18).  He also
finds that &ldquo;Aleut is exactly suited to the fishy needs of the
Aleutian Islanders&rdquo; (6).  And although &ldquo;the Indo-European
mother tongue started to be spoken about 8000 years ago&rdquo; (7),
&ldquo;Chinese is older&rdquo; (6) than the languages of Europe, whatever
such a judgment may mean.  Some of the later text reflects such
a point of view, as that on page 120: &ldquo;Danes, Norwegians,
Icelanders and Swedes can look back with mischievous glee to
the days when their ancestral tongue brought terror to foreigners
unfortunate to hear the berserkers for the first time.&rdquo;

Some of the generalizations verge on silliness.  The &ldquo;meaning
[of Classical Latin] was elusive to all but those who were
masters of it.  The order of words in a sentence could be varied
for reasons of emphasis and nuances of style and the sense
could remain unclear until the sentence was completed.  It was
not a language for everyday conversation&rdquo; (66).  And in the
&ldquo;perfectly good colloquial English&rdquo; sentence 'My *father's
tobacco kiosk* was *blown* to *smithereens* in the *blitz,'* &ldquo;none of
the italicized words has its origins in England&rdquo; (160).  Since
&ldquo;*father* and *blown* have their roots in the ancient Indo-European
mother tongue,&rdquo; there seems to be little likelihood
that many English words &ldquo;have their origins in England.&rdquo;

In spite of such misguided attempts at popularization,
*Words* is superior to many general works on language in
reflecting an accurate view of it and in presenting facts.
Students using the book can learn the general history of the
spread of the Indo-European language family, one of the
significant movements in human history, inasmuch as one of
every two human beings today speaks an Indo-European
language, and the number is growing with the massive attempt
of the People's Republic of China and other countries to teach
their citizens English.  Used to scholarly books with somber
formats and few illustrations, one wonders why a beautifully
designed and illustrated work must be flamboyant, stretching
its presentation of data to the edge of truth.  But since realism
cannot be evaded even in 1984, we hope that Words attracts a
broad audience, so broad that future editions will emend
overstatements, correct the small number of misprints, and
arouse interest once again in one of the most remarkable events
in human history, the spread of the Indo-European language
family and the contributions of its speakers.

*[Winfred P. Lehmann, The University of Texas at Austin]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Wally the Wordworm*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/wally-the-wordworm_clifton-fadiman/542123/#edition=4185868&idiq=4446060)
Clifton Fadiman, illustrated in color, (Stemmer House, 1983), 56 pp. 

I have conducted a life-long quarrel with word-books and
teaching tools for children that are based on the premise that
there is a more-or-less &ldquo;fixed&rdquo; vocabulary that children of a
certain age are familiar with.  That is not to criticize the purely
pedagogical theory that there are certain words that one can
expect children of a given age to know.  But that is a matter of
*analysis* of reading matter, not of writing.  If a child is
fortunate enough to have intelligent parents who speak *their*
language to him (instead of some idiotic notion of how children
use language, i.e., babytalk), he will learn from them the words
he needs for communication.  In addition, and if he is less
fortunate, he should, no, *must* acquire his vocabulary from
reading and from watching TV programs like *Nature, Nova,
Nickelodeon,* and, for those who cannot yet read, *Sesame
Street*.  Teaching vocabulary is a silly enterprise when applied to
children, and I have some doubts about its usefulness for
adults.  When I was about eight or nine, I was given books like
*The Earth for Sam, The Sky for Sam*, and *The Sea for Sam*,
which I found fascinating.  In short order, words like *Tyrannosaurus
Rex, nova, Horsehead Nebula, paleolithic,* and dozens of
others became familiar friends, though I had some difficulty in
steering conversations with my contemporaries to topics that
allowed me to exercise that kind of word stock.

There were, of course, many other books that yielded up
their verbal treasures.  Children tend, naturally, to acquire the
vocabularies of the subject areas that interest them: ten-year-olds
interested in computers, or astronomy, or baseball, or
philately will quickly become familiar, on their own, with the
words and concepts associated with those subjects.  It is (partly)
the function of education to broaden the base, so to speak, to
acquaint them with subjects they have not or might not have
otherwise encountered.  Some of those are &ldquo;academic,&rdquo; in the
sense that one does not, in the normal course of events,
encounter much American history or geometry in everyday life,
nor does the average person have access to the chemistry
laboratories or the powerful microscopes that are met with
when pursuing a general high-school curriculum.  &ldquo;Academic&rdquo;
education has its purpose in acquainting students with the sort
of basic knowledge they might be likely to need just to get by
in the modern world; only in a secondary sense does it
acquaint them with the kinds of options that they might
explore to fulfill their lives.  Thus, if one never learns what a
biologist or astronomer or anthropologist does, how can one
choose to become any of those?  In today's specialized world,
where choices of career abound, students are sore put to learn
all or even many of the options open to them, options that may
well coincide with their talents and interests.

Having delivered myself of that polemic, I'd best return to
*Wally the Wordworm*.  To many of us in the minority—that is,
those born before 1940—Clifton Fadiman is known as the
incisive host of a long-running radio show, *Information, Please,*
peopled by experts like Franklin P. Adams, Oscar Levant, and
other well-informed bodies who spontaneously answered questions
sent in by listeners.  If they failed to answer correctly, the
questioner received a set of the *Encyclopaedia Britannica*.  It
has always been my impression that few *EBs* were sent out,
owing to the brilliance of the experts.  More recently, Kip
Fadiman has been on the board of the Book-of-the-Month
Club, for more years than I can count.  *Wally* was first
published in 1964; the present edition, enlivened by sparkling
illustrations by Lisa Atherton, is a welcome and refreshing
addition to the welter of books for children, and it shouldn't be
allowed to go out of print again.  Fadiman's point is that words
are fun.  He &ldquo;hated books for children in which the words were
supposed to suit their age, so that they'd never come across a
word too 'hard' for them.&rdquo;  (From the Foreword.)

Wally the Wordworm is a bookworm with an insatiable
appetite for words: he not only loves dictionaries, he simply
eats them up.  In his gastronomic peregrinations, he encounters
(and ingests) words like *voracious, abracadabra, palindrome*
(where he stops for a post-prandial pause to consider *madam,
deified,* and other examples of the genre), *safari, alligator,* and
many other verbal delights.  The presentation of these words
varies from outright encounter to puns, analogies, spelling
curiosities, and other funomena.

If you have (or are, or know) a child, buy this book, a joy
to the eye, the mind, and the spirit.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Creative Publications 1984 Catalog: K-12 Mathematics*
(Language Arts and Computer Education), 104 pp.

This is an attractive catalogue containing books, film
strips, calculators, computers, computer software, and other
teaching materials for students from kindergarten through high
school.  It may seem odd to review such a publication in
VERBATIM, but, especially for younger children, learning can be
more of a game than a chore, and I see no reason a thoughtful
parent should not consider acquiring, for his five-year-old, *The
Children's Discovery System Computer* for only $69.95.  Available
for it are ten &ldquo;modules&rdquo; (programs) dealing with logic,
words, music, art, foods, geography, fractions, and the (I
suppose) inevitable arcade games.  (Perhaps arcade games on
computers can help improve eye-hand coordination; to be sure,
that was never a sufficient rationale for pin-ball machines.)

If you are unfamiliar with what is available in the realm of
teaching/learning aids, this catalogue is a revelation.  Most of
the items offered are quite inexpensive, though how good they
are I cannot say, as I haven't seen them &ldquo;in the flesh.&rdquo;  Creative
Publications' address is P.O. Box 10328, Palo Alto, California
94303.  The toll-free phone number (for orders) is 800-624-0822
(800-321-0707 in California).  There are many beautiful full-color
photos of seashells throughout the catalogue.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Dear Ann Landers:... 'There is now a fink of $100 if a
person fails to come to the aid of someone in an emergency.'
...Also, in Massachusetts a physician...has an obligation to
provide medical services...unless the physician's training or
experience makes him unqualified to do do, in which case the
physician must make a reasonable attempt to secure competent
emergency aid.  To date neither the Vermont nor the Massachusetts
regulation has been specifically appled....


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;For many years my husband and I talked about buying a
fag and putting up a pole so we could appropriately celebrate
patriotic holidays....


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our daughter and her husband are angry with us and I
am hurt.  My husband is on their side.  He says he is willing to
sin with the grandkids and that I am selfish.  What do you
think?&rdquo; [From the Kennebec Journal, Augusta, December 17,
1983, p. 8. Submitted by Vernon D. MacLaren, Augusta,
Maine.]

## Non-Native Tongues
*Stephen Trussel, Honolulu, Hawaii*

The use of *tongue* for *language* is rare in idiomatic English
today, although it has been used in that sense in literary
English since the earliest times (as for example, in the 14th-century
*Cursor Mundi: &thorn;is ilke boke is translate In to Inglis
tong to rede*).  We're not surprised to hear someone assert that
&ldquo;English is my mother tongue,&rdquo; but the question &ldquo;How many
*tongues* do you speak?&rdquo; would no doubt cause a few eyebrows
to be raised.  While *tongue* is familiar in some standard phrases,
with *mother, native, or exotic,* for example, we otherwise
generally seem to require *language.*

In idioms the sense 'speech' prevails, rather than 'language.'
We speak of *keeping a civil tongue, holding one's
tongue,* or *having a forked tongue.*  Getting a *tongue lashing,*
worrying about *tongues wagging,* or regretting a *slip of the
tongue,* may leave me *tongue-tied* ... (or maybe *the cat's just
got my tongue!*).

The use of *tongue* to mean 'language' or 'speech' parallels
the anatomical sense historically, well illustrated by passages
from Old English, and this connection of *tongue* and *language*
is common throughout languages: we find the same word with
both meanings in the romance Languages (Fr. *langue,* Sp.
*lengua,* It. *lingua,* Pr. *lingua*, Rm. *limb&abreve;*), Czech *(jazyk)* and
Serbo-Croatian *(jezik),* Hungarian *(nyelv)*, Finnish *(kieli)*, Greek
*(gl&otilde;ssa)*, Arabic *(lougha),* and Hebrew *(laschon)*.  And in poetic
use it is found in many more, as in English and German.  Our
word *tongue* is native, coming to us ultimately from the Indo-European
*dngh&umacr; 'tongue' by way of Germanic **tung&omacr;n*.  We
find Old English *tunge, tongue*, Middle Dutch *tonghe, tongue,*
Modern German *Zunge*.  The Latin *lingua* (Old Latin *dingua*)
from the same root, had both senses, anatomical and linguistic.
It is the source for one of our nonnative *tongue* roots, *lingu-,*
and indirectly, by way of French, for our word *language* itself.
Even *langue* (French 'tongue, language') can be found in
English texts into the 19th century.

It is from the Latin that the bulk of our scientific
borrowings for *language* come directly, both when we speak of
English becoming the *lingua franca* of the world, and when we
form new constructions on the root *lingu-.*  We may bemoan the
*monolingualism* of today's American youth, while admiring the
*bi-, tri-,* and *quadrilingual* speakers who make up the *multi-lingual*
populations of Europe.  And if you know the *lingo* well
enough, you can construct new compounds—trade names such
as *Linguaphone* (the language teaching method), or impetuous
coinages such as *linguaphile* or *linguaphobe*, with a good
likelihood of being understood.

*Webster's Second*, for example, lists *linguipotence,* 'the
mastery of languages,' *linguister* (and later *lingster*), 'interpreter,'
and even *linguacious,* 'loquacious.' Nowadays, *linguists*
are students of *linguistics* (perhaps more often than they are
masters of many languages), but this was not always the case.
Only a hundred or so years ago it was another nonnative
*tongue* which held sway in the science of language, one which
might easily be *glossed* over.  As Max M&uuml;ller wrote in 1868,
&ldquo;The conception of a science of language, of *Glottology*, was
reserved for the nineteenth century.&rdquo;  And there is our other
*tongue*, from the Greek.  The classical Greek *gl&omacr;ssa*, Attic *gl&omacr;tta*
(from Indo-European **gl&omacr;gh* 'thorn, point') meant both *tongue*
and *language* as far back as Homer.  And an additional meaning
came with the borrowed form into English, also from the
Greek: a word inserted between the lines or in the margin as
an explanation equivalent of a foreign or otherwise difficult
word in the text: our English *gloss.*  Old English had a cognate
*glesan* 'to gloss, interpret,' and this developed into both a noun
and verb form *gloze*, which was refashioned in the 16th
century, after the Latin and Greek, into *glosse, gloss*.  Latin
*glossarium* made its way into English by at least the 15th
century as *glossary*, a collection of *glosses*.  (The development
of the negative sense in *gloss over something* 'give a cursory
treatment' came from an extension of critical *gloss* 'literary
interpretation' and not from the (unrelated) 'surface shine.') So
as we will see, it was the *glossographers,* compilers of *glossaries*,
collectors and annotators of lists of obscure and foreign
words, who were the antecedents of the *glossologists* and
*glottologists* who were to become the *linguists* of today.

We find in Henry Cockeram's 1623 dictionary *glossographie:*
&ldquo;an expounding of strange words,&rdquo; and in Nathan
Bailey's (1721) *glossography:* &ldquo;the art of writing a glossary.&rdquo;
Whitney's *Century Dictionary* (1889) shows *glossographical:* &ldquo;a
description or grouping of languages,&rdquo; as well as the anatomical
sense, &ldquo;a description of the tongue.&rdquo;  And indeed, anatomical
compounds concerned with the tongue are quite common for
the *glosso-* root, eventually superseding the linguistic sense.  An
extension of this usage has resulted in the anatomical *glottis*
and *epiglottis*, with the concommitant *glottal stop* of articulatory
phonetics, in addition to technical medical terms for
disorders of the tongue.

*Glossology*, 'the study of language or languages; the
science of language,' was in use from the 18th century.
Consider William Taylor's plea (in the &ldquo;Annual Review and
History of Literature,&rdquo; 1808): &ldquo;We appeal to every lover of
*glossology* in general, and of English literature in particular, for
assistance to promulgate and to preserve a supplement to
Johnson's Dictionary....&rdquo;  An admirable goal.

Some 20th-century introductions into linguistic vocabulary
make use of the root: we find Bloomfield's *glosseme* and
Hjelmslev's *glossematics*; the *isoglottic* line of
linguistic geography; and *glottochronology*, Swadesh's system
for dating the divergence of linguistic family members.  But
these seem just stragglers from the large 19th-century herd.
Along with many 19th-century concepts, most of the terms
have vanished.  Consider the report in the *Edinburgh Review*
(1848) that &ldquo;it appears that *glottological* considerations afford a
strong presumption in favour of the origin of the nations of
Asia, Europe, America and Polynesia, from one common
stock.&rdquo;  Alas!  Earlier still, James Howell (in his *Lexicon
Tetraglotton*, 1659, an English-French-Italian-Spanish dictionary)
wrote: &ldquo;Touching Europe, *glottographers* tell us ... that
she hath eleven Originall, Independent, and Mother Toungs.&rdquo;
Terms and opinions change with the times.  John Evelyn (1660)
wrote in his memoirs that &ldquo;Dr. Petty ... had a main design to
erect a *Glottical* College,&rdquo; but such institutions are few and far
between today.  We can find references to *glottogonic*, 'relating
to the origin of language or languages'; *glottic* for 'linguistic';
*glossic*, for a phonetic writing system, a replacement of an
earlier *glossotype*; and *glossograph*, an electrical device to
reproduce speech automatically.  And if we should begin speaking
in tongues, we have *glossolalia*, still with us today.

As an adjective and noun-forming suffix, -*glot* (earlier *glott*)
is still familiar.  *Polyglot*, perhaps the most common form, dates
from at least the 17th century, with the same sense as found in
the original Greek.  Citations for its appearance in French date
from 1639.  Of the two senses, descriptive of a person speaking
many languages or of a book or text written in several, it is the
latter that has generally prevailed, especially in combination
with Greek numerical prefixes.  The *Oxford English Dictionary*
gives citations for *monoglot (1), diglot (2), triglot (3), tetraglot
(4), pentaglot (5), hexaglot (6), heptaglot (7), and octoglot (8),*
dating back into the 16th century and most often descriptive of
Bibles, dictionaries, or other texts.  There is even an example of
a hybrid (Latin + Greek) *biglot* (2), but hardly a sign of
*monolingual* (Greek + Latin).  Most of these have been
replaced with *lingu*- forms today, especially when descriptive
of speakers; and so, as we have seen above, we tend to use
*monolingual* or *unilingual, bilingual, trilingual* or even *quadri-lingual*,
along with *poly-, pluri-,* and *multilingual*.

But the eventual success of *linguist* over *glossologist* would
not have been easily predicted by one scanning the *OED*, for
the only sense current for *linguist* was 'one who is skilled in the
use of language, master of other tongues besides his own,' the
sense in which Shakespeare used it at the end of the 16th
century.  It also had the meaning 'one who speaks a (specified)
language,' but 'a student of language, a philologist' was deemed
obsolete (as were the senses 'interpreter' and 'language
master—one who uses his tongue freely or knows how to talk').
The most likely explanation may be the influence of the French
*(linguiste, linguistique)*, but the factors which led to the
preference of the Latin root over the Greek are still matters for
speculation.  Perhaps there is a connection with the decline in
the study of classical languages: Greek, with its less familiar,
less accessible alphabet, might be the first to go.  Or maybe
there was a more intentional shift—an attempt to break with
ideas of the past and their linguistic impedimenta.  Or is there
simply something objectionable about the sound of *glot* to the
modern ear?  Whatever the reason, we will presumably do well
to heed the advice of Archibald H. Sayce in his *Principles of
Comparative Philology* (1874): &ldquo;As *glottologists*, we have to
begin with roots.&rdquo;  And so we have come full circle.

## Chaucer's Fish
*Leonard Cochran, O.P., Providence College*

One might be hard pressed to say which provides more
intellectual satisfaction: speculation about the origin of a word
or the discovery of persuasive evidence.

In *Our Marvelous Native Tongue* (Times Books, New York,
1983), Robert Claiborne mentions Eric Partridge's discovery of
*dover*, &ldquo;a bit of hotel waiter's slang, apparently dating from the
mid-nineteenth century, meaning a reheated dish.&rdquo;  After pointing
out that Partridge &ldquo;guessed that it represented a sort of
condensation of 'do over,' &rdquo;  Claiborne goes on to offer his own
theory:

>Something about the word struck me as familiar, however,
and sent me back to my copy of *The Canterbury
Tales*.  At one point the Host, needling the Cook,
remarks (with the English modernized), &ldquo;Full many a
Jack of Dover hast thou sold/That hath been heated
twice and twice grown cold.&rdquo;  Here, I am convinced, is
the true source of Partridge's &ldquo;dover&rdquo;—evidently the
proprietor of some inn or cookshop better known for
economy than for quality.

Something about the word and the construction placed on
it by Claiborne struck me, also, and I hastened to my copy of
the *Tales*, edited by the well-known Chaucer scholar, John H.
Fisher, who glosses the phrase *Jakke of Dovere* as &ldquo;evidently a
stale pie.&rdquo;  *A Chaucer Glossary* (compiled by Norman Davis,
Douglas Gray, Patricia Ingham, and Anne Wallace-Hadrill,
OUP, 1979) seems less certain: &ldquo;?kind of meat pie.&rdquo;  At any
rate, was Jack a penny-pinching innkeeper or a stale pie?

Methinks neither.  He was a fish!  And Francis Magoun, Jr., may
agree, albeit more cautiously, as becomes a scholar.  In *A
Chaucer Gazetteer* (University of Chicago Press, 1961), the
following entry appears under DOVER:

>[Dover] ... is mentioned in *CT* A 4347 to define some
undetermined cooked dish, perhaps a pie of sorts, perhaps
a Dover sole ... at any rate much warmed over.

Let us look closer at the pertinent lines, which come from
the Prologue of the Cook's Tale, the Host speaking:

>Now telle on, Roger, looke that it be goode,  
For many a pastee hastow laten blood,  
And many a Jakke of Dovere hastow soold  
That hath been twies hoot and twies coold.

It is Roger who is being urged to tell his tale, and Roger
who is accused by the Host of having lightened the meat pie
by removing its filling, as Fisher glosses the second line.  And it
is Roger who has sold many a &ldquo;Jakke of Dovere&rdquo; which he had
allowed to cool, then warmed over for sale to the unsuspecting
guest.  Therefore, Jack of Dover (whatever he or it may be) is
not the innkeeper or the cook.  Then, is it a pie, and a stale one,
at that?  Why would Chaucer use the same image in succeeding
lines?  Obviously, he might have done so to illustrate two
different styles of the same fraud, but it seems more likely that,
having already used a pie to point out Roger's tight-fistedness, a
poet of Chaucer's range would select another example.

According to the *OED*, as early as 1466 the word *Jack* was
used to indicate a 'joint,' as in a joint of mutton (&ldquo;...a jakke of
motone&rdquo;).  This might make some sense, but if *jack* means
'joint,' what is a *joint of Dover?*  Perhaps the practice was so
common in the port town that a *dover joint* became synonymous
with warmed-over food.  I am intrigued by this possibility;
but I, too, have a theory I should like to spin out.

The John Dory, a flatfish popular in the Middle Ages, as
Waverley Root tells us *(Food: An Authoritative and Visual
History and Dictionary of the Foods of the World*, Simon and
Schuster, New York, 1980), is found &ldquo;...northward normally to
the southern coast of England, but is occasionally encountered
even off Norway.&rdquo;  Again, the *OED* informs us that *John Dory*
is &ldquo;A popular name of a fish, *Zeus faber*, formerly called simply
the *dor&eacute;e* or *dory*.&rdquo;  The first appearance of the word *dory* for
fish is listed as 1440.  The appellation *John* seems to have
attached itself some 300 or so years later.  But, as early as 1587,
*jack* was used with reference to fish, specifically to the pike.
The possibility of its earlier, even Middle English use, cannot
be ruled out.  And *dor&eacute;e* may as easily have been in oral use in
Chaucer's time.  Might we not, then, get *fish of Dover* from
*Jakke of Dovere?*  And how much more pungent Chaucer's line
when we know he is speaking of a warmed-over fish!

Far be it from me to challenge Partridge.  From a strictly
logical standpoint, his opinion rings true.  But, if language were
logical, it would be as cut and dried as Chaucer's &ldquo;twies hoot
and twies coold&rdquo; fish.  And just as unappetizing!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Moscow Press says 'Hysteria' Over Korean Plane Will
Not Effect Ties for Long.&rdquo;  [From The New York Times,
September 12, 1983.  Submitted by David Galef, New York
City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;East Coast's leading snake-cake and pie company is now
entering greater L.A.&rdquo;  [From a classified ad in the Los Angeles
Times, September 22, 1983.  Submitted by Julian Ross, Los
Angeles.]

## Language Crimes: The Case of the Count's Companion
*Richard L. Faust, New York, New York*

The icy February rain was beating against my grimy office
windows, and I was down to my last lychee nut, when
there was a knock at the office door.  The words on the glass
panel were clearly visible in the dim light: AHA: PRIVATE
INVESTIGATOR.  Beyond my palindromic name two shadows
waited.  As I shouted &ldquo;Come in!' &rdquo;  I reached for a clean manila
folder, for I knew another case was beginning.

They entered, two strangers in a strange land.  I sized
them up as foreigners, not used to our ways, and the man's first
utterance confirmed my deduction.

&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; he exclaimed, &ldquo;you are he, yes?&rdquo;

Central Europe, no doubt about it.  By his clothes he could
have been upper class, shabby but upper, with an atmosphere
of stale damask and fresh sorrow, the lost glories of a former
greatness.  He carried sadness like a pocket handkerchief.  My
oriental ancestors had learned a thousand years ago to counter
hardship with aplomb.

&ldquo;I am Count Abel Nownplurall,&rdquo; he announced grandly,
&ldquo;and this is the Countess Hyphen-Enid Nownplurall, my loyal
wife and companion in adversity.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Sit down, please.&rdquo;  I motioned toward the only two chairs
(Automat circa 32), and they sat as if assuming a throne.

&ldquo;We come about our dear good friend Fewer.  He's gone,
perhaps forever, maybe kaput even.  He is out of place in this
modern world, helpless.  And he was so attached to us, always.&rdquo;
He wept into his sadness.

&ldquo;When did you first notice he had disappeared?&rdquo;

&ldquo;In the supermarket.  When we saw the sign saying 'Ten
Items or Less,' we knew then; we knew that Fewer had
disappeared.  Can you bring him back, yes?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It may take time, a lot of time.  Maybe even until all the
supermarkets have been turned into radioactive rubble.&rdquo;

&ldquo;But we need him now; we need his distinction.  What
clear distinction he always gives!  Fewer is elegant, no less, and
has to be with Count Abel Nownplurall.  You must find him.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Describe him.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well, he is of ancient lineage, as old as our family, and he
has always associated with Counts, never non-Counts.  He is
lean, precise, learned.  Recently he has suffered from neglect,
like us all.&rdquo;  (He looked at the countess.)  &ldquo;No one wants to hear
him mentioned in the media any more.  People will not utilize
him.  The beer commercials on the television now use the
famous actor Les Calories.  We have heard Fewer say how
much he hated Les Calories no less than ten times.&rdquo;

So, I thought, Fewer and Les were bitter rivals.  I decided
to take on the case.  Before they left, the Countess spoke up,
&ldquo;We love Fewer more than most.  Return him to us.&rdquo;

As usual, I checked in with my old friend Billy Emerald,
the lex guard at the Oakland dictionary depot.  Sure enough, he
knew about the disappearance of Fewer—it was common
knowledge among the guards—but he held out little hope of
getting him back.  &ldquo;Do you know,&rdquo; he asked, &ldquo;how many such
guys end up on the dungheap of language every year?  The
carnage is awesome.  When is the last time you heard of
Supercilious or Supernumerary?  The Latins go first—highly
strung, no resistance.  There's a chance Fewer may not be dead
yet.  He has the strength of most plural adjuncts, but he'll need
lots of help, maybe a good PR man.  Aha, it's a big job; are you
up to it?&rdquo;

&ldquo;You forget, Billy, that my oriental ancestors in their
wisdom taught me old proverbs like 'Never choose a strong
opponent.'  I shall be up against only 'lesser' men.&rdquo;

I needed a break in the case.  My wise oriental ancestors
also said, &ldquo;Ask the classic questions.&rdquo;  So I asked one: &ldquo;Where
would you be if you were Fewer?&rdquo;  The answer was obvious, of
course: I would be in fewer places.  So I went back to my office.

It was there I solved the case.  I found him all right, or
what was left of him, just skin and bones and beyond
resuscitation, the cold body stuffed into the trash basket
outside my office door.  I made a phone call and waited, for I
knew in my oriental wisdom who had done it.

They entered the office, bearing with them the faint scent
of pumpernickel and rue.  They assumed the same postures as
before in the same chairs, but the scene was quite different
now.

&ldquo;How did you figure it out, please?&rdquo;

&ldquo;You made a slip.  You said, 'no *less* than ten times' when
talking about Fewer and Les.  It should be 'no fewer than.'
That mistake showed you, of all people, were in the habit of
using *less*, and I realized what that would do to Fewer.  You
badgered him and weakened him until eventually he passed
away, killed not by neglect, as one might expect, but by
deliberate persecution.  And I know why you did it, too.&rdquo;

Their eyes showed pain but no fear.

&ldquo;It was the beer, wasn't it?  You wanted to be famous on
the commercials, to be rich again and adored, to associate with
stars like Les.  But as long as Fewer lived, you were stuck with
him, since you and Fewer were historically linked.  You had no
chance to join with Les until you eliminated Fewer forever.
That's why you did it.&rdquo;

I reached for the phone.  In the dying light I saw their
noble tears.

After the police had taken them both away, I sat listening
to the rain beating against the grimy windows.  The warm tea
and the rain made me recall another piece of wisdom from my
oriental ancestors—&ldquo;You cannot avoid what is in the blood.&rdquo;
The Count and Countess had blood from Central Europe.  I
sighed and wrote at the end of the case memo—Cause of
Death: Old beer trying to mix with new.

## ANTIPODEAN ENGLISH: *From Woop Woop to Bullamakanka*
*George W. Turner, University of Adelaide*

When Mark Twain visited Australia in 1895, he seemed to
be especially attracted by our geographical names (such as
*Woolloomooloo*).  He would not have encountered the names
*Woop Woop* or *Bullamakanka*, as they are fictitious names for
remote places, parodies of Aboriginal names, as *Waikikamukau*
(pronounced &ldquo;Why kick a moo-cow&rdquo;) is a parody of New
Zealand's Polynesian names.  But the Australian reality holds its
own with parody.  *Tallygaroopna* is a genuine name and so are
*Old Koomooloo, Tittybong, Jimboomba, Kookabookra, Ki Ki,
Weebollabolla* and *Tharbogang*.  Some names, like *Bong Bong,*
are easy enough to pronounce; others, like *Goondoobluie*
(pronounced &ldquo;gunder-bluey&rdquo; with stress on the &ldquo;-blu-&rdquo;) might
puzzle the stranger.  There is no clear rule about accents.
*Goombargona,* with the same number of syllables as *Goondoo-bluie,*
has stress on the second syllable.  *Upper Botobolar* has it
on the last.  *Tyalgum* in Queensland is pronounced &ldquo;tie-alg-um,&rdquo;
with stress on the middle syllable, but *Tyalgum* in New South
Wales has only two syllables, &ldquo;tal-gum.&rdquo;

It is not only Aboriginal names that make pronunciation
puzzles.  Like Americans, Australians sometimes adopt English
names without following English pronunciation.  *Grantham* in
Australia rhymes with *anthem*, a permitted but less common
pronunciation in England.  *Trentham* in New Zealand likewise
has a &ldquo;th&rdquo; sound, in this case not even a possible pronunciation
in England.  Australians sound the *l* in *Faulconbridge* and
*Highgate* has a full *a* sound as if it were two words.

Not all newcomers were from England.  A Belgian patriot
named *Antwerp*, a rural locality in Victoria; *Zeerust* commemorates
a birthplace in the Transvaal.  The explorer Strzelecki
named *Mount Kosciusko*, Australia's highest mountain, after a
Polish patriot, and is himself remembered in place names, with
the pronunciation &ldquo;strez-lecky&rdquo; (accented on the middle syllable).
Early German settlement brought German place names,
especially in South Australia, but many were lost, at least for a
time, during the first World War, when Germans and their
language were considered unspeakable.  Scholarship was not
always accurate: *Hahndorf*, named after Captain Hahn, the
captain of a Danish ship, became *Ambleside* for a while, and
there was even a move to change *Tanunda* until it was pointed
out that the name was there even before the Germans.

Literature provided some names.  *Ivanhoe* in Victoria
reminds us of the popularity of Scott in the early days of
Australia, and the Bible explains *Jericho, Jerusalem*, and the
*Jordan*, the basis of a joke in Furphy's *Such Is Life* in which a
traveler willing to recount his experiences in these places turns
out to have been no further afield than South-Eastern
Tasmania.

American names are not common and are usually, like
*Yankee Jim's Creek*, associated with the goldfields.  *Tomahawk
Creek* need not have a direct American origin but indicates the
early adoption in Australia of the word *tomahawk* as the
normal word for a hatchet.  *American River* in Kangaroo Island
was a name given by sealers because an American captain had
visited the locality in 1803 and built a small ship there.
*Mississippi Sawmills*, a former timber-milling area near Big
Pat's Creek, in Victoria, must owe something to Americans, but
*Lexington* in the same state recalls an English locality.

Even in a young country the origins of names are often
hard to trace.  There are some surprises.  *Bendigo*, the name of a
famous goldfield and thriving city, well enough known to have
produced offshoot names like *New Bendigo* and *Little Bendigo,*
sounds like an Aboriginal name, but in fact is thought to recall
the nickname of a station shepherd jocularly known by the
name of the English pugilist Abednego William Thompson.
The other large goldrush city in Victoria, *Ballarat*, has an
Aboriginal name.

Literature and a touch of wit named the Victorian rural
locality *Lilliput*.  The name was originally chosen by a Lands
Commissioner for a relatively small station (American 'ranch')
owned by a man who had a number of children and whose
name was James Gullifer.  But, of course, if anyone takes the
trouble to check the bearings given by Lemuel Gulliver in
Dean Swift's report of his travels, it will be found that the
original Lilliput was really in South Australia.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Sick Sikh.&rdquo;  [From an Associated Press pick-up from a
local New Delhi newspaper, reporting a stricken soldier.  Submitted
by E.A. Livingston, Richmond Hill, New York.]

## A Grandfather Stories Glossary
*Josephus Perrick, Los Alamitos, California*

*Grandfather Stories* by Samuel Hopkins Adams (New York:
Random House, 1955) is the linguistic equivalent of the
finest wines, whiskeys, cheeses: a commingling of delightful
flavors suitably mellowed and aged.

These memoirs cover the author's &ldquo;boyhood years of the
1870s and early 1880s&rdquo; and contain many colloquialisms of
that era.  However, the dominant figure is Grandfather Myron
Adams, &ldquo;born at the tag-end of the eighteenth century,&rdquo; who
&ldquo;consciously affected its archaisms&rdquo; (to charm and often baffle
his grandchildren).  Add to that a generous amount of the slang
current along the Erie Canal in the 1820s and beyond, and we
have a savory mixture of vocabularies.  The secret, as the saying
goes, may be in the blend.

Not many of the book's colloquialisms can be found in
H. L. Mencken's *The American Language*.  Quite a few do turn
up in *Slang and Its Analogues* (1890-1904), compiled by J.S.
Farmer and W. E. Henley.  And a number of the &ldquo;archaisms&rdquo;
are explained in the Merriam-Webster *Third New International
(NID3)*; in fact, the source given for some of the *NID3*
definitions is none other than *Grandfather Stories*.  Most of this
quaint and flavorsome talk can be at least generally understood
from the context; but in some cases, fortunately, Grandfather
Adams translates Erie Canalese and other arcane expressions.
The following selective glossary relies primarily upon the book
itself rather than upon dictionaries.  (All page references are to
the 1955 Random House edition.)

*accosts*, *n.* unwanted sermons: *Nobody could get from
waterfront to capitol without a score of accosts from
these well-meaning zealots* ['temperance advocates'].
(62)

*affording*, *adj.* generous and helpful: *an affording and
officious nature* (119).  Used later in the sense of comfortable
or luxurious; see quotation after *pompous.*
See also *officious.*

*almshouse auction*, auctioning off the poor of the parish.
Bidders undertook to feed, clothe and lodge indigents
for the price indicated—in return for services as
cheap labor, domestic servants, etc.  See also *poor,
poormaster.*

*ambition,* *n.* grudge: *All true boatmen* [on the Erie
Canal] *have an ambition against the cumbering rafts.*
(307)

*anatomists,* *n., pl.* persons in the business of &ldquo;body-snatching&rdquo;
[see also *cad-wagons, resurrectioner*].
Listed among many Erie Canal country &ldquo;characters&rdquo;
and con-artists on p. 20: *ash-bucket apprentices* *(q.v.)*,
*blanketeers, gyppos* ['gypsies'], *shun-pikes, redemptioners*
*(q.v.)*, *swing kettles,* and *tenkers.*

*ash-bucket apprentices,* apprentices who have run off
and are listed in advertisements as, in effect, worthless
and ungrateful wretches.  A typical formula in
such notices was &ldquo;two cents and a bucket of ashes,&rdquo;
followed by the name and description of the runaway
apprentice.  (See 20, 288, and 289: *You put the ashbucket
on me.)*

*avails,* *n., pl.* funds: *I made it clear that none of my
avails were going to be dissipated upon a sawdust
siren*.  (84)

*Baptist time,* time on the clock in the steeple of the
Peculiar Baptists' church (56).  There is a later reference
to Presbyterian time.

*bouker,* *n.* bilker, pitchman: *A professional bouker,
higgling lewd prints for a penny* (300).  Comparable
terms are *bounetter* (79), *ingler* (73, 247).

*bunkum,* *adj.* clever, smart, fashionable: *Bunkum!  Very
bunkum*!  (113).  *NID3* conjectures a derivation, via
Canadian French *le buncum sa*, from French *il est
bonne comme ca*.  Not to be confused with the variant
of *buncombe.*

*cachexy,* *n.* fit, stroke: *If you let your gorge rise like
that, you'll have a cachexy.*  (111)

*cad-wagons*, *n., pl.* wagons transporting illicitly-obtained
cadavers (131).  See also *resurrectioner.*

*canal craft*, types of, listed on p. 295: *line boats,
packet boats, ballheads, Durhams, gala boats, countersterns,
toothpick scows, dugouts, arks, flats and per-iaugers,
and always the slow rafts*....

*carcagne*, *n.* terrible, vengeful monster: *a storm-hag
with a wolf's head, a vampire's mouth, and a bat's
wings* (127).  No dictionary listings located, but there
is a reference to this apparition in *The World of
Washington Irving* by Van Wyck Brooks.

*cataplasm*, *n.* a poultice: *A doctor on a passing boat
bled, purged and puked him, and applied a cataplasm
of bread and milk upon a wilted cabbage leaf.*
(302)

*chirk*, *adj.* lively, cheerful: *as chirk as a chitterdiddle
[?] on a pokeweed.*  (282)

*cholera sermons*, dire utterances from the pulpit representing
a cholera epidemic as divine retribution for
sinners: *a potent auxiliary of the disease* in producing
panic among the apprehensive populace.  (63)

*composition*, *n.* agreement, understanding: *The captains
consulted and came to a composition*.  (150)

*contagionist*, *adj.* The &ldquo;contagionist school of medicine&rdquo;
held that cholera was transmitted from person
to person (62).  See also *meteorastic, telluric.*

*copious*, *adj.* profanely eloquent: *The most copious
hoggee on the towpath could not have been more
vituperous.*

*cruel*, *adj.* very, decidedly: *She* [the gala boat] *was
cruel gay with bunting upon her rails and silk pennants
flying*.  (298)

*cupidity*, *n.* a love-note.  (186)

*dibs*, *n., pl.* dollars: *fifty sweet dibs.*  (258)

*doffer*, *n.* textile worker: *I was a doffer in the Bird of
Freedom mills.*  (304)

*dotch me*, equivalent to 'search me' or 'I'll be dadgummed':
*Dotch me if I quite twig it.*  (163) See also
*twig*.

*easeful*, *adj.* at elegant leisure: *Could they but see me
now, as I sit, easeful and ladyish, upon my spotless
foredeck!*  (294)

*easting*, *n.* progress eastward: ... *determined to make
all the easting he could before the water subsided
beneath us.*  (310)

*elephant, I have seen the*, slang for 'once bitten, twice
shy.'  (71)

*feeze, all of a*, very excited, distraught.  (161)

*fillip*, *v.* equivalent to thumbing one's nose: *The man
filliped his fingers toward his accuser, in jaunty farewell.*
(124)

*fip*, *n.* counterfeit coin: *A fip from his mold fell into
the sheriff's hand.*  (91)

*foofoo*, *n.* Erie Canal term for a foreigner.  (186)

*gardaloo*, *n.* variously, a heckler or the equivalent of a
Bronx cheer.  (175) Not to be confused with *gardyloo*,
that marvelous old Scottish cry of warning just before
the slops or chamber pot got emptied out a window
on the street below.

*ginseng*, *n.* brightweed, mandragon, shang.  See 199ff.
for an account of the great &ldquo;Ginseng Boom&rdquo; which
devastated wooded areas in rural New York.  There
was great demand for ginseng root among U.S. and
overseas Chinese, who regarded it as the ultimate
panacea and aphrodisiac.  (Today, ginseng is popular
among health food enthusiasts for the same reasons.)

*harstle*, *v.* to fret, upset: *Don't harstle yourself over it.*
(245) A possible ancestor of *hassle*, for which several
current dictionaries say &ldquo;origin unknown.&rdquo;

*hifer*, *v.* to dilly-dally?: ... *who is to ply the metal if
I hifer here listening to thy silly whoobub?*  (248)

*hoodledasher*, *n.* a &ldquo;live&rdquo; canal boat and a &ldquo;dead&rdquo; one
pulled by one team of horses.  (282)

*horse-high &amp; hog-tight*, safe, secure, escape-proof?:
*locked in, horse-high and hog-tight.*  (305)

*horse thief society*, organization formed to discourage,
chase, capture horse-stealers.  The members, rather
ambiguously, called themselves Horse Thieves.  (9, 11)

*humbox*, *n.* pulpit: *Back to your humbox, parson!*
(132)

*ignorama*, *n.* feminine of *ignoramus*.  Significantly, perhaps,
the word appears *only* in this form in the conversations
of Grandfather Adams.

*improvement party*, meeting of a church congregation
to cut a winter's supply of firewood for the minister.
(12)

*jackeroo*, *n.* blackjack?:  *There is great virtue in a properly
leaded jackeroo.*  (102)

*ladyish*, *adj.* like a grand lady?  See quotation following
*easeful*.  (*MW-3* lists *ladyish* only in a pejorative
sense.)

*locomotivator*, *n.* an earlier form, apparently, of *locomotive*.
(52)

*mac(c)aroni*, *adj.* smart, fashionable, (as in *Yankee
Doodle)*.  (25, 294) See also *bunkum.*

*makebate*, *n.* contentious person.  Grandfather Adams
discusses a petition opposing the Erie Canal which
was *signed by every makebate, dawplucker and mal-content.*
(43, 253)

*meteorastic*, *adj.* denoting a school of medicine that
believed that all diseases came from the air.  (60) See
also *contagionist, telluric*.

*mortal*, *adv.* a general intensive: P. 301: *a popet show
of Punch and Judy, mortal risible*.  (161); *mortal bunkum.*
(161)

*mung-meetings*, *n., pl.  Mung-news in canal parlance
means gossip.*  (299)

*notional*, *adj.* inclined to think: *I'm notional that there
is something queer afoot.*  (178)

*notion-higgler,* *n.  a peddler of oddments.*  (307)

*notorious*, *adj.* in the earlier sense of 'widely and
favorably known.'  (119)

*officious*, *adj.* in the earlier sense of 'kind, obliging,
eager to assist.'  (119)

*ort-book*, *n.* scrapbook, book of memorabilia (frequently
consulted by Grandfather Adams).

*over the left*, an expression of repudiation (like crossing
one's fingers to negate what one is saying).

Grandfather Adams thought his grandsons' schoolboy-slang
phrase must derive from the Greek &ldquo;thunder on
the left.&rdquo;  (30, 83)

*parmateers*, *n., pl.* dispensers of hokum: *windy
parmateers* (248); *the parmateering appeals* (248) of
political candidates.

*pompous,* *adj.* splendid, elegant: *How rich, how affording,
how pompous is the career of a canal wife.*
(312)

*poor*, *n.* pauper: *Did you want to buy a poor?*  (284)
Apparently addressed to someone who might be willing
to pay for the right to take a pauper from the
country poor farm and put same to work for his
keep.

*poormaster*, *n.* conductor of the almshouse auction or
vendu *(q.v.).*

*prank it*, lord it, show off: *How she will prank it over
us other canal wives.*  (299)

*pucker*, *n.* disagreement: *a pucker over the selection of
an official.*  (119)

*redemptioner*, *n.* an indentured emigrant: ... *a pockmarked
redemptioner who had been turned out of the
farmstead where she worked as not worth her keep.*
(284)

*resurrectioner*, *n.* person in the business of body-snatching
from graveyards and selling cadavers to
medical schools.  (130) See also *anatomist, cad-wagon.*

*scrawn*, *n.* scrawny youth, unprepossessing lumpkin: *a
pawky young scrawn.*  (259)

*scrimshanker*, *n.* rascal, ne'er-do-well.  (248, 307)

*soopling*, *adj.* limbering: *That's our pitcher, Critchley,
soopling his arm up.*  (151)

*sorrow of stones*, grave markers.  (175)

*strappado*, *adj.* strapped, flat broke.  (87)

*telluric*, *adj.* denoting a school of medicine that held
that the ground, dirt, or earth was the source of disease.
(60) See also *contagionist, meteorastic.*

*temptational*, *adj.* alluring: Grandfather Adams reminisces
about a lady circus rider with a *temptational
eye.*  (84)

*theologaster*, *n.* a pious fraud?: *a very theologaster for
false respectability.*  (120)

*toosey-woosey*, *adj.* of the great vogue for Thomas
Carlyle in Rochester, N.Y., during the 1880s: *He*
[Grandfather Adams] *regarded them as faddists.  I
have heard him apply the derogatory term &ldquo;toosey-woosey&rdquo;
to their unbridled enthusiasms.*  (229)

*trying it on the dog*, a trial run.  (239)

*twig (it),* to comprehend.  (113) See also *dotch.*

*under*, *v.* to accept a lower price: *Any man unders
that, he'll have me to deal with.*  (286)

*vegetate*, *v.* to collect vegetation.  Sign in woods: *All
Persons Are Positively Forbidden to Vegetate on These
Premises.*  (205)

*wastethrift*, *n.* unfrugal person; squanderer: *Only a was-tethrift
would plane the underside of a privy seat.*  (13)

Apart from the Erie Canal localisms, most of the relatively
exotic words in *Grandfather Stories* fall readily into just a few
other categories.  One of the largest groups is made up of
familiar-seeming words used in archaic or dialectal senses:
*accosts, affording, ambition, avails, bunkum, composition, copious,
cruel, cupidity, notorious, officious, and pompous.*

There is a rich vocabulary of insult, or expressions of
disdain: *ash-bucket apprentice, bouker, higgler, ingler,
ignorama, makebate, parmateer, redemptioner, scrawn, scrim-shanker,
theologaster*, and *wastethrift*.  And among terms of
abuse listed on p. 248 we find *chatter like a clape, dummock,
Federalist muckworm, poxy Democrat*, and *drop that forge bar.*

Still another category includes what might loosely be
called medical terms: *anatomist, cad-wagon, cachexy, cataplasm,
cholera sermon, resurrectioner*, and of course the *contagionist,
meteorastic*, and *telluric* schools of medicine.

Certain words and phrases illuminate economic conditions
and social attitudes during the youth and maturity of Grandfather
Adams: the *almshouse auction, poormaster*, and *poor
vendu*; the *ash-bucket apprentices* and *redemtioners*; the
rejection of such outsiders as *foofoos* and *gyppos.*

If we are grateful to Myron Adams of 19th-century
Rochester, New York, for the piquant, redolent language of
*Grandfather Stories*, we should feel even more indebted to the
phonographic memory, discriminating ear, and literary art of
his admiring grandson, Samuel Hopkins Adams.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Navy is considering basing a carrier group in the
Gulf area ... which could see a role for a battleship in places
like the Caribbean where ... they could cover 90 percent of
targets in Cuba with their 16mm guns and impose ... a oneship
blockade.&rdquo;  [From the Alabama/West Florida Business
Review, October 1983.  Submitted by Stephens G. Croom, Mobile, Alabama.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;... legislation recently proposed by Minnesota Sen.
Dave Durenberger to help provide funding for establishment of
a silt barrier system to keep affluents from running into our
nation's waterways.  Keep affluents out, we'll again have clear
water everywhere!&rdquo;  [From the Minneapolis Star &amp; Tribune,
Oct. 3, 1983; submitted by Dean R. Durken, West Saint Paul,
Minnesota.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Police seek widower after surgeon slained.&rdquo;  [Headline in
The Orlando Sentinel, October 5, 1983.  Submitted by Alexandra
Warden, Maitland, Florida.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The fight has just begun,' he said.  'We will continue
until infinitum.' &rdquo;  [Ronald Browning, president of the Association
of Concerned Taxpayers for Quality Education, quoted in
the San Bernardino Sun.  Submitted by J.B. Lawrence, San
Bernardino, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Fresh hydrophonic Bibb lettuce.&rdquo;  [From an advertising
brochure circulated in Columbus, Ohio, August 29, 1983.
Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Naples City Councilmen on Thursday adopted a ...
budget ... but only after a public hearing in which much
rabble was raised....&rdquo;  [From the Naples Daily News, September
16, 1983.  Submitted by Lynn G. Lee, Naples, Florida.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;2 Die in Apparent Murder-Suicide....  The bodies were
found by each other in a house on Shamrock Avenue, said
Johnny Shelton of the Surry County Emergency Medical
Services, and each had been shot in the chest....  Neighbors
told investigators that Hawks and Mrs. Jones had been dating
since Mrs. Jones' divorce a year ago, but that, following an
argument earlier this week, she had told him to pack his thing
and leave.&rdquo;  [From Winston-Salem Journal, October 7, 1983.
Submitted by W.D. Sanders, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A person shall not be treated as suffering from physical
disablement such that he is either unable to walk or virtually
unable to do so if he is not unable or virtually unable to walk
with a prosthesis or an artificial aid which he habitually wears
or uses or if he would not be unable or virtually unable to walk
if he habitually wore or used a prosthesis or an artificial aid
which is suitable in his case.&rdquo;  [From a (U.K.) Department of
Health and Social Services explanation regarding mobility
allowances for the disabled, as reported in a letter in The Daily
Telegraph, 30 October 1983.  Submitted by Edward G. Taylor, Tangier, Morocco.]

## Please Don't F*** the Grass
*Ann E. Bennaton, Guatemala, Guatemala*

Inspired by &ldquo;Never Ask a Uruguayan Waitress for a Little
Box: She Might Apply Her Foot to Your Eyelet,&rdquo; by John R.
Cassidy [IX, 4], I found myself remembering similar situations
from my experiences as an international conference interpreter
and translator who has traveled extensively in Latin America.

Among the words considered taboo in Chile is *pico*, which
in everyday Spanish means 'peak, point'; 'and a bit,' as in &ldquo;2
miles and a bit&rdquo;; or 'just after,' in reference to the hour.  To
Chileans, however, the word only means 'prick, pecker,' etc., in
its most vulgar form.  When Indira Ghandi stopped off in Chile
on her return from an official state visit to Argentina, she
brought her Argentine interpreter along with her to interpret
her speeches into Spanish at official functions.  At a very formal
luncheon full of naturally long-faced Chilean colonels, Mrs.
Ghandi began her speech by stressing the similarities between
India and Chile, saying that the two countries had so much in
common, particularly their peaks—'pricks'—and their valleys.
The colonels' faces froze.  She continued, stating that both
countries also shared many economic lows and peaks.  Neither
Mrs. Ghandi nor her interpreter could understand why everyone
looked so glacial, and both became rather hesitant as the
speech went on.  I recall being told that it was just about the
least successful visit ever made to Chile by a foreign head of
state.

Then there was the wife of a new French ambassador
who, upon her arrival, stated that she was certain she would
love Chile because of its lovely people and its magnificent
Andean peaks—again 'pricks.'  I don't know if she ever lived it
down.

Also in Chile, it seems that once, to welcome the Spanish
soccer team, great banners were strung all over Santiago with
the words *Bienvenidos los Co&ntilde;os*, which is what they call the
Spaniards.  In Spain, however, *co&ntilde;o* is a frequently heard
expletive meaning 'cunt,' used rather as English-speaking people
would say &ldquo;Oh, hell!&rdquo;  I wonder who was able to explain to
the visitors that &ldquo;Welcome, You Cunts,&rdquo; was really a friendly
greeting.

Some years ago a Guatemalan diplomat on a mission to
Uruguay was invited to a formal reception.  The next day, he
was asked whether he had enjoyed himself, and he said he had
even gotten a bit *bolo* 'drunk' or 'tipsy' before he left.  Shocked
faces and dead silence greeted his reply, and then he was
asked: &ldquo;Didn't they throw you out?&rdquo;  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;it wasn't
that noticeable.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Not noticeable?  That's impossible.  You said
you were *bolo*.&rdquo;  Eventually he was told that what he thought
meant 'drunk' means 'naked' in Uruguay, derived from &ldquo;balls
are showing,&rdquo; similar to English &ldquo;balls naked.&rdquo;

*Ponerse un pedo* 'putting on a fart,' and *ponerse un cohete*
'putting on a firecracker' mean getting drunk in Mexico.

On my first interpreting assignment in Nicaragua, I found
out much to my chagrin that my translation for 'handling,'
*manipuleo*, meant 'pocket pool' to them ('men playing with
their testicles with their hands in their pockets').  However, I
recently saw a document where the word 'handling' had been
translated as *manoseo* 'pawing.'

Being *constipado* is what they call 'having a cold' in
Mexico.  Once a Mexican delegate at a meeting of bankers
wanted to indicate metaphorically that for simple matters he
liked simple remedies.  *Cuando estoy constipado, uso Vicks* was
his way of saying: 'When I have a cold, I use Vicks.' However,
his interpreter was from Argentina, and so the statement came
back into English as &ldquo;When I'm constipated, I use Vicks.&rdquo;

In Hispanic America below Mexico, a *causante* is a
'deceased (person),' but in Mexico this word means 'taxpayer.'
A Peruvian interpreter at a tax conference had to apologize to
her listeners on day two and tell them that all those &ldquo;dead
people&rdquo; she had been talking about were really Mexican
taxpayers.

At a Family Planning Conference in the Dominican
Republic, I was very impressed when they announced that the
band would play the *Merengue de la Ligadura*, a merengue in
honor of 'tying the Fallopian tubes,' I thought.  I was somewhat
disappointed when it turned out to be a merengue in favor of
'sweethearts,' for *ligar* there means 'to be tied lovingly to each
other,' which might have the opposite effect of Family
Planning.

Between the neighboring countries of Honduras and Guatemala,
there are endless linguistic obstacles—some more
embarrassing than others.  A common saying in Guatemala is
*Amor de lejos es de pendejos* 'Love from afar is for fools.'  But
in Honduras, the word *pendejo* is used almost exclusively for
'pubic hair,' something no lady would ever mention in mixed
company.

*Arrecha* or *arrecho* in Guatemala is used as a compliment,
meaning 'courageous, brave.'  (&ldquo;The penniless widow left with
five children was very *arrecha* and managed to put them all
through school.&rdquo;) In Honduras, applied to females, the same
word means a 'loose woman,' so when a friend of mine
complimented my thrice-married Honduran aunt by calling her
*arrecha*, she kept insisting that when she was young, people
may have talked about her, but that she had never, never really
been *arrecha*!  On some of the Spanish-speaking islands of the
Caribbean, *arrecha* or *arrecho* means 'mad or angry,' but if a
woman used this expression in Honduras she would very
probably be propositioned immediately.

In Honduras, the word *pisar*, elsewhere 'to step on; to
cover a bird; to ram, trample, tread on,' means 'to fuck,' just as
do *coger* and *tirar* in South America.  This is why Hondurans
tend to be shocked when reading signs saying NO PISAR EL
CESPED in public parks, since to them it does not mean 'DON'T
WALK ON THE GRASS' but rather 'DON'T FUCK THE LAWN'!

*Pupusas* are a very popular sort of *taco*, originating in El
Salvador, made from *tortillas* filled with cheese, meat, or other
things and then fried or grilled.  *Pupusas* are 'cunts' to
Guatemalans and Hondurans.  And for Spaniards, a *tortilla* is a
sort of omelet.

The noun *chingaste* means 'coffee grounds' in Honduras,
whereas in Mexico it could only mean 'Did you fuck?' *Chingo*
in Honduras is an adjective meaning 'short,' as in a dress's
being too short; in Mexico it is a verb: 'I fuck.'

One of my own most embarrassing moments was when, as
a recently married young woman, I felt a cold coming on and
was a bit feverish.  So I asked my Argentine boss to let me go
home early from the office, telling him I thought I had a
*calentura* (which to me meant a low fever, whereas *fiebre*
would have been a very high fever).  He told me, of course, I
could go home, but that he really never expected me to be so
frank and open about it.  This puzzled me, until I found out
that to him and other Argentines *calentura* meant being
'horny' or 'in heat.'

For the female genitalia, the people from the River Plate
use the term *cajita* or *cajeta*, and elsewhere it may be *concha*;
but in Central America there are other rather descriptive
terms, such as *cuchara* 'spoon,' *cuca*, short for *cucaracha*
'cockroach,' *bollo* 'bun,' or *pan* 'bread.'  In Middle America
many women are named *Concha*, which is short for *Concepcion*,
a popular biblical name meaning 'conception.'  We also eat
*conchas* 'shellfish' in seafood cocktails!

And then there was the Argentine lady who went to
Mexico and met a charming, apparently very cultured gentleman
who invited her out for tea at Sanborns and suggested
she have *crepas* 'cr&egrave;pes' with *cajeta* 'a creamy caramel spread,'
which to her meant 'cunt.'  She was furious, mostly at herself
for having considered him a gentleman.

Until quite recently, when it became accepted in ecology
circles, the word *poluci&oacute;n* was totally taboo as a translation for
'pollution,' because its principal meaning was 'semen,' as in
wet dreams.  Now we may use this term officially at conferences
without the fear of having our mouths washed out with soap.

The descriptive term for blondes in various countries can
leave the best of us mystified.  In Mexico they are called *g&uuml;ero*
or *g&uuml;era*, in Guatemala *canche* (for both males and females).  In
Honduras and El Salvador they are *cheles* (also sexless), and in
Costa Rica—would you believe it—*macho* for men and *macha*
for women, with the diminutive for girls being *machita*.  The
first time I heard a Costa Rican admiringly refer to my cousin
as a *machita*, I thought he was calling her a lesbian!  In
Venezuela blondes are *catiras* and in Panama *fulas*.

In Central America breasts are known vulgarly as *tetas*
and *chiches*, but in Chile *chiches* are 'charms' or 'pendants,' as
worn on bracelets or necklaces.  Consequently, more than one
*chileno* has been slapped for voicing his admiration for the
necklace or pendant worn by a lady with a low-cut evening
dress.  His compliment could be freely translated as, &ldquo;What
beautiful tits you have, se&ntilde;ora.&rdquo;

An automobile can be variously called *autom&oacute;vil, carro,
coche*, and in Cuba (before the forced popularity of the
bicycle) *maquina*.  However, in Guatemala *coche* also means
'pig, hog,' and South Americans might be more than bemused
if offered *carne de coche* or *manteca de coche*, which to them
would mean 'meat of the automobile' or 'butter of the
automobile' instead of 'pork' or 'lard.'

Argentines, to whom *trastes* are 'bottoms, backsides, or
behinds' (preferably of pretty girls), tend to look rather shocked
when asked by people from northern Latin America to *fregar
los trastes* 'to scrub the dishes,' a request that to them would
sound like 'scrub those asses.'

I once received a text on Mexican rural housing for
translation into English.  I could hardly believe my eyes when a
certain dwelling was described as being made of *&oacute;rganos*
'organs.'  My imagination did run wild, as I knew intuitively
that they could not be the musical instrument.  The dictionary
did not help me either.  Finally a Mexican told me that what
was really meant was 'organ cactus.'

As a final note, in Guatemala it is quite comme il faut to
say to one's hostess *&iexcl;Qu&eacute; linda cola tiene Ud. se&ntilde;ora!* 'What a
lovely tail you have, se&ntilde;ora!'  She will understand that you are
talking about her ferns, which are called *colas de quetzal*, and
not her tail.


#### EPISTOLA {Eric Winters}

I refer to your article &ldquo;Down to Earth in a Low Country&rdquo;
by Harry Cohen [X,2].  I find the piece excellent and full of
interesting information.  However, Mr. Cohen is mistaken when
he calls the Dutch word for 'appendix,' *blindedarmonytsteking*,
an &ldquo;outright misnomer.&rdquo;  The Dutch word, like the German
*Blinddarm*, which is a little less frightening but means the same
thing, is simply the native name for the small saclike appendage
to the large intestine.  It designates it as 'blind,' in the sense
that it has no outlet.  Indeed, the appendix is closed at one end,
and therefore 'blind' is a very appropriate term and not a
misnomer or a folk etymology.

*[Eric Winters, Marble Dale, Connecticut]*

## Paring Pairs No. 13

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Lashings of dried plums.  
(b). Many new watches have it.  
(c). Bronx cheer for demimonde.  
(d). Supine and dead.  
(e). Pan bad actor.  
(f). Only one of many in Hell.  
(g). Diesel fuel from Cockney 'ooker.  
(h). Irritating beauty.  
(i). Drink to the dress from the deserted village.  
(j). Soviet complaint.  
(k). Dyspeptic German.  
(l). Belgian child.  
(m). Drunken coward.  
(n). Causes stir among golfers?  
(o). Meet saucy girl here?  
(p). Slender supplication for nutty confection.  
(q). Turnabout's Poe story.  
(r). &Agrave; votre sant&eacute;!  
(s). Oviparous adder.  
(t). Reared to be disdainfully ironic to *Life* staff.  
(u). Purple rear or just dessert?  
(v). Found tobacco substitute.  
(w). Unusually tasty investment.  
(x). Situation of some delicacy.  
(y). Chocolate tram.  
(z). Capital English heatwave.

(1). Belly.  
(2). Bit.  
(3). Biter.  
(4). Bred.  
(5). Broil.  
(6). Brussel.  
(7). Chafing.  
(8). Chicken.  
(9). Crate.  
(10). Dish.  
(11). d'Oeuvre.  
(12). Duff.  
(13). Egg.  
(14). French.  
(15). Fried.  
(16). Grilled.  
(17). Ham.  
(18). Hand.  
(19). Hors.  
(20). Hot.  
(21). Jovial.  
(22). Kosher.  
(23). Kraut.  
(24). Lean.  
(25). London.  
(26). Mate.  
(27). Plum.  
(28). Potato.  
(29). Pray.  
(30). Prune.  
(31). Rare.  
(32). Raspberry.  
(33). Red.  
(34). Roast.  
(35). Salmon.  
(36). Salt.  
(37). Second.  
(38). Smoked.  
(39). Soul.  
(40). Sour.  
(41). Spoon.  
(42). Sprout.  
(43). Stable.  
(44). Stake.  
(45). Sweet.  
(46). Tart.  
(47). Tee.  
(48). Toast.  
(49). Trolley.  
(50). Up.  
(51). Whine.  
(52). Whip.  
(53). Wry.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;NO DUMPING/TRESPASSERS WILL BE VIOLATED&rdquo; [Photo of
a sign published in The Oklahomans magazine, Sunday
Oklahoman, April 19, 1981.  Submitted by Tom S. Reyenga, Oklahoma City.]

## Rhyme Without Reason
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

Very early in our careers as language users, we human
beings take great pleasure in the repetition of playful
sounds in words.  In the crib and romper room, we babble *ma-ma,
da-da*, and *bye-bye*, and we are soon intoning such ditties
as *eeny meeny miny moe, fee fi fo fum*, and *hickory dickory
dock*, not because they make sense to us, but because they
satisfy a craving of our ears for rhythm and rhyme.  The appeal
of such playful repetitions is especially evident in the story of
Chicken Little (also Chicken Licken); his cohorts in alarmism,
Henny Penny, Cocky Locky, Ducky Lucky, Goosy Loosy, and
Turky Lurky; and their nemesis, Foxy Loxy.

When a sound or syllable repeats itself with little or no
change in a word, the resulting combination is often a reduplication.
There are more than 2000 such twin words in English,
and they come in three types: rhymes, like *hocus-pocus*; vowel
(or ablaut) shifts like *zigzag*; and repetitions, like *goody-goody*.

*Rhymes*

We are all familiar with the use of end-rhyme and internal
rhyme in poetry, but how aware are we of the extent to which
rhyme operates within English words?:

>*boogie-woogie*   
*claptrap*        
*hobnob*          
*hodgepodge*     
*namby-pamby*    
*nitty-gritty*   
*okey-dokey*
*pell-mell*
*willy-nilly*

Some of these rhymed reduplications have intriguing
origins.  Joann Karges [*VERBATIM: Volumes V &amp; VI*, pp. 918-20]
explains that *hobnob* springs &ldquo;from *hob or nob* 'to drink to one
another'; the *hob* 'heating unit' to keep the beer warm by the
hearth and the *nob* 'table' where the drink was set by the
elbow.&rdquo;  A *hodgepodge* (earlier *hotchpotch*) was originally a
stew of many ingredients and has broadened in meaning to a
'widely varied mixture, a mess.'  *Namby-pamby* was the title of
a poem written by Henry Carey in 1726, ridiculing the poetic
efforts of Ambrose Philips.  Long after Carey and Philips have
been forgotten, the reduplication *namby-pamby* has remained
to denote someone 'weakly sentimental and wishy-washy.'
Stuart Flexner [*I Hear America Talking*, Van Nostrand, 1976]
attributes *nitty-gritty* to the black militants of the 1960s and
the prevalence of &ldquo;grit-like nits.&rdquo;  And *willy-nilly* comes from
the phrase &ldquo;will I, nill I?&rdquo;—*nill* being an obsolete word
meaning &ldquo;not to will, to refuse&rdquo; [*Morris Dictionary of Word
and Phrase Origins*, William and Mary Morris, Harper &amp; Row,
1977].

*Vowel shifts*

Closely related to rhyming pairs are the many twin forms
in which the second element reduplicates the first with only a
slight change of vowel.  The sound pattern of these combinations
shows a powerful tendency to move from [i] or [iy],
vowels formed in the front of the mouth, to middle or low
vowels formed farther back in the mouth:

>*chitchat*      
*dilly-dally*   
*mishmash*      
*Ping-Pong*   
*riffraff*    
*singsong*    
*teeter-totter*
*tiptop*
*wishy-washy*

In contrast, the initial consonants of most rhymed reduplications
move forward, to the teeth and lips.

*Repetitions*

The third type of reduplication consists of an exact
repetition of a syllable or syllables.  Often these &ldquo;bolo words,&rdquo;
as Nils Thun calls them, represent expressive sounds, such as
the *choo-choo, chug-chug, puff-puff*, and *toot-toot* of a train or
the *quack-quack, tweet-tweet*, and *cuckoo* of birds [*Reduplicative
Words in English*, Uppsala, 1963].  But there are other
types of bolo words:

>*dodo*          
*fifty-fifty*   
*goody-goody*   
*no-no*         
*tom-tom*
*yo-yo*

The striking effects of balance, rhythm, and rhyme endow
reduplicative words with a special appropriateness to express
certain concepts:

>(a)  *onomatopoeic:* *boohoo, bow-wow, choo-choo, clip-clop,
ding-dong, heehaw, Ping-Pong, pitter-patter,
quack-quack, thump-thump, ticktock*.
>
>(b)  *confusion and disarray:* *harum-scarum, heebie-jeebies,
helter-skelter, hodgepodge, hubbub, huggermugger,
hurly-burly, mishmash, pell-mell, ragtag (raggle-taggle),
willy-nilly*.
>
>(c)  *alternating movement:* *crisscross, flip-flop, seesaw,
teeter-totter, ticktock, zigzag*.
>
>(d)  *idle talk:* *bibble-babble, blah blah, chitchat, claptrap,
mumbo jumbo*.
>
>(e)  *disparagement:* *dilly-dally, dodo, dumdum, fuddy-duddy,
no-no, riffraff* (from Old French *rif et raf*),
*rinky dinky, shillyshally* (from *shall I, shall I?*),
*wishy-washy*.
>
>(f)  *intensification:* *killer-diller, okey-dokey, razzle-dazzle,
super-duper, teen(s)y-ween(s)y*.

Recently I've been getting the heebie-jeebies about the
hurly-burly, helter-skelter, and hustle bustle of modern life and
have been working on a super-duper, tiptop, hot-shot theory to
distinguish compounds, which I discussed in VERBATIM X, 3,
from reduplications.

Most linguists, like Nils Thun and Hans Marchand, agree
that reduplications are not to be classified as subtypes of
compounds.  Thun accepts as the definition of a compound
&ldquo;cases when both elements can be used separately as words&rdquo;
[p. 11].  By this logic, combinations like *singsong* and *even
Stephen* are varieties of compounds, while those like *chitchat*
and *super-duper,* in which only one element can function
independently as a word, are not compounds.  Such a conclusion
is highly questionable.

Marchand's distinction between reduplicative and compound
words seems just:

>All these words are basically motivated by rhythm and
ablaut (or rime) underlying the significants of the twin
form.  Even those combinations which are composed of
two independent words do not speak against this essential
character of twin words.  *Sing-song* is not really a
combination of two signs comparable to *rainbow* ...
Nor is *walkie-talkie* just *walkie + talkie,* but we have
a playfully matched combination whose elements were
attracted to each other, so to speak, by the esthetic element
of rime while the putting together of logical contents
is more or less incidental.
>
>[*The Categories and Types of Present-Day English Word-Formation,*
M&uuml;nchen, 1969, p. 436.]

In short, Marchand appears to postulate two primary
criteria for reduplicative words: (1) motivation by the sounds of
the twin elements, and (2) the absence of a grammatical
relationship between the two parts.  These two word-formation
rules serve us well in identifying as reduplications such formations
as *flim-flam, hootchie-kootchie, super-duper,* and *razzle-dazzle,*
in which neither or only one element possesses semantic
value and, hence, in which there can be no grammatical
interplay between the parts.  By the same logic, twin forms like
*tiptop* and *teeter-totter,* in which both elements are morphemes,
qualify as reduplications because the two halves do not interact
grammatically.

But what about rhyming and vowel-shifted pairs containing
two semantic elements that do evidence a grammatical
alliance?  Thun points out that in cases in which &ldquo;the first
element ... can be replaced by an element of similar or
opposite meaning ... there is no reason to postulate a reduplicative
word-formation&rdquo; [p. 14].  As examples he shows that *ill
will* corresponds to *good will* and that *mole-hole* has as its
companions *mousehole, pigeonhole,* and the like.  Thun's insight
does help us to confirm our hunch that combinations like
*cookbook* (corresponding to *textbook, checkbook,* etc.) and
*downtown* (corresponding to *uptown, crosstown,* etc.) are
compounds and not reduplications.  In such formations, rhyme
is not the primary ingredient that glues the parts together, and
the first element was not &ldquo;chosen&rdquo; so as to match the sound of
the second.  Similarly, in words such as *freely, helplessness,* and
*maintain* we may confidently conclude that the rhyming of the
roots and suffixes is more accidental than intentional.

Having come this far in segregating reduplicative words
from compound words, we must still ask how we are to classify
combinations like *claptrap, prime time, jet set,* and *redhead*.
Each of these examples looks like a compound, for in each we
find two semantic units bound together by a clear grammatical
relationship: *claptrap* was originally 'a trap that makes a
clapping sound' [Morris]; *prime time* is 'time that is prime'; a
*jet set* is 'a group that travels by jet'; and a *redhead* is 'one
whose hair is red.'  At the same time, these words smack of
reduplication.  In each instance we have a strong sense that the
word parts were selected for their rhymes as well as their
meanings.  For example, *redhead* is not matched by *blondehead,
brownhead,* or *blackhead* (in the sense of hair color).

The process of trying to distinguish reduplications from
compound words vividly illustrates how words resist our most
prodigious efforts to classify them, how the living language
insists on wriggling out from under the most precise of
morphological microscopes.  If you will allow me to switch
metaphors, we cannot always tell where the front half of a
horse ends and the back half begins, even though we usually
know the difference between a horse's head and a horse's ass.
Still, it is often that ambiguous midpoint that makes for the
most intriguing investigations into anatomy and language.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Patient visits averaged 127.3 per week for the six months
ending last March—a drop of -4.3% from ...&rdquo; [From the
Journal of the American Medical Association, September 2,
1983.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Its smooth, white surface is almost undetectable and it
never peals, chips, or cracks.&rdquo;  [From the instruction booklet
with Snopake&reg; correction fluid.  Submitted by Andrew F.
Downey, Atlanta, Georgia.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Students will perform scenes in English from Mozart's
'The Magic Flute,' Rossini's 'Barber of Seville' and Verdi's
'Flagstaff.' &rdquo;  [From The Times-Picayune, New Orleans, January
8, 1984.  Submitted by M. M. Kreeger, Metairie, Louisiana.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Bryant Gumble here, with Mary Nissenson, who is in her
second week while Jane Pauley is on maternity leave.&rdquo;  [From
NBC Today, 8 a.m., January 9, 1984.  Submitted by Robert J.
Powers, Shreveport, Louisiana.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'Hamburgers, pizzas, ice cream and snakes.' &rdquo;  [From a
20-foot billboard in South Delhi (India), as reported by Michael
Hamlyn in The Times (London), March 5, 1984, p. 26.]

## Paring Pairs Prizes

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship,*
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations,* by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or &pound;18); *Word for Word,* by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box 199,
Aylesbury, Bucks, HP20 1TQ England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer.  Please use a postcard*.

## Subtitles: Or, the Forgotten Words
*Pat Tompkins, San Mateo, California*

To attract readers, a book title should be memorable,
informative, intriguing, and accurate.  Sometimes a subtitle
helps to meet those requirements.  In 1719, Daniel Defoe's
solution was this title: *The Life and Strange Surprizing Adventures
of Robinson Crusoe, of York, Mariner: Who Lived 8 and
20 Years All Alone in an Uninhabited Island on the Coast of
America, Near the Mouth of the Great River of Orinoco;
Having Been Cast on Shore by Shipwreck, Wherein All the
Men Perished but Himself.  With an Account How He Was at
Last Strangely Delivered by Pirates*.  If Defoe were deciding on
a title today, he would probably skip the synopsis and confine
himself to *Robinson*.  Or *Crusoe*.  Something succinct.

Subtitles are out of fashion.  &ldquo;A Novel&rdquo; sometimes appears
on current covers to help separate the fictitious from the
factual; a past convention labeled such novels as *The Scarlet
Letter* and *Ivanhoe* as &ldquo;A Romance.&rdquo;  But a real subtitle gives
an author a second chance to entice readers, to provide an
alternate label.  *Brideshead Revisited,* for example, is less vague
accompanied by its subtitle: &ldquo;The Sacred and Profane Memoirs
of Captain Charles Ryder.&rdquo;  A subtitle may clarify or mystify;
by nature it is secondary and generally ignored or forgotten.
Yet subtitles often contain stories, too.

The subtitle of Thomas Hardy's *Tess of the D'Urbervilles*
was not overlooked; it provoked such controversy that, twenty
years after it first appeared, Hardy declared that it would have
been better not to have written the subtitle.  In his preface to
the 1912 edition of *Tess,* he stated that the subtitle was &ldquo;the
estimate left in a candid mind of the heroine's character....  It
was disputed more than anything else in the book.&rdquo;  The
offending words?  &ldquo;A Pure Woman.&rdquo;

A few of the subtitles in the following list are familiar, but
your having read these novels is no guarantee of success in
matching the subtitles with the main titles.  For novels you may
not have read, the subtitles will tell you that *The Octopus* is not
an account of an eight-armed mollusk and *Green Mansions* is
not about life on an English country estate.  The subtitles may
even make you curious to read the books; if so, the words have
served their purpose.

## Pairing Pairs

1\. Madame Bovary (Flaubert)
2\. A History of Tom Jones (Fielding)
3\. The Mayor of Casterbridge (Hardy)
4\. Middlemarch (Eliot)
5\. Cakes and Ale (Maugham)
6\. The Octopus (Norris)
7\. Frankenstein (Shelley)
8\. Typee (Melville)
9\. Of Time and the River (Wolfe)
10\. Maggie (Crane)
11\. The Loved One (Waugh)
12\. Nostromo (Conrad)
13\. Silas Marner (Eliot)
14\. Green Mansions (Hudson)
15\. Eva Trout (Bowen)
16\. The Spy (Cooper)
17\. Decline and Fall (Waugh)
18\. Lorna Doone (Blackmore)
19\. Bartleby the Scrivener (Melville)
20\. The Good Soldier (Ford)

a. The Weaver of Raveloe  
b. A Story of California  
c. Or, the Skeleton in the Cupboard  
d. A Tale of Passion  
e. A Study of Provincial Life  
f. A Peep at Polynesian Life  
g. Or, A Tale of the Neutral Ground  
h. A Romance of the Tropical Forest  
i. Patterns of Provincial Life  
j. A Story of a Man of Character  
k. A Novel of Many Manners  
l. A Romance of Exmoor  
m. An Anglo-American Tragedy  
n. Or, the Modern Prometheus  
o. A Tale of th Seaboard  
p. A Foundling  
q. A Girl of the Streets  
r. A Story of Wall Street  
s. Or, Changing Scenes  
t. A Legend of Man's Hunger in His Youth

## Answers

1\. i  
2\. p  
3\. j  
4\. e  
5\. c  
6\. b  
7\. n  
8\. f  
9\. t  
10\. q  
11\. m  
12\. o  
13\. a  
14\. h  
15\. s  
16\. g  
17\. k  
18\. l  
19\. r  
20\. d  

There's an amazing story now making the rounds
concerning an illiterate young fellow who joined the all-Ivy
League firm as a salesman.  This bloke was the original drop
out.  He dropped out in the fourth grade.  Among his many
deficiencies was his inability to spell—even three-letter
words came out wrong in his jottings.  When the president
of the outfit caught up with this poor guy—through a letter
back to the sales manager—he nearly blew his stack, and
with some justification.  The letter went something like this:
&ldquo;I have came to Jamestown to sea this here company which
aint never bought nuthin from us but use can bet I will sel
them some of our guds.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Get rid of that fellow immediately,&rdquo;
the firm prexy ordered after reading the letter.  The
sales manager could see no way out but to do what the boss
ordered, so a couple of days later he started to dictate a
note telling the poor guy he was through.  While dictating,
he was going through his mail and came across a second
message from our hero, which read: &ldquo;That there outfit that
aint never bought nuthin from us just did.  I sole them our
guds worth $90,000.  Now I'm gonna to Houston.&rdquo;  The sales
manager delayed his note, and the next day there was
another brief letter from the illiterate salesman, as follows:
&ldquo;I got an order for halfa million from this Houston cumpny.
I couldove sole them the moon.&rdquo;  Delighted, the sales
manager made his way to the president's office and showed
him the messages and the orders.  The next day, the
following note from the prexy appeared on the bulletin
board in the sales office, along with the communications
from the salesman.  The president's letter read: &ldquo;We ben
spendin to much time tryin to spel instead uv tryin to sel.
Let's keep an eye on dem sails.  I want all of use to reed
dem letters from Joe (the new salesman) who is out on the
rode doin a grate job for this here furm.  All of use shood go
out an do like he done.&rdquo;

## The Imperative of Opposites
*Zellig Bach, Lakehurst, New Jersey*

Opposites coexist in our mental life inseparably, like inoperable
Siamese twins.  They permanently stand side by side,
or, like the obverse and reverse of a coin, back to back, which
describes more accurately their constant position vis-&agrave;-vis each
other, as well as the fact that they are forever bonded together.

Each half of a pair of opposites always has the power to
evoke immediately the other half.  This evocative power is often
used very effectively in poetry, rhetoric, and religious prayers
or hymns.  A good illustration of the latter instance is the hymn
by St. Francis of Assisi: &ldquo;Praised be my Lord for our brother
fire,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Praised be my Lord for our sister water.&rdquo;  Since the
pairing and juxtaposition of *brother/sister* and *fire/water*
already exist in one's mind, the reader or listener experiences
the pleasure of discovering within himself what was but dimly
known before.

It is a mental imperative that if a word has an exact
counterpart, it will promptly evoke this opposite.  This principle
is, in part, utilized in the psychological test called the Word
Association Test, which consists of a list of words of various
direct or indirect connotations.  They are oral, anal, aggressive,
phobic, and sexual words, as well as words about home and
family.  In this test the psychologist reads aloud from the list
one word at a time (called *the stimulus word*), and the
examinee has to respond promptly with the first word that
comes to mind (called *the reaction word*),  What is important to
us here is that, whenever there is a *specific* opposite to a
stimulus word, the expected reaction word is, as a rule, its
opposite.  Thus, *love/hate, father/mother, dog/cat, hunger/
thirst, boy-friend/girl-friend*.  If a reaction word *other* than the
available opposite is given, unless it has a logical connection
(for example, *hunger/food, summer/fall*), the response may be
considered an indicator of some emotional conflict *(father/
tyrant, mother/market)*.

The closely woven—one might say &ldquo;intimate&rdquo;— relationship
between two opposites is so strong that, occasionally, one
of the pair may come to serve both meanings, its own as well
as the other's.  Thus, Italian *bestia* and *bestiale* ('beast' and
'bestial') also mean, respectively, 'friendly' and 'marvelous.'
Instances of such an interchangeability of opposites are found
in many other languages.

One possible explanation for the phenomenon of the
imperative of opposites is that, in the very early stages of the
development of languages, when all communications were oral,
there was only one single word for *both* opposites.  Vocal
intonations, facial expressions, and other bodily gestures and
movements made it clear to the listener which one of the two
opposites was meant.

The German philologist Carl Abel (1837-1906) called
attention to this fact in a pamphlet about the oppositional
meaning of primal words.  He pointed out that in the ancient
Egyptian language there was a large number of words denoting
at one and the same time two opposites.  Abel rejected the
notion that two independent words (those for 'strong' and
'weak,' for instance) happened by chance to have the same
sound and therefore &ldquo;merged&rdquo; into a single word for both
concepts.  He stated that the simultaneity of two opposite
meanings in a single word can be explained by the fact that all
our concepts are based on comparisons.  If it were always day,
not only would we not have the concept of 'night,' but we
would have no concept or word for 'day,' either.  Every
concept, therefore, is a twin of its opposite.  He quoted in this
context the nineteenth-century English philosopher Alexander
Bain, who postulated on logical grounds the double meaning of
words: &ldquo;The essential relativity of all knowledge, thought, or
consciousness cannot but show itself in language.  If everything
that we can know is a transition from something else, every
experience must have two sides....  The name [word] *light* has
no meaning without what is implied in the name *dark*.&rdquo;  Bain
referred to this as the &ldquo;doubleness&rdquo; of concepts.

In the Appendix, Abel gave many examples of words with
oppositional meanings.  Here are several (some without any
changes in the word at all, some with phonetic modifications of
the same root): Latin *altus* ('high' as well as 'deep'); *sacer*
('sacred' as well as 'accursed'); *siccus* ('dry'), *succus* ('juice').
German *Boden* ('attic' as well as 'ground'); *stumm* ('dumb'),
*Stimme* ('voice').  There are numerous examples of this nature
from related languages.

A recent paper, &ldquo;Homonymous Antonyms&rdquo; [I, 4, 8],
brought further interesting examples: The Chinese word
*kungfu*, with identical characters and identical tones, means
both 'task' as well as 'leisure'; the Hebrew *KoDes* 'holy' and
*KeDesah* 'prostitute' have the same root' (cf. Latin *sacer*
above); the Latin *meretrix* 'harlot' comes from *mer(e)* 'earn,'
which in classical Latin meant both 'merit' and 'demerit.'

Residues of this ambivalent semantic feature are, of
course, found also in English.  The word *fast* is a good
illustration: in one context it connotes 'moving speedily,' in
another, 'firmly fixed in place.'  *Without* still carries the duality
of meanings ('with'/'out'), and *with* itself originally meant both
'with' as well as 'without,' evidence of which can still be seen
in such words as *withhold* and *withdraw*.

The editor of VERBATIM, in an unsigned note, listed six
words with double meanings—*scan, hew, cleave, impregnable,
inflammable, clip*—stating that &ldquo;even within English problems
can crop up in the writing of lucid, unambiguous prose.&rdquo; [I, 3]
A reader added the word *let* ('allow' but also 'hinder or
interfere,' as in the tennis term *let ball*).  [II, 2, 14]

Freud came to the notion of the interchangeability of
opposites in the course of his analyzing dreams and dream
symbols.  He was puzzled by the fact that &ldquo;every element in a
dream can, for purposes of interpretation, stand for its opposite
just as easily as for itself.&rdquo;  For instance, &ldquo;a predominantly male
symbol may be used [in dreams to represent] the female
genitals or vice versa,&rdquo; or nakedness to be represented by
clothes and uniforms.

When Freud came across Abel's pamphlet on the antithetical
meaning of primal words, he seemed to be highly pleased,
seeing in the phenomenon of words with opposite meanings a
welcome analogy to his own findings.  He wrote a lengthy
review of Abel's work and candidly acknowledged that he &ldquo;did
not succeed in understanding the dream-work's singular tendency
to...employ the same means of representation for
expressing contraries&rdquo; until he happened by chance to read this
philological study.  He quoted liberally from Abel's text and
examples and stated that psychoanalysts would be better at
understanding and interpreting the language of dreams if they
knew more about the development of language.

Another Freudian principle involving opposites is known
as displacement—from below to above, or from above to below,
referring to parts of the body.  This mechanism, unknown to
the dreamer or speaker, transposes, that is, replaces symbolically
a lower part of the body with an upper part, or vice versa.
Linguistic usage readily shows the way it works: We are all
familiar with the expression &ldquo;You're (or Don't be) a pain in the
neck.&rdquo;  This is a euphemism for &ldquo;...pain in the ass,&rdquo; *ass* being
a semi-polite cover-word for the tabooed buttocks or rectum.

Another instance of displacement is the British expression
*Keep your pecker up* 'keep up your courage.'  *Pecker* is a bird's
beak, but in slang it carries several meanings: 'a person's nose';
'a penis'; 'a boy full of piss and vinegar.'  Thus, the opposites of
nose/penis are carried in the same slang term.  Many other
instances from our daily speech show the ready unconscious—
and sometimes conscious—interchangeability of opposite body
parts and the general ease with which the directionality of the
symbolic equation changes between pairs of opposites.

Freud pointed out a number of such pairs of opposite
body parts that serve as symbols for each other: penis/nose,
labia/lips, testicles/eyes.  Oedipus, upon learning that he slept
with his mother, blinded himself, an act symbolizing castration.
While the eyes and testicles are equated symbolically on the
basis of their number and their below-and-above positions, I
believe that the eyes *and* the nose together strengthen the
symbolic equation of their opposite below, the three-part male
genital apparatus.

The imperative of opposites, their readiness to evoke each
other, and, indeed, their interchangeability under special circumstances
can thus be seen as a general mental mechanism
embedded in the mind of mankind.  Most of the time this
mechanism operates without our awareness.  But sometimes we
use it on purpose to reverse or transform something into its
opposite, or, at least, to demolish the very core meaning of the
word—as when quotation marks are used to emphasize the
opposite or non-meaning of what is written.  Applied this way,
the quotation marks literally work havoc upon the basic
meaning of a word—turning it upside down, inside out, and
rotating it 180&deg; into its very opposite, rendering it totally
devoid of its usual meaning.  If one were to write, for instance,
&ldquo;The 'patriotism' of these people leads them to assume...,&rdquo;
the writer, by the use of quotation marks, actually questions
their patriotism, denies their claim to it, and accuses them of
falsely pretending to be patriots.

The pull of the imperative of opposites and the tendency
toward a reversal into the opposite is extremely strong and is
further reflected in slang, wit, and slips of the tongue or pen.
Here are several examples:

>(1) The term *cool* in its opposite sense of 'hot' is well
known from jazz terminology.  From there it spread to
other areas with the same sense, as when a group of
teenage boys is standing at the corner watching girls go
by, and one of them comments that a passer-by of the
opposite sex &ldquo;is real cool.&rdquo;  The inference, of course, is
that she is, metaphorically, hot.
>
>(2) Theodor Reik tells of a party of Jewish students in
Vienna where the religious and social significance of circumcision
was discussed.  One of the students, alluding
to the commandments of the ritual in the Bible, quoted
Shakespeare: &ldquo;There is a divinity that shapes our ends.&rdquo;
>
>(3) A husband who went to Paris on a business trip
wrote his wife an enthusiastic letter about his business
deals, as well as about the city, and ended it with &ldquo;I
wish you were her.&rdquo;  The slip of the pen (*her* instead
of *here)* conveyed the opposite of what he consciously
thought of writing.
>
>(4) Sometimes the imperative of opposites shows up in
the strangest places.  I once noticed in a local advertising
sheet (distributed free in supermarkets and restaurants)
the following advertisement:
>
>>Dingy, miserable, upstairs Studio,  
semi. priv. bath,  
Cranky landlady, high rent  
Call PY 8-1829, Evenings=

Truth in advertising gone awry?  (Contrast it with the
next advertisement: &ldquo;Large, airy, attractive room, separate
entrance...&rdquo;).  Since it is against all conventions
to advertise in such a negative way, an explanation
based on the imperative of opposites presents itself,
namely that the negative automatically calls forth in the
reader's mind its very opposite.  All adjectives in this
advertisement must, therefore, undergo a reversal of
meaning, including the description of &ldquo;high&rdquo; rent.  In
other words, a *pleasant* landlady offers a *neat* upstairs
studio at *reasonable* rent.  (The lady has a sense of
humor and hopes to get a tenant with the same
characteristic).</quote>

The imperative of opposites is very likely an echo of the
pre-history of man and may be traced to the times when primal
man, without understanding the phenomena of his own body
and nature around him, could not help but observe the rhythm
of many fundamental life processes, a rhythm characterized by
its alternation or polarity—day and night, the tides of the
ocean, the beating of the heart, inhalation and exhalation,
wakefulness and sleep.  In this light the imperative of opposites
appears to be a link in man's mental development from ancient
times, specifically in the historical development of language.


#### EPISTOLA {Michael Javoronok}

Robert Devereux [IX,4] comments on Garland Cannon's
&ldquo;698 Japanese Loanwords in English&rdquo; and questions the origin
of the trademark *Taka-Diastase.*

Taka-Diastase is the name of a proprietary (Parke-Davis)
form of diastase that is produced not from malt but by the
growth of a certain species of Aspergillus upon rice hulls or
bran.  This ferment, discovered by Dr. Jokichi Takamine, is
capable under proper circumstances of converting one hundred
times its weight of starch into glucose in ten minutes.

*[Michael Javoronok, Worcester, Massachusetts]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;No talk of 'dreary Erie' for Lou Tullio, a former high
school and college football coach who seems to know or have
coached about half the population of Erie.  Tullio, who dispenses
Erie souvenirs to visitors from his office closet, has a
contagious enthusiasm for his city and he's had some luck in
passing the virus to federal officeholders.&rdquo;  [From Newsday,
Sunday, January 22, 1984.  Submitted by Robert Rachlin, Centerport, New York.]

## Gaming and/or Gambling: You pays your money...
*Thomas L. Clark, University of Nevada, Las Vegas*

While preparing material for the &ldquo;Dictionary of Gaming
and Gambling,&rdquo; I knew I must deal with the distinction
between *gaming* and *gambling.* Las Vegas bills itself as &ldquo;The
Gaming Capital of the World.&rdquo;  Yet people who arrive in town
expect to &ldquo;gamble&rdquo; by playing &ldquo;games&rdquo; or &ldquo;gambling games.&rdquo;
My understanding, after working with these materials for more
than five years, is that state officialdom, when hoping to sound
professional and clinical, uses the term *gaming* as having an
ameliorative sense.  By contrast, then, the assumption would be
that *gambling* has a pejorative connotation.  This article examines
some of the connotations in these terms from the standpoint
of people committed to the industry of playing while
paying and from the standpoint of other people equally
committed to abolishing this (nearly) most ancient vice.

In the extreme views, *gaming* is a pastime for sportsmen,
persons of gentility: genteel folk out for a lark may frolic and
sport by taking chances on winning or losing some money,
neither much nor little.  *Gambling,* on the other hand, carries a
note of desperation, a sense of wantonness, not a pastime but
an obsession, risking high amounts on generally losing propositions;
it is an activity for wastrels who dissipate estates and
fortunes while carousing with all manner of strumpets and
consorting with other riotous low-livers.  Actually, the distinctions
between *gaming* and *gambling* lie somewhere between
these extremes.  Indeed, for some people, the terms are
synonymous.

The members of the Nevada State Legislature first legalized
gambling in Assembly Bill number 98 in 1931.  The
prologue to the bill reads, &ldquo;An Act concerning slot machines,
*gambling games,* and gambling devices&rdquo; [emphasis mine].  The
bill goes on to list specific games played for money and to
prescribe licensing fees for such wagering activities, along with
a description of the premises where persons may risk money.
The index to those statutes of 1931 carries only the listing
*Gambling and Gambling Devices.*  By 1939, someone in officialdom
sensed the nuances between terms.  The index for that
year lists *Gambling—see Gaming,* and amendments to the 1931
bill are listed under the latter heading.  Interestingly, the
marginal notes placed alongside each bill and amendment use
the term *gambling.*

By 1941 (the state legislature meets only every two years),
the index for statutes was back to listing all such bills and
amendments under the heading of *Gambling,* a practice that
remained in effect even through the 1959 session, when the
Nevada Gaming Commission and the State Gaming Control
Board were established.  In fact, the index for 1959 lists all bills
and amendments under *Gambling,* while the entries under
*Gaming* list only the two new regulatory boards.  In 1967, the
indexer for the Nevada Revised Statutes used *see Gambling* for
all references to gaming.  And so it has remained until today.
That the indexer for these official papers has some latitude in
description is demonstrated by the fact that the famous (or
infamous) &ldquo;Black Book,&rdquo; a listing of persons &ldquo;to be excluded or
ejected from licensed *gaming* establishments&rdquo; [emphasis mine]
is referenced in the index but not in the amendment that
established that famous and seldom-seen document.

It appears that the term *gambling* is used generally within
the state to refer to any activity relative to wagering, while the
term *gaming* is used in all official references.  Today, Chapter
463 of the Nevada Revised Statutes is titled &ldquo;Licensing and
Control of Gaming,&rdquo; and the first definition offered in the
chapter is &ldquo;Short Title: Nevada Gaming Control Act.&rdquo;  The
definitions go on to explain that *game* and *gambling game* have
the same meaning and that *gaming* and *gambling* have the
same definition.

A short tour through historical dictionaries brings to light
some of the more interesting aspects of the cohesive vocabulary
associated with the two terms.  First stop: the *Oxford English
Dictionary* and *Supplements.*

*Game* was, from the first, connected to pleasant associations.
From the first appearance, in *Beowulf,* on through the
16th century, associations with game are &ldquo;glee, pleasance, joy,
play, mirth.&rdquo;  By the 15th century, the connotation could be
quite different, as the cruel aspect of *game* begins to make its
appearance.  In the late 16th century, the sense of *game* could
designate an object of ridicule, a laughingstock.

On the other hand, from its earliest appearances, *gamble*
was related to vices and foul practice.  The relationship to
dissipation and to cheating were close and constant through the
years.  In places where gambling took place, the excesses were
such that writers of the times (from about 1815) described
them as &ldquo;gambling hells.&rdquo;

The apparent derivative, *gambling,* antedates *gamble.*  The
*OED* records that in the 18th century the term was regarded as
slang.  It probably came about as a dialect survival from Middle
English *gamene-n.*  The rare 16th- and 17th-century *gameling*
implies a verb, **gamel,* which is unattested.  Progressive partial
homorganic assimilation could easily account for the intrusive *b*
that showed up in later spellings, though the *OED* does not
make such a speculation.  In the sense of &ldquo;wagering on the
outcome of games,&rdquo; *gaming* does not carry the pejorative
senses of *gambling,* though the latter term is often used as part
of the definition.

*A Dictionary of American English on Historical Principles
(DAE)* lists older citations for *gaming* than for *gambling.*  Those
17th-century citations from Virginia and Plymouth, as might be
expected, given the tenor of the time, link *gaming* to idleness,
drunkenness, &ldquo;excess in apparel,&rdquo; and other ruinous pastimes.
The earliest citations in *DAE* for *gambling* date from the 19th
century but usually carry similar pejorative comments and
&ldquo;warnings to young men of substance.&rdquo;  *A Dictionary of
Americanisms on Historical Principles (DA)* does not list *gambling*
or *gaming* as discrete entries, which is hardly surprising,
given the scope of *DA.*  The terms, where found, are listed in
attributive senses or as part of open compounds.  For many
years, then, *gambling* has had to sit below the salt, while
*gaming* occupies a position at least even with the salt.  Official
references to the practice seem to prefer *gaming*.  Indeed, the
more than seven thousand items dealing with gaming and
gambling in the Dickinson Library fall under the rubric of The
Gaming Research Center, and I was named to the University
Gaming Research Center Committee.

The perspective of the individual is often obvious from the
relative frequency with which a term is used.  In 1891, John
Philip Quinn's *Fools of Fortune* was published by The Anti-Gambling
Association in Chicago.  Quinn's book is a Victorian
tome of warning written in the breathless style and excruciating
detail designed to appeal to those gentlemen who might
like &ldquo;to have been there.&rdquo;  In keeping with the tone of the time,
the subtitle of Quinn's book is *Gambling* and *Gamblers;*
*Comprehending a History of the Vice in Ancient and Modern
Times, and in Both Hemispheres; an Exposition of Its Alarming
Prevalence and Destructive Effects; with an Unreserved and
Exhaustive Disclosure of Such Frauds, Tricks and Devices as
Are Practiced by &ldquo;Professional&rdquo; Gamblers, &ldquo;Confidence Men&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Bunko Steerers.&rdquo;*  His preface, dated 1890, begins, &ldquo;Of all
the vices which have enslaved mankind, none can reckon
among its victims so many as gambling.&rdquo;  Throughout his book,
Quinn uses *gamble, gambler,* and *gambling* in every reference
to evil and vice.  Other terms, such as *gamester,* appear only in
connection with *sharper* or some other such appellation.  *Gaming*
is used rarely and in the most neutral statements, such as
&ldquo;one whose instinct for gaming is satisfied with a legitimate
business.&rdquo;  For Quinn, speculation and risk in the name of
legitimate business is gaming, otherwise it is gambling.  Elsewhere,
Quinn uses *gaming* in clearly marked phrases, idioms,
or open compounds, such as *gaming hells.*

Other, more objective treatises have been more likely to
use a variety of terms with less cumulatively pejorative force—
cumulatively, because a term used once may carry only slight
negative connotation but, used frequently, can create a considerable
sense of pejoration in the mind of the reader.  Herbert
Asbury, in *Sucker's Progress* (1938, New York: Dodd, Mead and
Company) used *gambling game, banking game, gambler,
player, gaming tables, Faro Bank, Faro game,* usually without
prejudice or undue emphasis of one term over another.

On occasion, people have found a way out of the terminological
dilemma.  In 1977, the New Jersey State Legislature
passed the Casino Control Act, which was described as a
method for controlling &ldquo;Legalized Games of Chance.&rdquo;  The
policy body and the enforcement body, corresponding to the
Nevada Gaming Commission and the State Gaming Control
Board, are named the New Jersey Casino Control Commission
and the Division of Gaming Enforcement.  In the process of
defining terms for the Act, the drafters used interesting
variations.  &ldquo;Authorized Game&rdquo; or &ldquo;Authorized Gambling
Game&rdquo; is defined by exemplum: &ldquo;Roulette, baccarat, blackjack,
craps, big six wheel, and slot machines.&rdquo;  On the other hand,
&ldquo;Game&rdquo; or &ldquo;Gambling Game&rdquo; is a stipulative definition: &ldquo;Any
banking or percentage game located exclusively within the
casino, played with cards, dice or any mechanical device or
machine for money, property, or any representative of value.&rdquo;
And, finally, we are given an operational definition: &ldquo; 'Gaming'
or 'Gambling'—The dealing, operating, carrying on, conducting,
maintaining or exposing for pay any game.&rdquo;  We can ignore the
style in which the definitions are written.  We can even ignore
the fact that the definitions exclude, legally, electronic gambling
devices by referring only to &ldquo;mechanical&rdquo; machines.

By restricting the meaning of *gaming* to wagering on
events, a dictionary of terms has a defined scope of coverage.
Yet terms used in gaming events are not automatically excluded
from future editions of such a book.  Words and phrases from,
say, basketball can be collected in the archives; terms like *slam
dunk, off the glass, in the paint* are already being collected in
the citation file.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;One out of every child has been sexually abused.&rdquo;  [From
the 6 p.m. newscast, September 10, 1983, WCMH-TV, Columbus,
Ohio.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;TUDORING $4hr, reading, math computers...&rdquo;  [From
the Seattle Times, January 18, 1984.  Submitted by Caroline
Feiss, Seattle, Washington.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Private Eye's Colemanballs*](https://www.abebooks.co.uk/servlet/SearchResults?an=&tn=private%20eye%20colemanballs&sortby=100&cm_sp=plpafe-_-coll-_-link)
Compiled and edited by Barry Fantoni, (Private Eye Productions Ltd/Andr&eacute Deutsch, London, 1982), 90pp.

VERBATIM readers in England may have beat me to the
discovery of this fascinating paperback.  It is a rich lode of
(unintended) verbal entertainment—*fun 'n' pun* would seem as
apt a motto for the linguist.  As *Colemanballs* rings the
proverbial bell in the ears of sports fans in Britain, at whom the
booklet is primarily aimed, let me report on it anyway and
share my enthusiasm with those as yet unfamiliar with the
book.

Here is sports journalism at its liveliest: straight from the
horse's mouth into the microphone (often without any sobering
detour through the brain), with results that are as amusing as
they are revealing of what goes on in a speaker's mind when
his mouth produces a string of sounds that passes for language.
Whatever can go wrong in that process has been recorded here,
with full credit to the shamefaced authors.  Mixed metaphor is
probably the most common type of language error that occurs
in reporting in general and in sports reporting in particular,
with its uneven flow of events that leaves long stretches of time
during which nothing worthy of comment happens, alternating
with quick and unpredictable action, so as to tax to the
breaking point the mental and physical reflexes used in speech:
&ldquo;...but yesterday Sir Peter played his final card in what's
been a tricky game of chess&rdquo; or &ldquo;Tottenham have got the
bullets that can produce the goods.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Aston Villa began to harness the fruits of some good
midfield work&rdquo; is a slip of the tongue, whereas in other
instances it is rather the mind that takes a tumble on the
slippery ice of logic: &ldquo;Liverpool always seem to find a boot at
the right moment to keep Birmingham City at arm's length,&rdquo;
&ldquo;The dispute went on escalating like a snowball,&rdquo; or &ldquo;We all
have some sort of chip on our shoulder which we want to get
off our chest.&rdquo;  But then there are also such perfectly innocuous
statements as &ldquo;...Channel Tunnel project which seems to be
getting off the ground again.&rdquo;  Here is another: &ldquo;The government
is clutching at sport as a straw with which to beat the
Russians.&rdquo;  I would say it ties in effectiveness with &ldquo;He's bitten
off more than he can chew,&rdquo; said of a hunger striker.

In other instances, indiscriminate clustering of metaphors
is alone sufficient to create garble:  &ldquo;The crunch has been
reached.  The crying wolves are out the window.&rdquo;

The lesson to be learned from all this is that a speaker's
mind does, after all, work even while his tongue may get stuck.
And it usually works toward building up a perfectly closed
logic—the only trouble with this is that listeners, whose minds
are set on different paths of thinking and associating, have no
access to the speaker's thoughts and therefore no clues to the
meaning of the words.  What a speaker intends as a reinforcing
remark his listeners will frequently misunderstand as a separate—and,
as such, tautological or otherwise illogical—utterance:
&ldquo;The battle is well and truly on if it wasn't on before, and it
certainly was,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Roscoe Tanner is one of the great runners-up
of all time.  No man could have played better.&rdquo;  There is no
real contradiction in these examples; what the last one means is
merely 'Tanner didn't make it, but he played a brilliant game
all the same.'

This suggests that communication is achieved less through
direct verbal equivalence to intended meaning than through
allusive patterns that must observe certain standards of conventionality
in order to work.  When it comes to communication,
there is not that much difference between sports reporting and
poetry: just as poetry ceases to be &ldquo;understood&rdquo; by readers
whose allusive range of thought does not measure up to the
poet's, listeners to ordinary language reportage are apt to
mistake a speaker whose standards of association in language
they cannot match.  There is no such failure to understand
when only the (shared) literal representation of meaning is
applied, as in all forms of technical language with a fixed
terminology.

Explaining is not excusing mindless blunders of the type
&ldquo;Agatha Christie is such a well-known name, her books sell all
over the world—and other places as well&rdquo; or &ldquo;We are now into
the third and final quarter of the game.&rdquo;  Some of those listed in
*Colemanballs* are near-ingenious, as, for example: &ldquo;In the case
of my own case, this has not been the case&rdquo; or &ldquo;The French
are not normally a Nordic skiing nation.&rdquo;  Speaking of royalty, a
commentator once punned involuntarily, &ldquo;Even to my
untrained eye it looks as though she has a long train.&rdquo;  On the
other hand, to err is human: &ldquo;And Richie has now scored 11
goals, exactly double the number he scored last season.&rdquo;  It can
happen to anyone, including this reviewer: &ldquo;It's so easy to have
a fatal accident and ruin your life!&rdquo;

*[Kurt Opitz, Hamburg]*

[*Editor's Note:* Coleman is a sports announcer regularly
heard in England.  *Colemanballs,* we assume, are &ldquo;foul balls&rdquo;
tossed into the game by Mr. Coleman.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. What's discussed is woo (5)  
4\. Forecast based on data from a very high source? (9)  
9\. 411 has its number, probably (9)  
10\. Alan's confused about M and N sounds (5)  
11\. Crude citrus blend (6)  
12\. Dior sets new fashion for bodybuilder's aids. (8)  
14\. Coward's hot candidate for midday rabies? (10)  
16\. Powder in hospital container (4)  
19\. Elm or Maple Street inhabitant (4)  
20\. British batter a fan of Mickey's friend Jiminy? (10)  
22\. Overhaul Reliant's innards (8)  
23\. Brave makes comeback in Castro Havana (6)  
26\. Strange tales, Ducks!(5)  
27\. Sweet of the month? (In France it's a fish) (5,4)  
28\. Ten madmen put straight, for a change (9).  
29\. Fear rabid adder (5)

**Down**

1\. TNT recipe blows head off (9)  
2\. Watney's Ale shippers hold auctions (5)  
3\. Clear bent clip in way out (8)  
4\. Shout loudly, Gibson (4)  
5\. Coming in again near center switch (10)  
6\. Divers bask, get thirsty (6)  
7\. What you are when I am firm and he is a pig-headed fool? (9)  
8\. Letter is from NYC island (5)  
13\. Here's a love arranged for gobs' holiday (5,5)  
15\. Take large choppy body of water (5,4)  
17\. Rode together, sang about Italian river (9)  
18\. Last part in contract is itemized (8)  
21\. Circulated outmoded old English penny (6)  
22\. In front, beyond; alone, more (5)  
24\. Italian's love found in Bergamo region (5)  
25\. Dry beast has no tail (4)


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Many gifts under $10, more under $5&rdquo; [From a commercial
for Swiss Colony cheeses, September 1983, WUAB-TV,
Cleveland, Ohio.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Daisy is the dazzling offspring of an emigr&eacute; aristo
playboy (Stacy Keach, miscast) who is variously cheated,
neglected, seduced and exploited before finding fame and
fortune as the model for a perfume called Elstree.&rdquo;  [From The
Sunday Times (London), March 4, 1984, p. 54.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Fred and company would create cameras for prison
mugshots, for panoramas of entire mountain ranges of girls'
schools, for undistorted shots of the interior of Queen Mary's
dolls' House...&rdquo; [From The Sunday Times (London), March
4, 1984, p. 5.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v10n4_Spring_1984)