--- 
title: "VOL XI, No 3 [Summer, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Word Play the Media Way
*Barbara Hunt Lazerson, Illinois State University*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win the First Prize
of $1000 in the 1984 VERBATIM
Essay Competition.

In 1940 an article entitled &ldquo;The Vocabulary of *Time*
Magazine&rdquo; appeared in *American Speech* (Vol. 15, No. 3,
pp. 232-42).  The author of that article declared that &ldquo;of all the
journalistic phenomena of our age,... *Time* is linguistically the
most interesting&rdquo; because the editors of *Time* try &ldquo;to achieve
striking effects by the use of new words or combinations of
words.&rdquo;  In the years since *Time* became the &ldquo;lexicreator&rdquo; *par
excellence*, journalists working for other magazines such as
*Newsweek* and *People Weekly* and for newspapers ranging in
status from the illustrious *New York Times* to the little-known
Council Bluffs, Iowa, *Nonpareil* have also contributed their
share of neologisms.  As a result of their propensity for word
play, America's journalists have helped contemporary American
English become what is probably the most prolific word-producing
machine that has existed since language first
appeared on this planet.  As the following examples suggest,
anything that is newsworthy can serve as the fillip for journalistic
&ldquo;lexicreation.&rdquo;

The year was 1969.  Richard Nixon had been President of
the United States for only a few months when *Nixonomics* was
coined as a label for his economic policies.  Columnist William
Safire has provided the following account of the origin of the
term:

>In the summer of 1969, I wrote a memorandum for
my White House colleagues using the term *Nixonomics*
to hail the ingenious replacement of the Democrats'
&ldquo;new economics.&rdquo;  About that time, columnists Evans
and Novak were the first to use *Nixonomics* in print.
Walter Heller, a father of the &ldquo;new economics,&rdquo; was
quoted in *Time* magazine in November 1969, using *Nixonomics*
disparagingly.  Since that time, the term I used
with such high hopes has fallen on hard times.  (*N.Y.
Times Magazine*, Nov. 7, 1982, p. 18)

In the years since *Nixonomics* first appeared, journalists have
used terms patterned after it to label the economic policies of
other leaders (e.g., *Carternomics, Fordonomics, Hoovernomics,
Reaganomics, Volckernomics*).  Because such terms are so common,
-*(o)nomics* has been recognized as a combining form by
*American Speech* (Vol. 49, Nos. 3-4, p. 252).  Because *Reaganomics*
has been so widely used in the media, the editors of
*The World Book Dictionary* have included the term in the 1983
edition of that lexicon.

For a number of years, inflation has been a major problem
for the American economy regardless of whether it was
Nixonomics, Fordonomics, Carternomics, or Reaganomics that
was being discussed in the Oval Office.  Recently, journalists
have created blends labeling various types of inflation, including
*foodflation* 'the increasing cost of food,' *kidflation* 'the
increasing cost of the things kids buy and do,' *mediaflation* 'the
increasing cost of advertising in the media,' *oilflation* 'inflation
caused by the high price of imported oil,' and *taxflation* 'the
increase in taxes that occurs as inflation pushes one into a
higher tax bracket.'  The proliferation of terms such as these has
caused *American Speech* (Vol. 58, No. 4, pp. 361-62) to
recognize *-flation* as a combining form.

On June 17, 1972, Watergate, a building complex in
Washington, D.C., that housed the Democratic Party headquarters,
was burglarized by Republican campaign employees for
purposes of political espionage and sabotage.  This illegal act
was to have lexical, as well as political ramifications.  Thanks in
part to the investigative efforts of reporters Carl Bernstein and
Bob Woodward, the term *Watergate* came to signify a scandal
involving the misuse of power; and a decade later journalists
were still using phrases such as *industrial Watergate, French
Watergate*, and *Irish Watergate* to label corruption in high
places.  But the urge to clip has been strong; and the post-Watergate
years have seen the creation of a great number of
words in which *Watergate* has been reduced to *-gate: Cattle-gate,
Winegate, Koreagate, Banking-gate, Lancegate, Hollywoodgate,
Billygate, Debategate, Briefing-gate*, ad infinitum.
(*Time* magazine used the word *Billygate* almost three years
before the term appeared in the media as a label for charges
that the Libyans had been granted favors in exchange for a
$220,000 loan to President Carter's brother.  In the October 17,
1977, issue of *Time*, a blurb on page 2 read: &ldquo;There's no
Billygate in sight, but the President would be well advised to
tell his beer-swilling First Brother to shut up.&rdquo;) Some *-gate*
words are only tongue-in-cheek labels for incidents that could
hardly be classified as scandals.  For example, when George
Brett, star slugger of the Kansas City Royals, was called out by
an umpire's ruling (later overturned) after hitting a home run
with a bat heavily laden with pine tar, a writer for the *Chicago
Sun Times* and a columnist for *Fortune* magazine labeled the
incident *batgate*.  Not everyone has been pleased with all of this
lexical creativity.  It has been condemned by the Unicorn
Hunters, a group of language purists who issued &ldquo;a Suffix Red
Alert&rdquo; against *-gate* words,[^a1] and by columnist David S. Broder,
who decried the fact that &ldquo;any political scandal touching the
presidency is now a Something-Gate.&rdquo;[^a2]  Nevertheless, *-gate* has
been recognized as a combining form by *American Speech* (Vol.
53, No. 3, p. 215) where it is defined as &ldquo;scandal involving
charges of corruption and usually a coverup (added to a noun
that in some way suggests the particular scandal).&rdquo;

Asexual reproduction was brought to the attention of the
public in 1978 with the publication of *In His Image*, a book
that claimed that the clone of a millionaire had been produced,
and the release of *The Boys from Brazil*, a movie in which a
legion of Hitler clones was produced.  Before the year was out,
entertainment journalists were writing about *Beatles clones*
singing on Broadway, *Elvis clones* gyrating wherever there was
an audience, and the *&ldquo;Angels&rdquo; clones* that CBS had put in
prime time.  Thus the semantic equivalent of *carbon copy*, in
the metaphoric sense, had been born; and now a journalist who
wants to indicate that B closely resembles A may choose to use
either a *carbon copy* term or a *clone* term.  To cite but one
lexically productive example of the latter, the print media have
referred to leading men who look like Tom Selleck, the
handsome star of the TV show &ldquo;Magnum, P.I.,&rdquo; as *Selleck
clones, Selleclones, Tom Selleck clones*, and *&ldquo;Magnum, P.I.&rdquo;
clones*.

In 1979 a California court ordered actor Lee Marvin to
pay $104,000 in rehabilitation money to Michelle Triola Marvin,
a former entertainer who allegedly had sacrificed her
career in order to be the actor's live-in lover for six years.  Soon
journalists across the nation were using *palimony* (a blend of
*pal* and *alimony*) to label this and similar lawsuits.  The term
has continued to be used widely in the media, and several
lexicographers have recognized *palimony* as a permanent part
of the lexicon of American English.  (The word has been
included in *The Second Barnhart Dictionary of New Words;
The Morrow Book of New Words; The American Heritage
Dictionary*, 2nd edition; *Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary*;
and *9,000 Words, A Supplement to Webster's Third
New International Dictionary*.)  Journalists have created neologisms
patterned after *palimony* to name other types of suits for
financial support, including *kidimony* 'children suing their
estranged parents for support money,' *equalimony* 'men may
now sue their ex-wives for alimony,' and *galimony* 'Billy Jean
King's former homosexual lover sued her for support.'  The
press has not limited its word play to terms such as these,
however.  When Mick Jagger's wife sued him for divorce,
*People Weekly* declared, &ldquo;Bianca *Michelles* Mick&rdquo;; and journalists
have referred to Marvin Mitchelson, Michelle's attorney in
the Marvin case, by alliterative epithets such as the *sultan of
split*, the *paladin of palimony*, the *prince of palimony*, and the
*pioneer of palimony*.

When in the spring of 1980 a mass-transit strike caused
approximately a quarter of a million cars a day to flood into
Manhattan, newsmen who reported on the possible consequences
of the increased flow of traffic used a word that strikes
fear in the hearts of traffic controllers: *gridlock* 'traffic backed
up in all directions to such an extent that the movement of
vehicles is impossible.'  Thus a term that had begun its lexical
life c.1971 as part of the jargon of New York's highway
engineers was catapulted into the general lexicon through the
synergistic efforts of the print and electronic media.  As journalists
used *gridlock* to describe other kinds of &ldquo;clog-gestion,&rdquo;
(e.g., *financial gridlock, legislative gridlock, gridlocked society*),
the word acquired a meaning that made it the metaphoric
equivalent of *log-jam*, an Americanism that the lumber industry
contributed to the language c.1886 and that became a metaphor
in 1890 when American psychologist William James wrote
in *Principles of Psychology*, &ldquo;But at intervals an obstruction, a
set-back, a log-jam occurs.&rdquo;

*Nineteen Eighty-Four*, the classic novel published by
George Orwell in 1949, introduced Newspeak, a language
&ldquo;designed to diminish the range of thought.&rdquo;  The concept was
both frightening and intriguing; and over the years a few
words patterned after *Newspeak* (e.g., *doublespeak* 'double
talk,' which *Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary* dates
from 1952, and *businesspeak* 'business jargon,' which *The
Second Barnhart Dictionary of New Words* dates from 1971)
were produced.  As the year 1984 approached, the *-speak* terms
created by journalists increased in both number and semantic
variety.  To provide but a few examples, *Secretaryspeak* and
*Haigspeak* are labels that *Time* magazine applied in 1981 and
1982 to the garbled language used by then-Secretary of State,
Alexander Haig; *Primaryspeak* is the name that Robert Merry
of *The Wall Street Journal* has given to the euphemisms used
during the recent Democratic primaries; and *Whitespeak* is
what Meg Greenfield, columnist for *Newsweek*, has called the
condescending language that many whites use when talking to
or about blacks.  Terms of this type are now so common that
*-speak* has been listed as a new combining form in both
*American Speech* (Vol. 59, No. 2, pp. 163-64) and the 1984
edition of *The World Book Dictionary*.

Because space restrictions do not permit a comprehensive
delineation of the ways in which contemporary journalists have
enriched the lexicon of American English, the preceding list of
&ldquo;lexicreations,&rdquo; all of which have appeared in the print media
in recent years, are only illustrative rather than exhaustive.
Nevertheless, these examples are sufficient in number and
variety to demonstrate that within the last decade and a half
American journalists have created a plenitude of new, often
colorful terms (e.g., *Nixonomics, Selleclones, Haigspeak,
kidimony, kidflation*); have helped some neologisms (e.g.,
*palimony, Reaganomics*) to be recognized by lexicographers as
words that are used frequently enough to warrant inclusion in
&ldquo;the&rdquo; dictionary; have helped a term belonging to occupational
jargon (i.e., *gridlock*) to become established in the general
lexicon; have created synonyms for two already-established
metaphors (i.e., *gridlock* = *log-jam*; *clone* = *carbon copy*); and
have been instrumental in developing new combining forms
from already-established words (i.e., *-(o)nomics* < *economics;
-flation* < *inflation; -gate* < *Watergate; -speak* < *Newspeak*).  In
light of all of these lexical contributions, we are forced to go
beyond H. L. Mencken (*The American Language*, Supplement
One, p. 330) and classify journalists in general, not just gossip-column
journalists, as professional wordmakers.

***

[^a1]: *Chicago Tribune*, Jan. 2, 1981, sec. 1, p.6.

[^a2]: *Chicago Sun-Times*, July 13, 1983, p. 33.

## Diagnosis: Chronic Progressive Abstrusity
*Stephen E. Hirschberg, M.D., Elmsford, New York*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win Second Prize
of $500 in the 1984 VERBATIM
Essay Competition.

&ldquo;This 67-year-old man presented with paroxysmal noctur-jugular
dyspnea.  Physical examination was remarkable for
jugular venous distension, lungs with rales to the apices, heart
with an S3 gallop, no edema...&rdquo; To a physician, this description
of acute heart failure is not at all obscure—such terminology
has been second-nature to him since his early days in
medical school.  An uninitiated listener would certainly identify
the vocabulary and structure as English.  He would, however,
learn little less on stumbling, without a galactic interpreter, into
a convention of extraterrestrials.

If the purpose of language is to aid communication, why
does this arcane dialect—medical English—exist?  As a mode of
information transfer between doctors it can be most efficient.  It
is used to clarify and to becloud, to soothe and to shock.  Its
vocabulary ranges from the euphonic to the ponderous.  Study
of its etymology leads one from mythology to geography.

Any technical dialect will include words to label the
specialty's processes and machinery.  Since the body is the
physician's concern, anatomic terms are a necessary, though
not very interesting part of his jargon.  (It is difficult, even for
medical practitioners, to drop *extensor digiti minimi*—the muscle
which extends the little finger—into casual conversation.)
On the other hand, there are &ldquo;perfect&rdquo; medical words, expressing
concisely and unambiguously concepts or phenomena
which are familiar to the lay public, but only as multiple-word
descriptions: *borborygmi* 'the audible rumbling or gurgling
sounds produced by movement of gas in the digestive tract'
(&ldquo;stomach talking&rdquo;); *knismogenic* 'causing tickling'; *paresthesia*
'a tingling, &ldquo;pins and needles&rdquo; feeling'; *formication* 'the sensation
of ants crawling on the skin.'

At the other extreme of the language spectrum are
abstruse words used to avoid obvious self-incrimination before
distrustful nonmembers of the medical fraternity (*a.k.a.*
patients).  The theory here is that a polysyllabic, preferably
Greek-rooted diagnosis will flabbergast the patient and deter
embarrassing follow-up inquiries.  &ldquo;Mea culpa&rdquo; is not in the
doctor's vocabulary; rather, &ldquo;Your illness is *iatrogenic*&rdquo; 'induced
by a physician,' or &ldquo;It is a *nosocomial infection*&rdquo; 'acquired
during hospitalization.' Similarly, loath to concede his imperfection,
the doctor rarely says, &ldquo;God knows.&rdquo;  Diseases are not of
unknown cause.  They are &ldquo;idiopathic,&rdquo; &ldquo;agnogenic,&rdquo; &ldquo;essential,&rdquo;
or &ldquo;cryptogenic.&rdquo;  Your doctor may declare, for example,
&ldquo;You have *idiopathic* ['we don't know why'] *thrombocytopenic*
['but you're short of platelets'] *purpura* ['and you have purple
blotches from bleeding into your skin and mucous membranes'].&rdquo;
This sort of name sounds erudite, and the sufferer
may find it somehow reassuring that his ailment at least has an
imposing title, albeit no known cause and perhaps no cure.

For those patients who savor disease and desire professorial
terminology for their signs and symptoms, physicians can
oblige.  A simple fall on a sidewalk may thus produce a knee
*abrasion* ['skinned' knee], *confusion*, or *ecchymosis* ['bruise'].
The hypochondriac prefers *pyrosis* to heartburn, *furuncles* to
boils, and *pruritus* to itch.  The common cold sounds less
common as *acute rhinitis* with *rhinorrhea* ['runny nose'],
*sternutation* ['sneezing'], *cephalalgia* ['headache'], and *pyrexia*
['fever'].

When delicacy is required, euphemisms are available.
Patients don't belch (they eructate), fart (they pass flatus), or
bleed to death (they exsanguinate).  Old taboos persist.  There
are still references to *lues* (syphilis) and *Hansen's disease*
(leprosy).  &ldquo;The prognosis is guarded&rdquo; translates to &ldquo;The patient
is in trouble,&rdquo; while &ldquo;Prognosis grave&rdquo; uses &ldquo;grave&rdquo; in both its
adjectival and nounal senses.  Most important (if one reads
medical charts), the patient never dies, though he may *arrest*
(short for &ldquo;suffer cardiac arrest&rdquo;), *expire, cease* (from &ldquo;cease to
breathe&rdquo;), or be *pronounced* (not the unmentionable &ldquo;pronounced
*dead*&rdquo;).

There are few medical dysphemisms.  Disease is unpleasant
enough without superimposed iatrogenic terror.  One should
avoid acquiring the rare diseases with these modifiers in their
names: *progressive* ['it will get worse and nothing can help'],
*necrotizing* ['causing death of tissues'], and *lethal* ['perhaps you
want a second opinion'].

Descriptions of physical abnormalities may be marked by
imagery which is almost poetic.  What can be heard with a
stethoscope amounts to an onomatopoetic glossary: pistol shot
pulses; cardiac murmurs, rumbles, clicks, and gallops; pericardial
knocks and rubs; rales and rhonchi of the lungs; succussion
splashes in the abdomen.  Diagnostic hues range from violaceous
&ldquo;heliotrope&rdquo; rashes and light-brown &ldquo;caf&eacute;-au-lait&rdquo; spots
of the skin, to the &ldquo;strawberry&rdquo; tongue of rheumatic fever.  The
breath may smell &ldquo;fruity&rdquo; in uncontrolled diabetes, or &ldquo;musty&rdquo;
in liver failure.

Medical language teems with eponyms, most of which
honor the authors of the classic descriptions of the designated
maladies (*Hodgkin's disease, Tay-Sachs disease, Huntington's
disease*, and so forth).  These can be convenient labels for
complex disorders and may ease communication as long as both
speaker and listener share the vocabulary.  If ignorant of the
eponym, however, the listener (even if he is a physician) will
receive no clue to the cause or nature of the illness.  With
knowledge of a selection of eponyms (and little else), a lecturer
may nonetheless leave an audience of his peers awestruck.
Physicans are a proud lot, hesitant to demonstrate gaps in their
learning.  &ldquo;We must consider the possibility of Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander
disease&rdquo; is unlikely to be rejoined by
&ldquo;What's that?&rdquo;

Legend and literature have also been sources of eponyms.
*Caesarean section* purportedly derives from the legend of Julius
Caesar's supposed delivery by this means.  (Untrue.  The
Romans did not perform this procedure on the living mother,
and Caesar's mother, Aurelia, was alive during the Gallic wars.
The operation was mandatory under Roman law at that time
for every woman dying in advanced pregnancy.)  Mythology
suggested the name *Achilles tendon* to the Dutch anatomist
Verheyden in 1693 as he dissected his own amputated leg.
(Achilles was held by the heel by Thetis, his mother, as he was
dipped into the river Styx to render him impervious to harm.
The heel, not immersed, became his only vulnerable spot.)
*Munchausen's syndrome*, in which the affected person repeatedly
seeks hospitalizations and treatment for imaginary illness,
is a reference to Baron Karl Friedrich Hieronymus von M&uuml;nchhausen
(1720-1797), the German soldier and fabricator of
preposterous adventures, exaggerated further and written in
English by Rudolph Raspe as *Baron Munchausen's Narrative of
his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia*.  (One of the
Baron's *hs* did not survive anglicization.)  The complex of
obesity, somnolence, excessive appetite, and inadequate ventilation
of the lungs is *Pickwickian syndrome*, after Joe, the fat
boy, in Charles Dickens' *Pickwick Papers* (&ldquo;The fat boy rose,
opened his eyes, swallowed the huge piece of pie he had been
masticating when he last fell asleep...&rdquo;).  A disorder characterized
by recurrent staphylococcal abscesses and eczema has
been called *Job's syndrome* (&ldquo;...Satan...smote Job with sore
boils from the soles of his foot unto his crown.&rdquo;  [*Job* 2:7]).

Geography has supplied names to numerous afflictions,
usually in recognition of the places of first recorded outbreaks.
(Thus, *St. Louis encephalitis*, after a major epidemic there in
1933.)  Diseases widespread before modern communication
received multiple, local names.  In this manner, the skin
infection now generally called *cutaneous Old World leishmaniasis*
is also known as *Delhi boil, Bagdad boil, Biskra button,
Aleppo evil*, and *bouton de Cr&eacute;te*.  Such etymologies may be
confusing, particulary to medical students, who must remember
that *Rocky Mountain spotted fever* is now most commonly
found in the Atlantic states; another disease carried by the
same tick, *Colorado tick fever*, is the more common in the
Rockies.

The occurrence of similar pulmonary disorders in patients
with common occupational histories led to the naming of a
number of chest diseases for their victims.  The names secondarily
introduce us to vocations and avocations we may not have
known existed.  In addition to *farmer's lung, mushroom worker's
lung, plastic worker's lung, malt worker's lung*, and *bird
fancier's lung*, there are *maple bark stripper's lung, silo-filler's
disease, cheese washer's lung, paprika splitter's lung*, and
*blackfat tobacco smokers' lung*.  The infectious pneumonia,
*Legionnaire's disease*, was first recognized as a disease entity
after an outbreak among persons who had stood outside the
entrance or entered the lobby of a Philadelphia hotel during
the American Legion convention of 1976.

As a rule, disease nomenclature has become more straightforward,
and of lesser linguistic interest, with the current era of
molecular biology.  Medical literature has been increasingly
peppered with the likes of &ldquo;glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency&rdquo; (a cause of anemia) and &ldquo;C'1 esterase inhibitor
deficiency&rdquo; (a disease of the immune system).  Surprisingly,
there has been no movement to rename disorders as their
chemical foundations are discovered, though it is apparent this
would give further advantage to physicians in efforts to
obfuscate their patients.  Thus, it is still *sickle cell anemia*, not
&ldquo;hemoglobin beta chain (valine replacing glutamate in position 1) disease.&rdquo;

In spite of the popularization of medicine and the pressures
to speak to patients in plain English, the use of the
medical dialect is likely to persist.  It has been, after all, a
tradition for over two millennia.  Hippocrates wrote, in *The
Law*:

>Those things which are sacred are to be imparted
only to sacred persons; and it is not lawful to impart
them to the profane until they have been initiated in
the mysteries of the science.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The !Kung, who use no modern forms of contraception and
have no fertility-regulating practices such as late marriage,
taboo on intercourse during lactation or infanticide, have an
average completed family size of 4.7 children.&rdquo;  [From *Scientific
American*, April 1984.  Submitted by F. Eugene Davis IV, 
Stamford, Connecticut.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;He rode his horse across Highway 12 and up and down the
sidewalk in front of Fat Albert's (saloon) a good half hour
before deputies arrived, shouting obscenities and being obnoxious.&rdquo;
[Testimony to a jury, quoted in *The Santa Barbara News-Press*,
16 March 1984.  Submitted by Elizabeth G. Christensen, Lompoc, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We have passed a great gauntlet.&rdquo;  [A quote from Frederick
W. Mielke Jr., chairman and chief executive officer of PG&amp;E,
appearing in *The Los Angeles Times, n.d*. Submitted by Jean P.
MacAllister, Beverly Hills, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Eventually, you reach a stage in life where you don't have to
wear the same shoes everybody else does.&rdquo;  [Ad for Bostonian
shoes in *The Wall Street Journal*, 13 November 1984.  Submitted
by John F. Sakz, Ross, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We are a plethora of racing information.&rdquo;  [From a 6 p.m.
newscast by Gary Radnich, WBNS-TV, Columbus, 8 June
1984.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]

## The Pearl of Hex
*Virginia Howard, Metairie, Louisiana*

&ldquo;What's the Pearl of Hex?&rdquo;  my brother asked, looking
up from his crossword puzzle.

The Pearl of Hex!  From the front porch of the vacation
cabin where we had been having a family gathering, I gazed
across the valley at the distant, blue-haze mountains.  What
stories, I wondered, could be told about the mysterious Pearl of
Hex?  What lives were altered in the striving for its possession?
The Pearl of Hex!  What fascinating history must surround it?
&ldquo;I don't know,&rdquo; I finally sighed, in answer to the question, &ldquo;but
it certainly sounds exotic.&rdquo;

My brother gave me a puzzled look.  &ldquo;I just wanted to
know whether the plural of *hex* was *hex* or *hexes*,&rdquo; he said,
with some vexation.

At times my eardrums seem to beat to the tune of a
different drummer, and my imagination, well-tempered with
Romanticism, creates a tympanic fantasy.  For example, while
waiting for my flight at an airport, I noticed a young soldier
who was earnestly writing on a pad of paper.  His concentration
was so intense that at first I imagined that he was writing a
technical report, but then I saw that it was stationery he was
using.  Ah, I thought, writing a letter to the folks back home,
recounting his military adventures.  My attention had been
diverted to a magazine when the young soldier asked, &ldquo;Excuse
me, ma'm, but how do you spell *whir*?&rdquo;

Aha!  So he was a novice helicopter pilot, and he was
relating in his letter (to the folks back home) his experience in
flying a helicopter, complete with the sound of the rotating
blades.  His mother would probably say &ldquo;My, my!&rdquo;  in admiration
and pass the letter to his grandmother, who would cluck
and shake her head over the idea of her little grandson
managing a whirring helicopter.

To help me with my spelling task, the soldier continued,
&ldquo;You know, ma'm—*whir*, as in 'This airport is whir we are raht
now.&rdquo;'

More truth may sometimes be heard in the mishearing.  In
an advertisement for floor wax, a young lady demonstrated
how easily the waxed floor could be cleaned.  Smiling at the
camera, she chirped pertly, &ldquo;If you get spills, you just clean it
up with a damn sponge!&rdquo;  Did she say what I thought she said?
When the commercial was repeated, she again admitted, quite
cheerfully, &ldquo;...just clean it up with a damn sponge!&rdquo;  Again
and again, it sounded the same: &ldquo;...clean it up with a damn
sponge,&rdquo; &ldquo;...a damn sponge,&rdquo; &ldquo;...a damn sponge.&rdquo;  Despite
her cheerful facade, a young lady having to clean spills off
floors can maintain her fondness for damp sponges for only a
limited time.

No matter how many times that commercial was repeated,
the wording sounded the same, but in other instances repetition
may resolve the misinterpretation.  During a recent gubernatorial
race in a Southern state, campaigning was heavy on
the television tube.  In one such spot, a gray-haired lady looked
sternly into the camera and said, &ldquo;Mr. Governor, you have a
lemonade in our Council on Aging!&rdquo;  What an odd, but rather
touching, statement to make about our incumbent governor, I
thought.  He had apparently found the Council on Aging to
have problems, but following the adage, &ldquo;If you have a lemon,
make lemonade,&rdquo; he had made the most of it, presumably to its
success.  But what a funny way of stating it.  How many people
would understand such an oblique comment?  And the advertisement
was sponsored by the governor's opponent, how
extraordinary!  After hearing the advertisement several times,
however, my ears slowly became more receptive to the truth.
Thinking the joke was on me, I repeated the story to a native.
&ldquo;Ha, ha,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;the woman faced the camera and said&rdquo;—or I
thought she said—&ldquo;(here I enunciated clearly so that there
could be no mistaking my original misguided interpretation)
&ldquo; 'Mr. Governor, you have a lemonade in our Council on
Aging.' &rdquo;

To this the native responded, &ldquo;What's wrong with that?
He *did* eliminate the Council on Aging, you know.&rdquo;

My sister-in-law encountered a similar problem when she
read an article from VERBATIM to a neighbor, over the
telephone.  The article concerned accents, particularly Southern
accents, and to my sister-in-law's consternation she suddenly
realized that what she had just read to the neighbor was
exactly the way the neighbor herself spoke.  No wonder she
wasn't laughing.

Accents of all kinds can at first create a lemon in my
brain, but, true to my nature, my neocortex squeezes it into
lemonade.  A television chef with a beguiling European accent
used to concoct most unusual dishes.  Once he really caught my
attention by announcing that he was about to cook a *leggo
flam*.  Was it some Lewis-Carrollian wag's name for a wonderful
flaming dessert, a flaming flan from Denmark?  Was it something
that required hours of preparation, yielding culinary
perfection?  Was it a new dish concocted from that British
Erector Set, Leggo?  &ldquo;Ah!&rdquo;  the great chefs of Europe would
chortle, gathering around the pot, or platter, or bowl, &ldquo;Leggo
flam!  Perfection!&rdquo;  Did it require ingredients that were scarce
outside the upper slopes of the Andes?  What indeed could
leggo flam be?  What a disappointment when our chef hoisted a
leg of lamb onto the table and stated that the recipe was &ldquo;nahz
'n' zimble.&rdquo;  He did, however, springle it wiz pebble, which was
a nahz touch.

Even if the words are clearly understood, the interpretation
may be muddled.  It all depends on the listener and the
speaker, and whir their minds are raht at the point of
communication.  Distraction between the listener and the
speaker—one mind veering in one direction and the other in
another direction—can make the conversation most intriguing.
Once when I parked in front of an ice cream parlor that had
moved from a different section of the city, my nephew, espying
a panting dog tied to a stob in front of a neighboring shop,
said, &ldquo;I wonder how long it's been here.&rdquo;

I, gazing at the ice cream parlor, replied, &ldquo;Oh, about six
years now.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Poor dog!&rdquo;  my nephew gasped.

The wording itself, approached from a different angle by
the listener than the speaker intended, may cause equally
startling results.  I was about to go out of town and needed to
buy a container to supply water for my two cats while I was
away.  An Albanian doctor was present when I stated to my
work colleague that I needed to stop by the pet store to get a
device for watering my cats.  The doctor listened silently to the
conversation for a few minutes, and then ventured a hesitant
question.  &ldquo;Tell me,&rdquo; he asked, &ldquo;just how do you water these
cats?  Do you, er, *sprinkle* them, or...or... Just how do you
water these cats?&rdquo;  After the explanation, he appeared relieved.
He was afraid he was somehow neglecting his own cats by not
keeping them bedewed with mist or at least slightly damp.

Sometimes, though, my understanding of a conversation
seems clear despite possibly murky accents or the potential for
fuzzy interpretation.  At one such time, a Spanish friend was
speaking of a situation in which an associate would feel
envious.  &ldquo;He will,&rdquo; he explained, &ldquo;be jello ... jello ...&rdquo;  He
hesitated, obviously searching for the right word.

&ldquo;Jealous?&rdquo;  I offered, at least feeling confident that I could
not possibly confuse the meaning.

&ldquo;Jes!&rdquo; he agreed, &ldquo;Is like yellous, but is a color.  It's a
saying, something like 'jello with envy.'  Blue with envy?  Red
with envy?&rdquo;

If I ever discover the owner of the Pearl of Hex, I shall
meekly eat my leggo flam and be jello with envy!

## Cinq Centmille Diables! W'at Dat Is?  Dat's Cajun, I Ga-ron-tee!
*Mary Stewart Craig, Pineville, Louisiana*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win one of the four
Third Prize of $250 in the 1984
VERBATIM Essay Competition.

*Les Acadiens—les Cadiens—les Cajuns* are a fascinating
people who speak a fascinating language.  Cajun French
has been called a &ldquo;verbal jambalaya,&rdquo; and indeed it is.  The
Cajun tongue has appropriated expressions from so many
different sources that what has emerged is a language m&eacute;lange
with extremely interesting ingredients.

The Cajuns have been in this country more than 200
years, since what they still call *le Grand D&eacute;rangement*.  In 1775,
when the British defeated the French in Nova Scotia, French
immigrants there were deported from their adopted country.
France didn't want them back; most American colonies didn't
want them, period.  They were welcomed in Louisiana, where
the French population was already substantial.

According to William Faulkner Rushton in his 1979 book,
*The Cajuns*, the language today contains many nautical and
antique terms from the early 1500s, as well as other linguistic
evidence of Celtic influence.  *Amarrer* 'to moor a boat' is used
in the phrase, &ldquo;to tie one's shoelaces,&rdquo; rather than the standard
*nouer.  Virer de board*, literally, 'to come aboard' is used for &ldquo;to
turn around,&rdquo; instead of *tourner*.  Some words are thought to
come from the old French of Louis *XIV's* time: *froumi* for
*fourmi* 'ant'; *fremer* for *fermer* 'to close'; *boete* for *boite* 'box';
*asteure* for *maintenant* 'now'; *zozo* for *oiseau* 'bird'; &eacute;&eacute; for *il*
'he, it'; *ou* for *elle* 'she, it.'

There is at least a memory of standard French usage in
many Cajun expressions in both French and English.  For
example, Cajun makes provisions to prevent a glottal stop, as
standard French does, when two vowel sounds come together:
*vous autres* is *visotes*; 'green gumbo' is *gumbo s'herbes*.  There
is a line from a Cajun song which goes, *Mes alti&egrave;res &eacute;taient-z-enti&egrave;res*.

The use of the reflexive pronoun for emphasis is seen in
such phrases as: &ldquo;They did it, them&rdquo;; &ldquo;She work slow, her&rdquo;;
&ldquo;He go fas', him.&rdquo;  And then there is the interesting construction,
&ldquo;He be no bigger'n a swimps, much.&rdquo;

Cajun French has a more simple grammatic construction
than standard French.  Usage varies widely from place to place,
so that one who knows the language can pinpoint where a
Cajun speaker is from by his use of certain expressions and
vocabulary words.  One may hear *j'eus* for *je suis* '*I* am', *j'va* for
*je vais* '*I* go,' and *mo pense* for *je pense* *'I* think.'  The second
person plural *vous* is not used in conversation except with
priests, outsiders, or in jest.  The present tense conjugation of
*aimer* 'to love' is:

>j'aime        &mdash;         nous aime  
tu aime                &mdash;  
il, elle aime   &mdash;       ils, elles aimont

The future tense uses the present tense of *aller* 'to go' plus the
main infinitive, as in: 'Mary will eat,' *Marie va manger*,
literally, 'Mary is going to eat.'  *Marie mangera* of standard
French is not used.  To say, 'Mary is eating,' one takes the
present tense of *&ecirc;tre*, plus *apr&egrave;s*, plus the main infinitive; so,
*Marie est apr&egrave;s manger*.  To ask a question, take the affirmative
statement and change the inflection: *Tu mange?  Nous mange?*

Besides the variations in grammatical structure, accents
and other orthographic signs often go by the wayside.  The oral
tradition certainly accounts for this as well as the various
spellings found for the same word.  Only in recent years (and
perhaps too late) has the language been put into written form
in an effort to preserve and standardize it.

Among the many languages and dialects that have had an
influence on Cajun, Black English accounts for such forms as:
&ldquo;He use&rdquo;; &ldquo;We uses&rdquo;; &ldquo;He be tall&rdquo;; &ldquo;I was goned a lon' time&rdquo;;
&ldquo;a chirren&rdquo; 'one child' but &ldquo;chirrens&rdquo; 'more than one child'; &ldquo;a
mens&rdquo; 'one man,' but &ldquo;mens&rdquo; 'more than one man.'  Vocabulary
has been added from the African, such as *congo* 'water
moccasin'; *voudoo* or *hoo-doo*; *cush-cush* 'corn grits.'  Many
Indian words are enmeshed in the language.  There are *bayou*,
and *plaquemine*, one of the parish names, 'persimmon';
*sacamite* 'corn grits'; *gumbo* 'okra'; *pirogue* 'canoe.'  The word
*ouaouaron* is used for 'frog,' as *grenouille* has become a vulgar
sexual term.  Spanish contributed *l'agniappe* (or *lagniappe*),
meaning 'something extra,' via *&ntilde;apa*.  Cajun *gouerre* from *g&uuml;ero*
is 'someone stupid—or blond.'

*Nonc* comes from *mon oncle* 'my uncle'; *p'pere* is 'grandfather';
*quofaire* does nicely for *pourquoi* 'why'; *accordant*
'according to' is used instead of *s&eacute;lon*.  *Chaud* 'hot' is used
instead of *f&acirc;ch&eacute;* for 'angry'; *Boy Scout* is perfectly good Cajun,
but it is pronounced BOY SCOOT!  *T-Jean* (or '*Ti'-Jean* or *Tee-Jean*)
is Cajun for 'Little John.'  When you want to 'get out,'
you &ldquo;get down&rdquo; or *gidonne*, an' li' dat.

A *brouhaha* is an 'argument or great excitement'; in
France *une ratatouille* may be 'a stew,' but to a Cajun *un
ratatouille* is 'a dispute between a husband and wife,' and
sounds like it.

Revon Reed, Cajun author-in-residence from Mamou, in
his book *L&acirc;che Pas La Patate*, discusses two other interesting
onomatopoeic words which he calls Mamou expressions:
*Bourdoudoum* and *ouarjoujoum*.  They both indicate what
happens when two objects strike each other, but with a big
difference.  He says:

>*Bourdoudoum* is used when someone falls on a solid
object on one's head, as: &ldquo;The baby hit his head on a
plank with a *bourdoudoum*.&rdquo;  [But you know it didn't
hurt when,] &ldquo;The man jumped into the bayou with a
*ouarjoujoum*.&rdquo; (My translation.)

Carolyn Ramsey, back in the late fifties, recorded an
unusual version of a Cajun folksong.  Here are two lines:

>Ton papa 'semb'e ein elephant
>
>Et ta maman 'semb'e ein automobile.

'*Semb'e* is rusticated from *ressembler* 'to resemble.'  *Ein*
originates from the German, as does the town named *Des
Allemands*.  Many people of German and Belgian descent have
intermarried with the Cajuns.

Reed has noted several what I call &ldquo;sweep-the-kitchen&rdquo;
words, because they are used to mean whatever one needs
them to mean.  (I remember a French professor giving us *le
disposatif* 'thing-a-ma-bob; doo-dad' to describe the indescribable.
One example from Cajun will suffice: *gaboo*.

>*manger: Il a gaboo son diner*.  'He ate his dinner.'
>
>*boire: Il a gaboo le vin*.  'He drank the wine.'
>
>*voler: Il a gaboo mon portefeuille*.  'He stole my wallet.'

In Cajun &ldquo;Frenglish,&rdquo; when one comes of legal age, one
&ldquo;makes eighteen.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Lemme tole you, lemme make some spoke
wit' you!&rdquo;  a Cajun friend will say.  When a pretty girl comes a
boy's way, he'll &ldquo;cass an eye on dat!&rdquo;  There is a character in a
Cajun fable who describes a &ldquo;baksetball&rdquo; player as &ldquo;a fallow
twice ma' tall an' haf ma' skinny.&rdquo;

&ldquo;It's fo' true&rdquo; that Cajun might be interspersed with such
neologisms as *furimous, peculiarmous, magnifimous,
gorgemous, delicimous*, and *intoximous*, I ga-ron-tee!  &ldquo;For
true?&rdquo;  my non-Cajun husband will often ask, showing the
spillover of Cajun influence in Louisiana's version of *n'est-ce
pas?*

Some words are self-explanatory half-breeds: *gambluer; le
peace cop; la maison de show*.  &ldquo;What's your first name?&rdquo;
becomes, &ldquo;How much is your front name is?&rdquo;; &ldquo;I don't
comprestand, me&rdquo;; &ldquo;Mo pense qu'il fait trop cold pour les
catfish,&rdquo; one fellow says in the book, *People of the Bayou*.

Cajun sayings abound.  If you &ldquo;show on where de bear sat
in de buckwheat,&rdquo; you tell somebody off but good.  *Cinq
Centmille Diables!*  'Five hundred thousand devils!'  they will
tell you, you can become a Cajun one of three ways: &ldquo;By the
blood, by the ring, or by the back door!&rdquo;

Cajuns are sometimes called &ldquo;Coonies&rdquo; or &ldquo;Coonasses.&rdquo;
But smile when you say that!  The term &ldquo;coonass&rdquo; apparently
originated during World War Two when French *poilus*, amused
at the Louisiana Frenchman's patois, called him a *conasse*,
slang for &ldquo;prostitute.&rdquo;

Speaking of names, never call a Frenchman *couvillion*
(pronounced COOB-YAWN or COO-YAWN), or you'll get a *coup de
poing* 'fist blow' instead of a *coup de main* 'helping hand' for
casting aspersions on his intelligence.

Pronunciation of proper names depends on where one is
at the time.  *Baillio* is BUY-UH or BAL-EE-OH.  *Aucoin* is OH-KWA
or OH-QUINN.  *Bordelon* is BIRD-UH-LAWN and *Jordan* is JERDUHN.
*DeBlieux* is pronounced DOUBLE-U.  *Gauthier* is GO-CHAY.
*Morace* is MORE-AHS.  *Saucier* becomes SO-SHAY and *Cyriaque* is
SEAR-UH-QUE.  *Guillot* JEE-YO, GE-YO, or GE-YAT.  *Gravel* is
GRUH-VEL, and the town of *Cloutierville* is CLUE-CHEE-VILL.  A
name like *Boudreaux, Breaux*, or *Thibeaux* came about when a
French immigrant entering the U.S. was told by the customs
man to put an X beside his name to certify that it was correctly
written.

Changes in the language and customs have come fast since
the Second World War.  Up until then, in &ldquo;them ol' days,&rdquo; a
Cajun &ldquo;got himse'f married, him,&rdquo; to his *ch&egrave;re*, when friends
would &ldquo;hole de broomstick a foots from de flo' and de' happy
couple jump over it fo' de waddin' sara-mony,&rdquo; and then later
when a priest came to the area, he would bless the marriage.[^b1]
*Sauter l'balai* 'to jump the broomstick' made a marriage legal
enough in their eyes.

People used to go to *traiters* 'treaters' to be cured of
illnesses with a combination of magic *tisanes* 'potions,' secret
herbs found in *les prairies tremblantes* 'marshes,' literally,
'trembling prairies,' and the saying of prayers and sprinkling of
holy water.  This kind of &ldquo;religious&rdquo; *coodoo* is still practised in
places.  Cajun Catholicism has long been mixed with superstition.
The mythical Ol' Boudreaux was feared by generations of
French kids, because he might put the *gris-gris* on them if they
misbehaved.  Many traditions are dying out.  A few churches
still have mass in French.  A Frenchman will still navigate his
*pirogue* (PEE-ROW) down the *bayou* (BUY-AH or BUY-OH), but
with a motor instead of a long pole.  Weddings and Mardi Gras
are still occasions for a *fait do-do* (child's expression for 'going
to sleep').  These carefree social gatherings used to take place
every Saturday or Sunday night.  While the parents danced the
night away, all the &ldquo;chirrens&rdquo; slept in a room off the dancing
area.  *Fait do-do* has now broadened in its use to mean
'argument,' as in: &ldquo;We had a real *fait do-do*, him and me, mais
sho',&rdquo; as one friend put it.

*Laissez les bons temps rouler!*  could certainly be the Cajun
motto, for they are a high-spirited people who do know how to
&ldquo;make the good times roll,&rdquo; wrong placement of the infinitive
or not.  They have made a specialty of combining fun and food.

*Tit noir* (TEET-NWAR, literally, 'little black'), made with
parched coffee beans and chicory, is strong enough to stand in
the corner and fight for its honor!  French dishes include
&ldquo;Louisiana mudbugs,&rdquo; crawfish (never crayfish) in *bisque* with
heads stuffed and *&eacute;touff&eacute;e* in a tangy sauce served on rice.
Everything goes into the *jambalaya* and *gumbo* (soup) sprinkled
with *fil&eacute;* 'ground sassafras root.'  Folks savor &ldquo;dirty rice,&rdquo; a
spicy rice-meat-onion-garlic-et-al mixture, red beans over rice
and *boudin* (BOO-DAN), sausage made with pork brains, livers,
and blood.  Speaking of pigs, a *cochon de lait*, where a &ldquo;milkfed
pig&rdquo; roasts all day, is a &ldquo;full-boar&rdquo; (Sorry, irresistible
impulse!) celebration enjoyed by Cajuns and *cou-rouges* alike.
A &ldquo;red-neck&rdquo; was originally a sunburned Texas outlander
hunting oil in Louisiana, but today he's any North Louisiana
WASP type.

With the formation several years ago of CODOFIL, the
Council for the Development of French in Louisiana, French
finally became an accepted and legitimate language in the
state.  I am acquainted with several people who remember
being punished as late as the 1950s for speaking French in the
classroom or on the playground at school.  Although there are
textbooks out which teach Cajun French, CODOFIL teachers
usually come from France or Canada, and they teach standard
French.  The controversy rages now, with good reasoning on
both sides of the issue, over whether to teach Cajun or
standard French.  One suspects that, like most languages and
cultures which are exposed to outside influences, Cajun French
will eventually be absorbed into the great open-throated maw
of the prevailing culture which threatens it.  Quel dommage!

***

[^b1]: From *Once Upon a Bayou* by Howard Jacobs and Jim Rice.

## The Case of Gender
*Robert N. Goss, San Diego, California*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win one of the four
Third Prizes of $250 in the 1984
VERBATIM Essay Competition.

It may be that all has been said about gender in English that
can be, but my own admittedly limited reading in the
history of English does not bear that out.  Most authors content
themselves with pointing out that historical development has
resulted in an English that is virtually gender-free, and most
pronounce that outcome good.  By casting gender aside, except
when it is an indicator of sex, English has become a logical and
natural language.  A common thread in many of the accounts is
the conviction that a language like German is somehow
defective in its logic of reference.  It takes only a gibe at
*M&auml;dchen* or *Fr&auml;ulein* to prove that point.  How absurd to refer
to a girl in the neuter!  Unfortunately, some treatments amount
to little more than that.  To balance the account, the historian
of language should also point to the Latin *nauta*; this noun is
feminine in form and declension but has been assigned masculine
gender because it denotes a male being.  So, faced with the
same dilemma, German and Latin have chosen the opposite
horns: German elects to maintain a consistent relation between
gender and inflection type, while for Latin the decisive factor
is the sex of the referent.  Which is the more logical?

This note starts from the observation that there is indeed a
detectible residue of gender in modern English but that the
word has connotations different from those in synthetic languages.
We shall first attempt to characterize the logical status
of gender in terms somewhat more precise than language
historians are wont to use.  Then we shall cite several features
of English wherein gender plays a nontrivial role and comment
on one of these.  We are particularly interested in implications
of the fact that English has no formal mechanism to account
for gender outside of the frame of reference of sex.  Throughout
the discussion *sex* will denote a biological category comprising
two classes, called *male* and *female*, while *gender* will mean a
grammatical category consisting of the three classes *masculine,
feminine*, and *neuter*.  We will assume that there is a mapping
of *sex* into *gender*, that is, a correspondence which associates
with each element of *sex* an element of *gender*, called the *name*
of that element of *sex*.  Thus, to a female horse corresponds the
name &ldquo;mare,&rdquo; which has the property of gender; in this
instance it is feminine.

We need to know how membership in the various classes is
realized.  As for the two sexual classes, the proper elements or
members are beings who are living or who have lived, and
membership is fixed by nature.  The elements of the gender
classes are words—nouns and pronouns, the vast majority of
which do not refer to the sexual classes at all.  There are various
ways in which a noun can be assigned to a gender class.  For
example, we have three different processes that are characteristic
of German, Latin, and English, respectively:

>German model: Place noun in gender class according
                 to the inflection pattern it exhibits.
>
>Latin model: If noun names a male, put it in *masculine*;
                if noun names a female, put it in
                *feminine*; otherwise follow the German
                model.
>
>English model: If noun names a male, put it in *masculine*;
                  if noun names a female, put it
                  in *feminine*; otherwise put it in *neuter*.

Each of these rules is expressed as a mapping which makes a
given element of the category *sex* correspond to an appropriate
member of the category *gender*.  It is worth emphasizing that
the correspondence is independent of our state of knowledge
about the elements at any particular moment.

Now, within the narrow context we have established, the
characterization of a language as &ldquo;logical&rdquo; should mean that
the correspondence is one-to-one—that is, that in addition to
the mapping mentioned, the inverse mapping (from *gender* into
*sex*) also exists.  No (Indo-European) language that I know
satisfies that condition; certainly those tongues in which every
noun has gender do not.  We could term English &ldquo;semilogical&rdquo;
because, according to the process above, the name of a female
(or, alternatively, male) is always feminine (or, alternatively,
masculine).  A boy cousin is always &ldquo;he&rdquo; and a girl cousin
&ldquo;she&rdquo;; hence the word &ldquo;cousin&rdquo; is masculine or feminine
according to the sex of the referent.  I prefer the term &ldquo;sex-preserving&rdquo;
as being more specific than &ldquo;semilogical.&rdquo;  Some
authorities use the adjective &ldquo;natural&rdquo; to describe what I have
called sex-preserving.

The procedure exhibited above for the three models lays
bare the essential difference between synthetic and analytic
languages in their concept of gender.  In German and Latin
nouns are assigned to gender classes associated with declension
patterns.  In English the gender classes are inextricably bound
to sex.  The main function of gender in synthetic tongues is to
reduce the possibility of ambiguity by affording a variety of
inflection classes to operate with the syntactic mechanism of
agreement.  In analytic languages, on the other hand, an
elaborate apparatus of agreement is unnecessary, since semantic
relationships are expressed mainly by word order.  However,
English has seen fit to retain a rudimentary inflection pattern
for pronouns, whose role is to facilitate communication by
minimizing both redundance and ambiguity.

The analogue of sex preservation is gender preservation.
As we have suggested, English is not gender-preserving, and
this point perhaps needs clarification.  We shall understand
&ldquo;gender-preserving&rdquo; to mean that a masculine (feminine) noun
or pronoun always refers to a male (female) and a neuter noun
or pronoun never to a male or female.  But to leave it at that is
not enough.  The definition is without force unless it entails
some means for correlating the gender of a noun in question
with the sex of its referent.  In contrast to pronouns, relatively
few nouns carry any attribution of the sex of the object to
which they refer.  *Aunt* indeed preserves gender, but there is
nothing in &ldquo;I have a cousin in Milwaukee&rdquo; to convey information
about the gender of *cousin*; a listener must inquire directly
or be alert for a telltale pronoun.  As the following discussion
will bring out, attempted deduction of gender is not invariably
successful even when there is a pronoun in sight.

That one can turn up exceptions to almost any grammatical
rule is well understood and constitutes no reason to
relinquish attempts to find orderly patterns.  Let us consider the
instances in which one may draw conclusions about the gender
of a noun by testing agreement with a pronoun.  We examine
only the singular.  Since each of the pronouns in question (*he,
she, it* along with their possessive and objective cases) can be
paired with each of the three genders, there are nine possible
cases to consider.  Three of them are the obvious normal
pairings in which agreement alone is sufficient.  Of the remaining
six, I know of only one that is invariably regarded as an
error: the coupling of a masculine noun with a feminine
pronoun.  Each of the other five cases may occur from time to
time.  Since they are departures from the rule of agreement, we
shall call them *anomalies*, meaning mismatches of sex with
gender.  It is the presence of these anomalies in English that
precludes its being gender-preserving and hence completely
logical.

Two of the anomalies are easily disposed of: a masculine
or feminine antecedent with the neuter pronoun.  &ldquo;When I saw
the dog, it was in the next block.&rdquo; The pronoun is not used in
its canonical sense of 'neither male nor female'; here it means
'either male or female'—perhaps a natural extension of the
official meaning even though it indicates precisely the opposite.
(There is irony in that the use of &ldquo;he&rdquo; or &ldquo;she&rdquo; or the specific
&ldquo;bitch&rdquo; would probably mark the speaker as a connoisseur of
canines before it would be taken as indicating care for accurate
English usage.)  &ldquo;It&rdquo; can be applied to humans only in the case
of infants when there is no conspicuous hint as to sex and then
only temporarily.

The reflections, so to speak, of the cases just mentioned
are those in which the names have masculine or feminine
gender but the objects they name have no sex.  Mariner and
landlubber alike refer to a ship as &ldquo;she,&rdquo; notwithstanding the
suggestion conveyed by *man o'war*.  Moreover, in our reservoir
of idioms such expressions as *Mother Nature, Father Time*, and
*Ol' Man River* could be called gender-preserving for the reason
that gender-specific pronouns are customarily used to refer to
them.  However, the same would not be true of formally similar
terms in which the gender-bearing noun is used as an adjective:
*mother tongue, grandfather clock, female plug*.  But whether
there is total commitment to gender or not, the door is left
open to the possibility that a noun might have gender and its
referent have no sex.  Indeed, the literary association of a
masculine or feminine pronoun with a sexless object is the
rhetorical device of personification, so loved by classical and
Romantic poets, and this cannot be dismissed as improper
usage.

If all of this smacks of pedantry, the one anomaly
remaining gives a new flavor to the discussion.  In recent years
we have pointedly been made aware that the occurrence of a
masculine pronoun does not always unequivocally refer to a
male, and some have professed to find such usage offensive.

How many organizations have taken up resolutions to &ldquo;remove
sexist language&rdquo; from their by-laws!  It is by no means self-evident
that &ldquo;sexist language&rdquo; (the term betrays confusion of
categories) in itself fosters or even represents discrimination.
Anthropological—and ultimately biological—factors have made
it almost inevitable that until recent times the male would
function as spokesperson for the family unit.  The legacy we
have inherited from this circumstance is a vast freight of terms
in which the male role has been enshrined.  But it is now
recognized that any wholesale expunging of male-oriented
elements from English would result in emasculation in the
worst figurative sense.  Discerning feminists have backed away
from—indeed, have never advocated—such a drastic course, but
&ldquo;purging the language of sexism&rdquo; is still a popular shibboleth.
&ldquo;When the chairman desires to speak to the issue on the floor,
he shall...&rdquo; becomes &ldquo;When the presiding officer desires to
speak, he or she shall....&rdquo;  An occurrence or two of &ldquo;he or she&rdquo;
in this setting is not noteworthy (although it does leave
unresolved a question of precedence), but, deadly in repeated
doses, the coupling of the pronouns can work havoc upon even
the most pedestrian prose.  Some ingenious remedies have been
proposed, often with satirical overtones, but that is not the way
common usage becomes established.  The least objectionable
alternative to many users appears to be one that speakers of
English already lapse into on occasion: an extension of the
plural *they/their/them* to instances in which one wishes to be
noncommittal about the sex of a singular referent.  At first,
&ldquo;When the presiding officer..., they shall...&rdquo; has a false ring
to the discriminating ear, but as history has shown, there is
nothing immutable as our language evolves to accommodate
changing needs.  Moreover, adaptation of the third person
plural pronoun for use in the singular has features in common
with the editorial *we*, the royal *we* and the supplanting of *thou*
by *you*, all perfectly acceptable.

Our wholly inadequate inquiry has shown that gender is
still with us as a resource for conveying unconventional
nuances by means of what we have called the anomalies.  At
the same time, the indication is clear that users of English are
uncomfortable with departures from isomorphism between the
grammatical and the sexual categories.  Is this a signal that the
anomalies may one day be consigned to that limbo of linguistic
niceties which, like our children, we can observe and cherish
but cannot control?

## What Mrs. Garnett Never Told Us
*Alex Auswaks, St. Albans, Hertfordshire*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win one of the four
Third Prizes of $250 in the 1984
VERBATIM Essay Competition.

The Georgian seminary student who changed his name
from Yosif Jugashvili to Yosif Stalin (Mr. Steel) was
following in a time-honored Russian tradition.  Most Russian
surnames have a meaning.  In fact, Russian surnames not only
have a meaning but a recognizable linguistic form.  They have
certain recognizable endings.  To a Russian a surname with a
meaning, even an ironic or pejorative one is a perfectly natural
thing.  (I know of a Russian exile in Siberia, bitterly committed
against church and state, whose name was Popov, i.e., Mr.
Priest.)  Nobody sees anything in the fact that the Prime
Minister is called Thatcher, in fact, few people are conscious of
its meaning.  But in Russia, every Russian is acutely aware that
Molotov means 'hammer' (which is why he adopted the name)
and Gromyko is 'thunder.'

Russian writers have not been slow to exploit this characteristic.
After all, if literature is to reflect reality, meaningful
naming is a natural and acceptable literary device.  When Mrs.
Garnett translated the great classics into English, it was a great
pity she did not tell her readers that in naming characters in
their novels, Russian writers played games with their readers,
hinted at their intention in the names they gave them, and,
most important, circumvented censorship.

An early example was the famous (in Russia) playwright,
Vonwizin, in a play called *The Minor*, sometimes referred to by
translators as *The Milksop*.  He names one character in the play
*Pravdin*, which means 'Mr. Truth,' and another, *Prostakov*, 'Mr.
Simpleton.'  Yet another is *Mr. Skotinin*, which, colloquially, can
only be translated as 'Mr. S.O.B.' A slightly more subtle use is
made of the naming ploy in *The Mischief of Being Clever* by
the Russian diplomat Griboyedov, which means Mushroom-eater.
This play introduced into Russian literature the first of a
long line of literary characters known as &ldquo;superfluous men.&rdquo;  A
hardly perennial in all Russian literature exams (at least in the
United Kingdom) invites students to discuss this notion.  Basically,
a superfluous man is a member of the aristocracy or
landed gentry, rich, highly intelligent and very capable.  The
stifling atmosphere of Russia allows no scope for the talents of
such a man, and he ends up leading a singularly purposeless
life, generally doing damage to others.  The first such superfluous
man in Griboyedov's play is called *Chatsky*, a word that
resembles the Russian *chahat* 'to wither away.'  The villain of
the play is *Famusov*, in whose name no doubt you recognize
our word &ldquo;famous,&rdquo; and Griboyedov does portray a man
looked up to and respected, albeit undeservedly so.  Famusov
has a secretary called *Molchalin*, which one can loosely translate
as 'Mr. Keeps Quiet' or 'Mr. Don't Answer Back.'  A rather
choleric colonel is named 'Colonel Bare Your Teeth.'  Notice
that whereas Vonwizin used naming to indicate moral qualities,
Griboyedov virtually gives a thumbnail character sketch.

The next in the superfluous male line is Pushkin's Eugene
Onegin, named after the River Onega, a common enough
device.  Lenin adopted it: he was exiled on the River Lena; but
even the most dedicated Russian communist is painfully aware
of its close resemblance to the Russian word for 'lazy'.  Onegin
lived in the days of Alexander I, when the order of things was
not as oppressive as under his successor Nicholas I.  In the reign
of Nicholas I, Lermontov (descended from a Scots mercenary
called Learmont, with the addition of a Russian surname
ending) wrote *A Hero of Our Time*, in which the hero is
*Pechorin*, named after the River Pechora.  Its significance was
immediate to every Russian.  Pechorin is a far more desperate,
even wilder character than Onegin.  As characters they are
totally different.  Onegin is quite a pleasant, even amiable man.
Pechorin is ... well, there are few polite words to describe
him.  Nevertheless, Lermontov wanted to underline the connection
between them as superfluous men, and thus exculpate
Pechorin's character.  The Onega and Pechora rivers flow side
by side, and while the Onega flows smoothly the Pechora is a
wild and turbulent river.  Onegin had done nothing to offend
prevailing morals and Pechorin had offended every prevailing
moral, but they were literary brothers.

Naming really comes into its own in the works of Gogol,
who uses names the way a cartoonist takes a physical feature
and enlarges it so that it becomes a trade mark, e.g., the large
jaw associated with Nixon, which crossed the Atlantic and was
adopted by British cartoonists.  Gogol's names allude to qualities
in the character of his characters.  In *The Inspector General*
(immortalized on the screen by Danny Kaye), a junior official
from St. Petersburg who passes himself off as a local government
inspector is *Hlestiakoff*, which means 'Mr. Scourge.'
Three constables are 'Whistle' (*Svistunoff*), 'Scare 'em' or
'Button' (*Pugovitsin*), and *'Shut Your Gob*' (*Derjhimorda*).  Their
superintendent is 'Twist-Your-Ear' (*Uhoviortov*).  The postmaster
who intercepts and reads everyone's mail is 'Mr. Spy'
(*Shpiokin*).  The Superintendent of Schools is 'Mr. Bustle and
Bothered' (*Hlopoff*).  These and other names have passed into
the language and are used as nicknames by Russian people.
Somewhere in the Soviet Union today at least one city mayor is
called *Skvoznik-Dmuhanovsky* (a combination of 'draught' and
'fly').  In *Dead Souls* a landlord who constantly pursues trivialities
is named 'Mr. Seductive' (*Maniloff*), the scandal-monger is
'Mr. Nostril' (*Nozdrev*), who noses out all the local scandal.  The
epitaph on Gogol's grave is, &ldquo;It would be funny, if it weren't so
sad,&rdquo; and even the tsar is supposed to have begun by laughing
when he saw the *Inspector General* and then commented on
what a sorry state the country was in to have folk like that in
authority.

Tolstoy named his favorite characters after himself.  Levin,
in *Anna Karenina*, is supposed to be Tolstoy (his first name was
Lev) personified.  He seems to have overlooked the fact that it
is also a Jewish name, ironic when one remembers that he was
an anti-Semite.  *Vronsky*, Anna Karenina's faithless lover, is
from the Russian *voron*, 'raven,' and *Karenina* is from the word
*karat* 'to punish.'  The book bears a Biblical epigraph.

One of the most interesting examples of a naming device
is Dostoevsky's Raskolnikoff in *Crime and Punishment*.
Raskolnikoff is the idealistic young man who murders a woman
money-lender to try to prevent his sister from marrying a
despicable elderly man.  *Raskolnikoff*, on the face of it, comes
from the Russian word *raskol* which means 'schism'; hence
*Raskolnikoff* means 'Mr. Schismatic.'  There is some opinion
that *raskol* also means 'split' and is a reference to his split
personality, his mental and moral schizophrenia.  It may even
have had something to do with the split between Slavophiles
and pro-Westerners in Russian society and amongst Russian
intellectuals.  However, *raskol* also means 'cloven' as in 'cloven
hoof,' and Dostoevsky clearly equated this character with the
devil's work.  H. H. Munro, better known as Saki, who knew
Russia and Russian, wrote about a heartless young man, a sort
of upper-class English equivalent of Raskolnikoff, and he called
him *Clovis*.  Now where did he get the idea for that name?

The revolution came and went, and the more things
changed, the more they remained as they were.  The naming
device stayed, it even entered Russian political life, as Mr.
Jugashvili became Mr. Stalin, Ulyanov became Lenin, a Mr.
Molotov appeared on the scene.  In literature the tradition
continued, Alexander Solzhenitsyn used it with a vengeance.
*The Cancer Ward* opens with a hospital scene in one of the
Soviet Union's Central Asiatic republics.  The first person we
meet is a typical Soviet apparatchik, a party hack.  His name is
*Rusanov* 'Comrade Russia.'  He looks down in particular on
another patient, *Kostoglotov* 'Bone in the Throat,' who is verily
the bone in everyone's gullet.  There are two nurses: the one
with the spiritual nature is aptly named *Vera* 'Faith.'  The girl
who goes to a lot of trouble for Kostoglotov is *Zoya*, Siberian
vernacular for 'Busybody,' but in an affectionate sense.  There
is a former KGB man, whose tongue has developed cancer; his
name is *Podueff*, an 'ash pit.'  But there are two people, a
married couple, whose naming is so subtle that I have often
wondered whether I am reading more into it than Solzhenitsyn
intended.  They are an old couple called the *Kadmins*.  They
were sentenced and exiled for no reason at all.  There used to
be a joke in those times that life in Russia was like a bus ride
on a crowded route.  Some are to get on, some are on the buses,
others will be allowed off.  For &ldquo;buses&rdquo; read &ldquo;prison camps.&rdquo;
No rhyme, no reason.  If it's your turn: you get on, or stay, or
get off.  The Kadmins never rail against their fate.  They give
Kostoglotov financial and moral support.  What does their name
mean?  It is a well-known fact that Solzhenitsyn lived in
Ryazan, where his wife taught at the Ryazan Polytechnical
Institute.  There is, in the dialect of the Ryazan district, a word
*kadi*, from which the surname *Kadmin* is derived.  The natives
of Ryazan insert 'kadi' in their speech to emphasize meaning.

This naming kadi is really something, isn't it, comrades!

## Lexicography in the Scottish Highlands and Islands Cannibalism, Caves, and Amulets:
*Philip Riley, Uppingham, Leicestershire*

>This article was selected by the
judges' vote to win one of the four
Third Prizes of $250 in the 1984
VERBATIM Essay Competition.

&ldquo;He that eats a slice of his grandmother, may, with great
propriety, sip the soup that is made of the same.&rdquo;
This observation does not describe one of the customs of a
remote cannibal tribe discovered in the days of the British
Empire; it is to be found in a respectable dictionary of the
Gaelic language first published in Glasgow a century and a half
ago.  The lexicographer to whom we owe our knowledge of this
&ldquo;proverb&rdquo; was one Neil MacAlpine, at the time a parochial
schoolmaster on the island of Islay, where he had been born in
1786 and where he was to die in 1867.  *MacAlpine's Pronouncing
Gaelic Dictionary* first appeared in 1832 and became very
popular, being cheaper than any of its rivals while remaining
remarkably comprehensive.  Indeed, we might well consider it
over-comprehensive: was it, for instance, really necessary to
include *raibheic* 'the roar that a cow gives when gored by
another; *caiseach* 'well supplied with cheese; or *frith*, a word
apparently used only in MacAlpine's native Islay, meaning 'an
encantation [*sic*] to find whether people at a great distance or
at sea be in life'?

There are many more equally idiosyncratic definitions
within MacAlpine's pages, some of which will stand comparison
with any of Dr. Johnson's more celebrated eccentricities.
Thus we come across, for example, *drip* 'snare meant for
another, but ensnaring the author of it,' *meadhail* 'an uncommon
and unaccountable burst of joy, on the eve of getting
some distressing news; and *roic* 'sumptuous feasting of boorish
people; superabundance of the good things of life, without any
of the refined manners of genteel society,' to mention only
three from a very long list.  Sometimes all the possible meanings
of a word in different areas are listed, giving rise to strings like
&ldquo;a prodigious large, red carbuncled nose (like a boiled lobster)
... also the cog of a wheel; a ludicrous name for a large pinch
of snuff... just a nose ... the nasal canal... the cork of a
bottle ... a huge frog... conscience&rdquo; (MacAlpine's definition
of the word *cogais*); or, for *colgarrachd*, &ldquo;sternness; new-year's
eve; an absurd hammering at any thing.&rdquo;  Similarly, no Irishman
is likely to be pleased to find that the word *eirionnach*,
according to MacAlpine, means both 'Irishman' and 'castrated
he-goat'!

It must be admitted, nevertheless, that some of
MacAlpine's turns of phrase are well worth keeping: *srullamas*,
for instance, is defined as &ldquo;a person that speaks as if his mouth
was filled with liquid,&rdquo; and *tighich* as &ldquo;state of being subject to
callers&rdquo; (surely the right word for the unfortunate protagonist
of Edmund Crispin's short story, collected in *Fen Country*,
&ldquo;We Know You're Busy Writing, But We Thought You Wouldn't
Mind If We Just Dropped in for a Minute&rdquo;?).

Gaelic, it is said, is a language rich in invective.  Certainly
MacAlpine includes a wide variety of opprobrious terms,
including what seems a disproportionate number applying only
to women.  Perhaps he was disappointed in love at some time;
the biographical sketch at the beginning of his dictionary
makes no mention of a wife.  Be that as it may, he provides a
well-stocked arsenal for all Celtic misogynists, including
*biodanach* 'a bickering, eternally scolding or complaining
female,' *cuilteach* 'a skulking female,' *grobag* 'a little female
with broken teeth,' and, comprehensively, *gloichdeil* 'idiotical,
as a female, stupid, senseless.'  There are many more.

MacAlpine would have had little patience with the
descriptivist attitude of many of today's lexicographers.  For
him, there was only one right way to spell and pronounce a
given word: &ldquo;Some pronounce drabhluinn, *draoluinn* and
*drowluinn*, but in Islay we never murder a Gaelic word.&rdquo;
According to MacAlpine, &ldquo;in the islands of Argyle, every word
is pronounced just as ADAM spoke it,&rdquo; so it is hardly surprising
that any deviation incurs his censure: the spelling *pairilis* is
&ldquo;downright nonsense&rdquo; for *paralais*, and *raibheic* is &ldquo;most
unconscionably murdered by the best Gaelic scholars
RAOICHD.&rdquo;  Nevertheless, even he is sometimes at a loss: of
*biodag* 'dirk, dagger' he says &ldquo;It is impossible to pronounce this
word&rdquo;; similarly, his entry for *iosail* reads, *in toto*, &ldquo;low, mean;
can't pretend to pronounce it properly; same as iseal.&rdquo;

The marked individuality of MacAlpine is perhaps most
clearly seen in his outbursts of national and local pride, which
can occur in the most unlikely contexts.  In a comment on the
word *paitireachd*, which he translates as 'phrenology, thumping,'
he declares that &ldquo;The sublime science of PHRENOLOGY has
been in use, in the Highlands, for time immemorial [I wonder
whether any present-day Highlander could confirm or deny
this?], though the inhabitants of Edinburgh, piqued themselves
on its discovery.&rdquo;  Again, on the subject of Gaelic spelling,
which an outsider would not consider very satisfactory (too
many redundancies and silent consonants), MacAlpine asserts
that &ldquo;The orthography of the Gaelic, shews more acuteness and
ingenuity in its structure, than any other language the author
knows any thing of.&rdquo;  The word *muirn* is defined as &ldquo;a
respectful, tender reception or genuine Highland hospitality&rdquo;;
and to illustrate the meaning of *iseal* 'low, humble' he cites the
phrase *iseal am folachd* 'of a base extraction,' adding helpfully
&ldquo;such as every person that is not HIGHLAND!!!!!&rdquo;  I have
already drawn attention above to MacAlpine's firm belief in the
linguistic purity of the Islands, and of Islay in particular.

In the light of this attitude, which today would no doubt
be regarded as rampant chauvinism, it is no surprise that
MacAlpine has his own theory about Dr. Johnson's well-known
dislike of Scotland and the Scots.  He explains this obvious
aberration from rationality in a footnote to the word *uamh*
'cave' which deserves to be quoted in full:

>Uamh nam fear, the Gentleman's Cave,—a very singular
cavern in the Island of St. MacCormaig, in the
Sound of Jura, Argyle.  It is the fate of every gentleman
that enters this cave, that
>
>&ldquo;Out of his derogate body shall never spring,
A babe to honour him!!!&rdquo;
>
>What a grand look-out for the Rev. Mr. Malthus!!!
Report says, that the celebrated Doctors SAMUEL JOHNSON
and MACCULLOCH were storm-staid in this untoward
den,—and that this was the reason they vented
their spleen on the poor HIGHLANDS and HIGHLANDERS.
Government should look about them; St. MacCormaig
is in the market.

This is by no means MacAlpine's only excursion into the
subject of local beliefs and customs.  In his discussion of *b&ograve;rd*
'table,' for example, he notes the idiomatic usage *tha e fo'n
bh&oacute;rd* 'he is dead,' literally, 'he is under the table.'  &ldquo;This phrase
is peculiar to a part of Perthshire, but is quite common in
Ireland; originating from a practice that obtains, among the
lower classes there, of placing the corpse when coffined under
the table.&rdquo;  He also gives his readers useful advice on dealing
with supernatural visitants (&ldquo;Assaulted by ghosts or hobgoblins
at any time in the Highlands, you have only to describe a
circle, within which, you are as safe, as if aside your mother at
the fireside&rdquo;) and goes into great detail about the various types
of *orra*, or amulet: they include, for instance, &ldquo;*orra-chomais*...
to deprive a man of his v-r-l-ty, particularly on the marriage-night,
by way of vengeance, (a fine thing to cure blackguards)&rdquo;;
&ldquo;*orra-ghr&uacute;daire*... to make every drop of the wash to overflow
the wash-tuns&rdquo;; and &ldquo;*orra nan o&igrave;leamh*... to prevent d—s to
[*sic*] succeed in any publication, such as a Gaelic dictionary,
&amp;c. &amp;c. &amp;c.&rdquo;

It seems unlikely that belief in such devices should still be
found, though stranger things have happened and one should
not assume automatically that Southron &ldquo;enlightenment&rdquo; is
now universal in Scotland (or, indeed, in England).  Traditions
are tenacious, after all, and survive in the most improbable
places; so I am unable to say for sure that one cannot obtain an
*orra-chomais* today, just as I am unable to say whether Uamh
nam fear retains its efficacy as a contraceptive.  However, I can
reassure prospective visitors to Scotland on one point: notwithstanding
the observation quoted at the beginning of this article,
the practice of anthropophagy is no longer considered socially
acceptable in *any* part of the United Kingdom.


#### EPISTOLA {Kirkham Ford}

In Richard Lederer's article [XI, 1] about sexist language,
he asserted, &ldquo;... the only common uncapitalized English words
...from the names of women are *tawdry*... and *bloomers*.&rdquo;

He should have been with me and my sheila on our motor
trip.  She wore a bertha collar and had a juliet cap on her
pompadour.  The girl is a professional nanny and may be a
pollyanna, but is not a mollycoddle or a patsy, although she is a
nervous nellie about riding in my tin lizzie.

The first evening we had a couple of margaritas before
dinner, a stew flavored with rosemary, and charlotte russe and
brown betty for dessert.  I had in my pocket a couple of annie
oakleys for the bullfights, so the next day we hired a victoria
with a span of jennies and drove to the bull ring.  The veronicas
and chiquilitas were excellent.  In the evening fireworks, the
best was a catherine wheel.  Later, we went back to the hotel
and smoked some marijuana.

Some of the words in this account are made from Spanish
names.  I am not much of an entomologist, so for all I know,
that may not be cricket.

Besides the examples I have given above, there are two
units of measurement named for women: the *curie* (named for
Marie, not Pierre) and the *millihelen*, the unit of beauty
needed to launch one ship.

*[Kirkham Ford, Paris, Tennessee]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Acronyms, Initialisms, and Abbreviations Dictionary: A Guide to Alphabetic Designations, Contractions, Acronyms, Initialisms, Abbreviations, and Similar Condensed Appellations*](https://www.amazon.ca/Acronyms-Initialisms-Abbreviations-Dictionary-Contractions/dp/0028667166)
Ellen T. Crowley and Helen E. Sheppard, eds., (Gale Research Company, 1984), Part 1: A-K, pp. 1-1017, Part 2: L-Z, pp. 1018-2048.

Formidable!  That and the subtitle say it all for this
reference source, which has become, in this day of *AIDS* and
other afflictions, verbal and corporeal, an indispensable adjunct
to every library.  NASA uses AIDS to mean 'Abort Inertial
Digital System' (whatever that means), and the 26 listings
under the entry end with 'North Atlantic Institute for Defense
Study,' which, curiously enough, merits no entry under
NAIDS: perhaps the entire Atlantic is now a subject for study.
There are more than 300,000 listings in these large tomes; in
the event you considered that skimpy, a two-issue supplement,
*New Acronyms, Initialisms, and Abbreviations*, by the same
editors, by subscription in 1985 for $130, is in preparation.  I
didn't have the strength to browse, but I have had much
experience using earlier editions and can commend it, without
reservation, to any who think they may need it.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *National Directory of Addresses and Telephone Numbers*
(World Almanac Publications, 1984), 1985 Edition, 1069 pp.

Several years ago, a similar directory was published, but it
is now out of date.  We found it very useful quite often, though
I have never been able to understand why some categories of
companies are listed and others omitted, what the rationale is
behind the various breakdowns of some categories (like those
for Magazines), why some companies (e.g., under Book Publishing)
are listed and others are not, etc.  There is no answer to
these questions in an Editor's Foreword.  In short, this is not—
nor does it pretend to be—a &ldquo;national telephone directory,&rdquo;
and one must be grateful for what is there: more than 75,000
listings.  Because of its usefulness, we offer it in the VERBATIM
Book Club Catalogue.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Now for 24 hours a day, I can sleep, swim and be completely
active!&rdquo;  [An ad for hair replacement, from *The New York Times*
19 August 1984.  Submitted by Rosemary Darmstadt, Glendale,
New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Lady Diana, expecting her second child in about a month ...&rdquo;
[From the *Boston Globe*, 22 August 1984.  Submitted by
Franklin Rodman, Brookline, Massachusetts.]

## Palindromes: The Art of Reverse English
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

During the 1930's, the word *radar* was coined to describe a
radio device used to locate an object by means of waves
reflected from the object and received by the sending unit.  The
letters in *radar* form not only an acronym (they stand for *radio
detecting and ranging*), but also a palindrome because they
read the same forwards and backwards.  As such, the word
seems to be an especially happy coinage to denote the two-way
reflection of radio waves.

A palindrome (from two Greek roots that mean 'running
back again') is a word, sentence, or longer statement that
communicates the same message when the letters of which it is
composed are taken in reverse order.  *Madam* is probably the
most famous palindromic word in English, but once you begin
pursuing what has been called &ldquo;the abominable palindrome,&rdquo;
you will discover a surprising number of words in our language
that do indeed &ldquo;run back again.&rdquo;

Start with your own family, and you will find *mom, pop*
(or *dad*), *sis*, and *tot*.  Soon you will come upon longer words,
such as *toot* (four letters), *level* (five letters), *redder* (six letters),
and *deified* (seven letters).  Other seven-letter palindromic
words include *reviver, repaper*, and *rotator*.  The longest palindromic
word listed in English dictionaries is *redivider* (nine
letters), although some chemical handbooks list the eleven-letter
word *detartrated*.  Dimitri Borgmann, who has collected
thousands of palindromes in all major languages, asserts that
the longest non-hyphenated single-word palindrome in the
world is *saippuakauppias*, a fifteen-letter Finnish word for
'soap dealer.'

Close kin to the palindrome is the *semordnilap*.  Take a
good look at the word *semordnilap* and you will find that it is
*palindromes* spelled backward.  While a palindromic word reads
the same forwards and backwards, a semordnilapic word
becomes a new word when spelled in reverse.  The ending of
Stanley Kubrick's chilling film, *The Shining*, hinges on the
semordnilapic circumstance that the words *red rum*, which Jack
Nicholson blithers throughout the story, spell *murder* when one
starts from the back.  Other semordnilapic examples include Al
Boleska's question, &ldquo;Have you ever noticed what *golf* spells
backwards?&rdquo; and the anonymously penned definition of *eros*:
&ldquo;spelled backwards gives you an idea of how it affects
beginners.&rdquo;

Such words are more prevalent than you might think.  For
instance, along most highways you will see such signs as: &ldquo;Stop
Ahead,&rdquo; &ldquo;Food-Gas-Lodging,&rdquo; &ldquo;Speed Limit 55,&rdquo; &ldquo;Do Not
Pass,&rdquo; &ldquo;Keep Right,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Motel: Pool.&rdquo;  The dedicated
semordnilap stalker will quickly flush out the hidden reversals
embedded in each message: *pots, sag, deeps, ton, peek*, and
*loop*.  Up until 1970, if you were driving on West Miner Street
in Yreka, California, you would have come to the Yreka
Bakery.  Alas, that bakery is now closed; but its premises are
now occupied by the Yrella Gallery.

It is to the sentence palindrome that we must turn to
discover the most celebrated and adroit exercises in palindromic
power.  Some word-players claim that the first sentence
ever spoken was a palindrome.  Adam allegedly introduced
himself to Eve thus: *Madam, I'm Adam*.  Professional logologist
J. A. Lindon offers the complete primordial dialogue, from
which I excerpt the best exchanges:

>ADAM: *Madam* —
>
>EVE: *Oh, who?*
>
>ADAM: *Madam, I'm Adam*.
>
>EVE: *Name of a foeman?*
>
>ADAM: *O stone me!  Not so*.
>
>EVE: *Mad!  A maid I am, Adam*.
>
>ADAM: *Madam in Eden, I'm Adam*.
>
>EVE: *Eve, maiden name.  Both sad in Eden?  I dash to
be manned.  I am Eve*.
>
>ADAM: *Madam, I'm Adam.  Named under a ban.  A
bared, nude man.  Madam, I'm Adam*.
>
>EVE: *Tut-tut, mad Adam.  Tut-tut*.

Another palindromic sentence of great historical pitch and
moment is this classic, purportedly uttered by Napoleon after
his defeat at Waterloo: *Able was I ere I saw Elba*.  More
recently, a palindromist characterized Jimmy Carter's presidency
this way: *To last, Carter retracts a lot*.

Palindromes have a long and honorable history.  One of the
oldest surviving examples of graffiti is found on the wall of an
excavated tavern of ancient Rome: *Roma summus amor:*
'Rome is the greatest love.'  Over the entrance to the sixth-century
Hagia Sophia temple in Turkey is an inscription which,
translated into modern Greek, reads: *NIPSON ANOMENA ME
MONAN OPSIN*: 'Wash your sins, not just your face.'

The first recorded sentence palindrome in English comes
from the hand of the early seventeenth-century poet John
Taylor: *Lewd did I live &amp; evil I did dwel*.  *Dwel* is acceptable
seventeenth-century spelling, but the substitution of an ampersand
for *and* is a bit of a fudge factor.  Still, Taylor's nine-word
effort is a promising palindromic pathbreaker, which blazed the
way for such tours de farce as this interview from the *Harvard
Bulletin* conducted with the fictional *Professor R. Osseforp*,
holder of the *Emor D. Nilap*, Chair in Palindromology.  Note
that not only are the professor's name and title palindromic,
but so are all his answers:

>—And what about your new novel, could you tell me
its title?
>
>—*Dennis Sinned*.
>
>—Intriguing.  What is the plot?
>
>—*Dennis and Edna sinned*.
>
>—I see.  Is there any more to it than that?
>
>—*Dennis Krats and Edna Stark sinned*.
>
>—Now it all becomes clear.  Tell me, with all this concern
about the ecology, what kind of car are you
driving nowadays?
>
>—*A Toyota*.
>
>—Naturally, and how about your colleague, Prof.
Nustad?
>
>—*Nustad?  A Datsun*.

A successful palindromic sentence must make a self-contained
and reasonably clear statement and, at the same
time, obey the laws of grammar.  Writing sentence palindromes
can be an extremely fascinating pastime, but the task is fraught
with myriad possibilities for frustration.  Two near-misses (near-hits,
actually) will illustrate the problems involved: *Are we not
drawn onward, we few, drawn onward to new era?*  Here is a
brilliant and ringing creation—if only an *a* could be inserted
between *to* and *new*.  But the *a* destroys the fragile design, and
the elusive beast slips away uncaptured.

The second near hit is one that I made up: *Eros, a ton tub
stops spots, but a sore*.  While this sentence holds up grammatically,
it requires an outpouring of background.  You see the
Greek Eros was afflicted with leprosy sores, and he tried to
wash them away by bathing in a huge tub that held a ton of
water.  When he asked his physician why the strategy wasn't
working, the good doctor replied....  Unfortunately, by the
time such an explanation is completed, the palindrome is dead.

Still, if you are persistent, you may be able to capture the
perfect palindromic statement, one that requires no explanation
and makes clear sense.  My original creation, *Pepsi is Pep* meets
these criteria, and I harbor dreams that the slogan may one day
make much money for me.

Here follows a list of what are, in my view, twenty of the
best long palindromes ever created, arranged in order of
length:

>*I prefer pi*.  (mathematician's palindrome)
>
>*Draw, o coward*!
>
>*Rail at a liar*.
>
>*Step on no pets*.
>
>*Sex at noon taxes*.
>
>*Never odd or even*.
>
>*Dennis and Edna sinned*.
>
>*Won't lovers revolt now*?
>
>*Emil asleep peels a lime*.
>
>*Sit on a potato pan, Otis*.
>
>*Rats live on no evil star*.
>
>*Ma is as selfless as I am*.
>
>*Now, Ned, I am a maiden won*.
>
>*Was it a car or a cat I saw*?
>
>*Some men interpret nine memos*.
>
>*Sums are not set as a test on Erasmus*.
>
>*Mad Zeus, no live devil, lived evil on Suez Dam*.

As a palindrome expands, its sense tends to evaporate.
Despite this law of palindromology, brilliant efforts of considerable
density have been produced.  Two of the most admirable
are: *Straw?  No!  Too stupid a fad.  I put soot on warts* and *Doc,
note I dissent.  A fast never prevents a fatness.  I diet on cod*.

But many believe that for a palindrome that makes a lucid
and elegant statement, it is impossible to beat the story of the
Panama Canal, as written by Leigh Mercer: *A man!  A plan!  A
canal!  Panama!*

## A Reverse English Quiz

1\. How many of these commonplace palindromic words
can you recognize from their definitions?  The number of letters
in each word is indicated in parentheses: midday (4); exploit
(4); oaf (4); even; flat (5); allude to (5); northern boat (5); belief
or dogma (5); address to a woman (5).

2\. The following are definitions of phrases consisting of
two semordnilapic words, followed by the number of letters in
each word: [Example: canine deity (3) = dog god] drink a
stopper (4); dull poet (4); therefore a monster (4); rodents' sun
(4); prevaricating engineer (4); feeling that the end is near (4);
repulse victim of dread disease (5); prevents stains (5); dried
grain growths (5); paid back baby's pants (6); compensate an
artist (6); poet's bathroom bowl (6); bring in the hated (7);
skunk makes another sweater (7); emphasized last meal course
(8).

1\. noon; deed; boob; level; refer; kayak; tenet; madam.

2\. gulp plug; drab bard; ergo ogre; rats' star; rail liar;
doom mood; repel leper; stops spots; straw warts; repaid
diaper; reward drawer; T. Eliot toilet; deliver reviled; stinker
reknits; stressed desserts.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Library prefers 'indented' children.&rdquo;  [Caption on library
bookmarks promoting &ldquo;Ident-a-Kid&rdquo; program.  From *The
Columbus Dispatch*, 29 August 1984.  Submitted by Dorothy
Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*You All Spoken Here*](https://www.amazon.com/Spoken-Here-Brown-Thrasher-Books/dp/0820320293)
Roy Wilder, Jr., (Viking, 1984), xvii + 215 pp.

It has been said that the clich&eacute;s and idioms of a language
are born in dialect areas, then, if they are felt to be apt, spread
to other parts of the language community till they become
accepted into the language generally or, in a lesser way,
regionally.  That is scarcely a profound observation, for every
expression must have its origins somewhere, its originator must
be a speaker of the language, and every speaker of every
language speaks a dialect of some sort.  In America, because of
the universality of radio, television, and national periodicals
and—to some extent at least—of the *V&ouml;lkerwanderung* of the
years since the early 1940s, the relatively firm isoglosses, or
boundaries between conterminous dialect areas have been
breached.  One result has been the leveling of differences
between and among certain dialects; another, the complete
obliteration of geographical distinctions of certain dialects.
From another point of view, we can observe the democratization
of language, in the sense that people everywhere are far
more aware of the differences in American dialects and,
perhaps, are more tolerant of them, accepting the regional
rhetoric of a John F. Kennedy, the polemical oratory of a
midwestern Everett Dirksen, and the dulcet Texan tones of a
Dan Rather with decreasing prejudice.  It is not impossible that
Mr. Rather's popularity stems to some degree from his speaking
in a dialect similar to that affected by popular singers, almost
all of whom imitate, with varying success, the folksy country
accents of the United States.  (Nothing seems more ludicrous to
me than listening to a radio or television interview with a
popular singer or group with obvious Welsh or Liverpudlian
accents only to hear the performance of their top hit record in
which they try to sound as if they have just got off a plane
from Dallas—or were they just watching the soap opera,
*Dallas*?)

&ldquo;Cornpone Country,&rdquo; characterized on the dust cover of
this book as &ldquo;southern parts of the United States&rdquo; but not more
precisely focused by its author on North Carolina—probably
about a howdy and a half ['About a tater chunk—as far as you
can throw a potato'] from his front door in Gourd Hollow
(probably pronounced HOLLER)—yields what I can characterize
only with the clich&eacute; &ldquo;picturesque.&rdquo;  The metaphors abound
and, because they are unfamiliar (at least to me), they amuse
and entertain and confirm for the umpteenth time that the
language and its speakers are thriving *somewhere*, albeit not in
Washington or on Madison Avenue:

>If brains were dynamite he wouldn't have enough to
blow his nose: ... if a bird had his brains he'd fly
backwards.
>
>He'd steal flies from a blind spider.
>
>He's so ugly he has to slap himself to sleep: He'd gag
a maggot.
>
>He's so ugly no fly'd ever land on him.
>
>Looks like he's been chewin' tobacco and spittin' in the
wind.
>
>When he was a baby he was so ugly they fed him
with a slingshot.
>
>She's so fat that if she had to haul ass she'd have to
make two trips.

These are candidates for the *Dictionary of Insults* and for
documentation in *Maledicta*.  Similes are rife:

>[As pretty as] ... a speckled puppy under a red wagon.
>
>[As confused as] ... a rubber-nosed woodpecker in the
Petrified Forest.
>
>[As tearful as] ... a child that's lost his chewing gum
on a henhouse floor.

The foregoing illustrate style rather than lexical regionalisms.
But the latter occur in profusion, too:

>pirootin': Messing around; from &ldquo;pirouetting.&rdquo;
>
>tickler: A flat pocket flask.
>
>favorance: Resemblance.
>
>gumshot: Slingshot.
>
>throddy: Well rounded; plump; chuffy.
>
>in the room of: In place of.

... and many more.

Although Wilder has included some words and expressions
that, doubtlessly, occur in the speech of the area he describes, I
have my reservations about accepting them as exclusively
indigenous or, indeed, as having originated there.  Such terms as
*tacky* 'not couth,' *farthingale* 'hooped petticoat,' *smidgen, on
tick, in a pig's eye, hog wild, traipse, jitney, gallimaufry,
tailormades*, and *What boots it*?, for which a citation from
Milton's *Lycidas* is provided, can scarcely be said to occur
exclusively in the dialect(s) he describes.  Also, it is a shame that
Wilder credits Robert Burchfield and not, more properly, Allen
Walker Read with the etymology of *O.K.*  [p. 173].

Most books of this kind are quite thin and are generally
padded out by (large) illustrations.  *You All Spoken Here*, a hefty
215 pages (plus a foreword by the redoubtable Willard R.
Espy), is packed with entries and information.  My only
criticism is that its broad, topical organization affords little
opportunity for reference, as the material is not readily retrievable
and, alas, there is no index.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Concealed Iranians
*William Cole, New York City*

Few scholars have recognized the importance and uniqueness
of the contributions of the Persian language to
English.  Research in this area is difficult, because most of these
contributions have been particularly indirect—Iranian words
have traveled through as many as five or six different tongues
before finally arriving in English.  A related problem is that the
roots of many words of Middle Eastern origin have long since
fallen into obscurity, and whether a given word was first used
by the Arabs, Turks, Hindus, Jews, or Persians is often
impossible to determine.  But many interesting words *can* be
traced, and the study of this bastardized Indo-European language
is invariably fruitful and fascinating.  (It is true that,
practically by definition, all Indo-European tongues have been
bastardized to some degree.  But vast cultural interchange with
other groups in the area has affected Persian incomparably
more than, for example, the Arab invaders affected Castilian.)

From the first, Persian words have traveled far to reach
English—*paradise*, probably the first Iranian word to make the
journey to the West, passed from Greek into Latin long before
English was ever spoken.  *Tiger* is also such a word, coming
from Persian *tier* 'arrow.'

During the late Middle Ages, French was the intermediary.
The chess vocabulary arrived during that time.  *Chess* and
*check* both come from the Persian *shah*, 'king.'  This relationship
is more easily perceptible in the German word for chess,
*Schach.  Checkmate* comes from *shah mat* 'the king is dead.'

From c.1650 to c.1850 many Persian words entered the
English vocabulary.  Some came directly, but most did not, this
time being filtered through Turkish and Hindi.  Included in this
group are such words as *shawl, seersucker* and *khaki*—all of
which indicate Iran's longstanding importance as a textile and
fashion center.  Also belonging to this group is *cummerbund*,
first coined by the Hindus but coming from Persian *kamar*
'waist' + *band* 'band.'  Very few western words entered Persian
during this period, the notable exception being the French
*merci*—no Persian word for &ldquo;thank you&rdquo; had existed prior to
the late seventeenth century.  I wonder what a (socio)linguist
would make of that.

*Pol&oacute;*, the Iranian word for 'rice,' took perhaps the longest
and most difficult route.  Picked up by Arabs in the ninth
century, it somehow spread to Arab-controlled Spain by the
early 11th century.  By the early 15th century it had become
the Castilian *paella*, now referring to a rice-based dish usually
made with seafood.  On to France where, in the mid 16th
century, it became *pilaf*.  By now, both *pilaf* and *paella* are
standard English.

*Peach*, coming from the Latin *m&amacr;lus persica* 'Persian
apple,' cannot, of course, be described as originating in Persia,
but is still an interesting toponym.

Other words of cultural significance include *drum, tambourine*,
and *guitar*, all of which seem to have their earliest
roots in Farsee.

The more recent alleged contributions are less plausible.
*Ha&auml;gen-Dazs*, for example, means nothing in any language
except Persian, where *hokh-an-dause* means 'garbage can.'  That
particular brand of ice cream would probably sell even worse
in Iran than Perdue chickens would in France.

Equally interesting is the insight Persian gives into a
certain surname.  Philologists have woodenly assumed that
*Urdang* originally comes from Middle High Germany, presumably
meaning &ldquo;primordial wisdom,&rdquo; &ldquo;original knowledge,&rdquo; or
the like.  Yet I will now assert that perhaps it comes from
Farsee: *urdang-ee* means 'kick in the ass.' (Mr. Urdang should
consider himself far more fortunate than the NCAA soccer
coach of the year, Diether Ficken: German *ficken* 'to fuck'; and
certainly no worse off than former CBS anchorman Walter
Cronkite: German *Krankheit*, 'sickness, disease.')

[Which may be why I ran.—*Ed*.]

## The Viking Linguistic Legacy
*S. B. Godinez, New York, New York*

The language of the Vikings has long been underrated as an
influence on the English language.  Hartvig Dahl's *Word
Frequencies of Spoken American English* counts five words of
Old Norse (ON) origin among the hundred most common
words uttered by Americans: possibly *like; get, want, they*, and
*them*.  Latin-Old French, understandably touted as a far richer
source, counts but six words in the same range: *just, because,
really*, possibly *mean; very*, and *sort*.  Latin-Old French ultimately
has the numbers, but ON has the depth.  Rarely does a
language borrow pronouns, since they're part of the bedrock of
a language; yet the ON borrowings *they, them*, and *their*
suggest the powerful influence of the Scandinavians on Old
English-speaking (OE) people.  They also help when you want
to impress your friends by formulating sentences almost totally
borrowed from Scandinavian sources such as, &ldquo;They got
snagged,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Like die, scrub,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Their sister reeks
whoredom!&rdquo;

This essay discusses a few semantic categories of ON
words that exist in Modern English (E).  Each category includes
the dialect words often unmentioned in similar treatments by
history-of-English type books.  All words have an ON etymon
unless otherwise indicated as Scandinavian (Scand).  This means
the word seems to have an etymon or cognate in one of the five
Scand languages (Icelandic, Norwegian, Danish, Swedish, or
Faroese), but no attested form has yet been found in ON.
Words are glossed when I feel the precise meaning is especially
interesting.

A for animals is a good place to start.  The Vikings were
not prigs, and things porcine must have been important to
them: *galt, gilt* 'young sow,' *grice, griskin*, and possibly *hog*.
Sheep terms are *gimmer, hirsel*, and *blissom* 'concerning ewe;
in heat', a blossoming bliss of sorts.  Cattle terms: *bull, quey*
'heifer,' akin to E *cow*, and *nowt* with variant *nolt* 'cattle,' akin
to E *neat* 'ox'.  Two deer terms are possibly *elk*; and *rein(deer)*;
dogs: *cur, Dane*, and *sleuth*, originally 'animal track' and later
'bloodhound'; horses: *filly* and perhaps *jade* 'worn-out horse'
and *yaud* 'whore; mare', the latter two words maybe ultimately
from Finnish.  Animals that annoy: insects as *clegg* 'horsefly,'
Scand *lop* 'flea'; *mawk* 'maggot,' and *maggot* itself; rodents as
*vole(mouse)* and Scand *lemming*.  Some miscellaneous animals:
Scand *bat; hagworm*, possibly *kid*, possibly *scut* 'hare'; *walrus*,
and *pad(dock)* 'toad' from which *padlock* may have been
formed due to a supposed similarity to the shape of the toad.
Odd terms number *brisket* 'animal breast,' *kitling* 'young of an
animal; kitten', *scrag* 'lean person or animal,' and *tyke*, originally
'dog'—ON *tik* 'bitch.'

Birds figure heavily in ON borrowings.  Geese alone
number several terms: *brant, ember(goose), gosling, goosander,
gull* (not the sea bird, which is from Welsh), and *solan*.  Only a
few bird terms are commonly known: *auk, (corn) crake, dove*.
The rest are generally known only by specialists: *cadder* and
related *kae; fulmar* and related *maw*, akin to E *mew; gare-fowl*
and possibly related *gyrfalcon; gowk* which superseded OE
*g&eacute;ac* 'cuckoo'>obsolete (obs) E *yeke*; the related *loom* and
*loon*, the related *scarf* and *scart; scua, steg*, and *tern*.  A few
miscellaneous terms: *down* 'feathering,' *egg* 'ovum' (although
*egg* 'to incite' is indeed another Norse borrowing), *laughter*
'number of eggs laid by a fowl,' and *wing*, cherished by Paul
McCartney.

Just as many of the birds above are sea-related, the
Norsemen, and presumably Norsewomen, were also interested
in what lived below the surface: *bloat(er)*, Scand *brisling;
flounder, hake*, the whales *narwhale* (formed on ON *n&aacute;r*
'corpse' with reference to the mammal's skin) and *rorqual;
saithe*, Scand *scrabe; scrae, sile, skate*, possibly *skelly; torsk* and
related *tusk* and *cusk; turbot*.  Some miscellaneous terms: *gill,
rip* 'wicker basket for fish,' *roe* 'spawn of fish.'

The popular image of the Vikings is far from that of flower
children, yet borrowed flora terms abound.  Plants include
*bur(r)*, later 'obstacle in the throat' and possibly even later
'uvular pronunciation of /r/'; *burdock*, formed on *bur(r)*; *carl
hemp*, Scand *golland* and variant *gowan*, possibly akin to E
*gold; hulver, ling, seal* 'willow,' and *seave* 'the rush.'  The
*dahlia* is eponymous for the Swedish botanist A. Dahl.  Vegetables
count *cole, collard, kale*, all 'cabbage' and preserved in
*kailyard* 'cabbage garden,' symbolic of Scotland's literature
since 1895 as in &ldquo;the kailyard school&rdquo;; *rutabaga* 'turnip,'
literally, 'root-bag'; and *skirret* 'parsnip,' literally, 'sheer-white.'
Various grasses are Scand *fog* (and later perhaps *foggy* 'misty'
and by backformation *fog* 'mist'), *marram*, literally, 'mere
[&ldquo;sea&rdquo;] haulm'; Scand *s(a) ennegrass, tang*, and *varech*, akin to
E *wreck*; star 'grass' (the Norse heavenly body is preserved in
*stern, starn*), and *tangle*.  Shrubs: *busk* and adjectival *bosky;
rest-harrow, rone*, and Scand *whin*.  Trees: possibly *fir*; and
Scand *rowan*.  Grains: *big(g)* 'type of barley,' akin to OE *b&eacute;ow*
'grain'; and *skeg*, akin to E *shaw* 'thicket; surname,' E *shag*
'rough hair,' and *skaw*, itself from ON meaning 'promontory.'
Fruit: only the Scand *bilberry*.  Various items concerning parts
of a tree, plant, or hedge are *awn, bark, blea, bole, root, sway*,
possibly Scand *log*; and *trouse*.  Scand *trash* originally meant
'broken twigs.'

Most of the terms inherited from Old Norse referring to
human beings are disparaging.  The etymological fallacy is
belied by *cheapskate*, literally 'cheap shit.'  The second element
is preserved in *blatherskate, blatherskite* 'talkative person' and
unbounded in *skate* 'contemptible person' and *skite* 'to
excrete.'  (One cannot overlook the important frequentatives
*skitter* and probable variant *squitter* 'to void thin excrement.')
For a quick put-down try: *duffer* 'incompetent person,' akin to
E *deaf; fry* 'unimportant person,' which I've never heard
unchaperoned by E *small*, maybe redundant to purists since
the etymon for *fry* meant *seed; gowk* 'fool' (also 'bird': see
above); *hobo*, perhaps as Professor E. Fichtner has suggested,
from ON *haugb&uacute;i* 'ghost, &ldquo;undead&rdquo; man,' formed on *haugr* 'a
how, a hill' + *bua* 'to dwell'; *kid*, originally 'young of goat';
*nithing* 'a wretch' and variants *nidder(l)ing* 'a coward; cowardly';
*oaf*, surprisingly akin to and originally meaning E '*elf;
outlaw; runagate* 'apostate, deserter' with second element
formed on *gate* 'way; street; manner of going' with variant *gait*
'manner of walking'; possibly *scout* and variant *scut* 'contemptible
person'; possibly *scrub* 'mean little fellow; low stunted
tree,' although I've heard this word used only to describe
inferior athletes; Scand *slouk* and possible variant *slouch*
'ungainly fellow,' the latter also 'stooping posture'; *snob*,
originally 'shoemaker('s apprentice); townsman'; *steg* 'stupid
person' (also 'bird': see above); *swain*, also preserved in
*boatswain* and *coxswain*; and *thrall*.  The Norsemen were
apparently as sexist as we are: all of the following, *flag, giglet,
gimmer, skit*, and *slattern* generally mean 'low, contemptible
woman'; only *may* 'maiden' has survived with specific reference
to women without pejoration.  Other words without
necessary pejoration: *fellow*, literally 'fee-layer'; *guest*, replacing
OE *g(i)est*; and *ombudsman*.  A surprising number of words
have endured indicating familial relationship: *bairn* 'child,'
*fore-elders, forefather, friend* 'kinsman', *half-brother/sister, sister*
itself, replacing cognates of OE *sweostor*; and *husband* with
variant *hubby*, the latter preferred in huge headlines of
sensationalistic newspapers.  The *in-law* hyphemes are partially
Norse since *law* is directly from ON superseding OE *&aelig;* 'law.'  A
few historical terms: *hold* 'high-ranking officer in the Danelaw,'
*housecarl* 'bodyguard of a king or noble,' *jarl* 'chieftain of
ancient Scandinavia.'  Personal names, almost all compounds,
include *Eric*, literally 'honor-great'; *Harold* 'army-wielder';
*Ingrid* 'Ingvi (&ldquo;a Germanic god&rdquo;)-ride'; *Leif*, akin to E *lief* and
E *love; Ralph* 'counsel-wolf'; *Ronald* 'decreeing powers-ruler';
partially *Sigmund* 'victory-hand'; and presumably *Thurston*
'Thor-stone.' A few other proper names: *Norman*, literally
'north-man'; *Varangian* &ldquo;Scandinavian rover over Russia'; and—
what else?—probably *Viking*.

And what did the Vikings like to do?  Well, some scholars
claim the Norse got a raw deal and were ultimately scholarly
farmers.  But their linguistic legacy in English sometimes seems
otherwise: they apparently liked to *bang, bash, baste* (and *lam*
and *lambaste*, of course), *berry* 'to hit,' *ding* with
(re)duplicative *ding-dong, dint* (verb only), *hit, nevel* 'to
punch,' *scrap, scuff, slam, slat* 'to strike; to cast,' sometimes
*slaughter*, but sometimes only *tip*.  Scandinavian words include
*bump, cuff* (also in *fisticuffs)*, *rap, slug*, and *whither* 'to strike
violently.'

Can the savage words above be counterbalanced by
perhaps the most beautiful relic of Old Norse: *hug*?


#### EPISTOLA {John Mella}

*The Hint of Print in Your Breath is a Mint of Divinest
Flavor: A Note on Printed Spoonerisms*

Norman Ward, in his witty article on spoonerisms [XI, 1]
wonders &ldquo;what the English called spoonerisms before Rev. W.
A. was born in 1844,&rdquo; and notes that &ldquo;the word has no
synonym.&rdquo;  While he is, of course, technically correct, words
existed for the concept as long ago as Aristotle, and theoreticians
of the English Renaissance discussed them exhaustively.
While Mr. Ward is right on target when he says that &ldquo;the best
spoonerisms are heard, not seen,&rdquo; there are several amusing
ones immortalized (if that's the right word) in print which
deserve to be served up as an addendum, or tail, to his
entertaining oral list, and it is in this spirit that the following
note is appended.

*Agnomination*, or *paronomasia*, a form of pun, is, in
appropriately wooden fashion, discussed by Aristotle in his
*Rhetoric* (3.11): &ldquo;The effect is produced even by jokes depending
upon changes of the letters in a word...&rdquo;; and he gives
examples from Isocrates and others.  Cicero's treatment of what
rhetoricians of the time called &ldquo;figures of ambiguity&rdquo; in *De
oratore* was adapted by Castiglione in *Il libro del cortegiano*
(1528) and thence by Wilson in *The Arte of Rhetorique* (1553),
who cites an amusing instance of paronomasia by William
Somer, Henry VIII's fool:

>[He] seeing much adoe for accomptes making, and that
the Kinges Majestie... wanted money, such as was due
unto him: and please your grace (quoth he) you have
so many Frauditors, so many Conveighers, and so many
Deceivers to get up your money, that they get all to
themselves...  He should have saide Auditours,
Surveighours, and Receivers.

Related figures, or &ldquo;topics of invention,&rdquo; such as *antanaclasis*
(two or more meanings attached to the same word), *metathesis*
(the transposition of letters in a word), *asteismus* (a figure of
reply; a facetious or mocking answer), and figures of deliberate
obscurity (*enigma, noema, schematismus*) are cited by such
16th-century rhetoricians as Peacham (*The Garden of Eloquence*,
1577), Puttenham (*The Arte of English Poesie*, 1589),
and Hoskyns (*Direccions for Speech and Style*, ca. 1599).

&ldquo;Paronomasia,&rdquo; says a more recent scholiast, &ldquo;is a kind of
verbal plague, a contagious sickness in the world of words.&rdquo;
Elsewhere, he speaks of &ldquo;Life everlasting—based on a misprint
!&rdquo;, and in the novel, *Bend Sinister*, from which the former
squib is lifted, characters form anagrams of each other.
Nabokov, of course, is famous for witty inversions and for
collecting, among his rainbow-bag of butterfly-specimens, the
&ldquo;dove-droppings&rdquo; of words.  In the afore-mentioned work we
are treated to the perfectly mounted catch of a university
president, the brilliantly named Dr. Azureus, who annotates,
with the inanities unspun from the tape-recorder secreted in his
stuffing, the grief which forms the book's heart:

>Gentlemen!  When a man has lost a beloved wife, when
an animal has lost his feet in the aging ocean...he
regrets... So let us not by our own fault place ourselves
in the position of the bereaved lover, of the
admiral whose fleet is lost in the raging waves...
(Chapter Four)

Verbal clutter, morphemic mazes, lexical labyrinths abound in
the texture of this work, densely packed mirror-ripples of
hilarity punctuated, as it were, with explosions of unreasoning
terror: the immortal Dr. Hammecke, a synthesis, so to speak, of
Heidegger and half-baked Hegel, his adam's apple constricted
at the proleptic intimation of his terminal toboggan-ride down
sinuous slopes onto &ldquo;the virgin snows of anonymous death,&rdquo;
&ldquo;in a thick stream of apprehension and halitosis&rdquo; spoonerizing
&ldquo;silence&rdquo; and &ldquo;science&rdquo; (Chapter Seventeen).

Perhaps more affecting, in a kind of prurient-pathetic way,
is the wilting and yet humidly tumescent Humbert Humbert
(through whose tortured glottis the word *nymphet* has decisively
been lifted into the linguistic mainstream from the minor
Jacobean rivulets of Drayton and Drummond), whose speech is
effectively spoonerized by the &ldquo;tender, mysterious, impure,
indifferent twilight eyes&rdquo; of &ldquo;Haze, Dolores&rdquo; (to firmly place
the child where she belongs—in a school attendance list):

>&ldquo;What's the katter with misses?&rdquo;  I muttered (wordcontrol
gone) into her hair.
>
>&ldquo;If you must know,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;you do it the wrong
way.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Show, wight ray.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;All in good time,&rdquo; responded the spoonerette.
>
>Which is followed by a patch of macaronic prose-poetry to
which I refer the titillated reader (Part One, Chapter 27,
*Lolita*).

Perhaps it takes a philologist to eviscerate, with sufficient
skill, the steaming entrails of words, though it certainly requires
a poet's touch as well.  C.S. Lewis manages to bring both into
play toward the end of his funny and horripilating *That
Hideous Strength* (1946)—correctly subtitled &ldquo;A Modern Fairy-Tale
for Grown-Ups&rdquo;—where the pseudo-scientists of Belbury
are afflicted with a kind of instant aphasia at their terminal
dinner-party.

>The Deputy Director [a courtly somewhat sinister
aristocrat whose normal speech resembles that of a
senile professor emeritus heavily sedated with
Quaaludes] could not understand this, for to him his
own voice seemed to be uttering the speech he had
resolved to make.  But the audience heard him saying,
&ldquo;Tidies and fugleman—I sheel foor that we all—er—most
steeply rebut the defensible, though, I trust, lavatory,
Aspasia which gleams to have selected our redeemed
inspector this deceiving.  It would—ah—be shark, very
shark, from anyone's debenture...&rdquo;

The brilliance and delicacy of this satiric effect, if I may be
allowed to hold Professor Lewis's scalpel up so that its edge
may catch the light, is owing in part to the uncanny way in
which the intonations and rhythms of a characteristically turgid
after-dinner speech are reproduced—as the comatose auditor
hears it, buzzing with bordeaux and boredom, potty with port.
(It will have been noted by astute readers that Mr. Ward's
point is reemphasized in these examples: though they all occur
&ldquo;in print,&rdquo; each of them exists only in the mouth of one or
another character—which brings us neatly, if unobtrusively,
back to the oral nature of the phenomenon.)

Aristotle regarded such figures and fancies as &ldquo;adornments,&rdquo;
but in the 19th century (which saw the birth both of
Spooner and Sir James A.H. Murray's monstrous lexicographical
child) the icing on the cake, all froth and saccharinity to the
humorless rhetorician, becomes in fact the entire bill of fare;
the rhetorical flourish, all we can discern of rhetoric, and the
play on words, the word itself.  Here (to paraphrase A. D.
Godley) is an art which does not conceal itself; and if one is
not always able to do the trick, one can still see how the trick
might be done.  This is also, we should remember, the century
of Lewis Carroll and the rage in England for crossword
puzzles, of Lear and his alphabet soup of nonsense and his
great word-haunted hybrids, of Browningesque ellipses and of
Thackeray's &ldquo;faint fashionable fiddle-faddle and feeble court
slip-slop.&rdquo;  On this languid note we will wish a rowdy yet
reserved &ldquo;Good night&rdquo; —along with W. M. Praed (1802-39)—to

>Miss Fennel's macaw, which at Boodle's  
Was held to have something to say;
>
>Mrs. Splenetic's musical poodles,  
Which bark '*Batti Batti*' all day...
>
>We'll be seeing them in the next century.

*[John Mella, Chicago, Illinois]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the new French dictionary being produced in France with
the aid of some 1,700 computerized French texts dating back
to the 17th century.&rdquo;  [From an article by Colin Campbell in
*The New York Times*, reprinted in *The International Herald
Tribune,* n.d. Submitted by Frank Abate, Old Saybrook,
Connecticut.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The 47-year-old Governor has received nationwide attention
since she was elected Kentucky's first governor who was a
woman last November.&rdquo;  [From an article in *The New York
Times*, 20 May 1984.  Submitted by Doris Whalen, Kentfield,
California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...The office they gave me was filthy.  I had to clean it with
my secretary.&rdquo;  [From an interview with an ousted justice, in
the *Detroit Free Press*, 27 September 1984.  Submitted by Rudy
Simons, Oak Park, Michigan.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;If Oscar Mayer were alive today, he would turn over in his
grave!&rdquo;  [Complaint by a worker about wage cuts by the
present management of the Oscar Mayer sausage factory in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  WTMJ-TV, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 5
p.m. news, Sept. 10, 1984.  Submitted by Reinhold Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin.]

## Paring Pairs No. 16

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-zz); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). &Ccedil; for condom?  
(b). Imitation of weeping Bohemian.  
(c). Here, Pussy!  Boo!  Hiss!  
(d). See the horologist.  
(e). Vain addict from Paoli.  
(f). Sturdy hooligan known for his persistence.  
(g). Elfin loans are sacrilegious.  
(h). Nasty argument in Hyde Park bridle path.  
(i). Strange chap is fifth wheel.  
(j). Legends of pixies beg the question.  
(k). Lech Walesa is the cynosure.  
(l). Explosive sticker.  
(m). Pawnee takes it all back.  
(n). Crafty shoeshine boy.  
(o). Quixotic illumination.  
(p). Has it rung for Esau's brother?  
(q). Henry IV and VIII furious in London street.  
(r). Not wearing even a teddy in the railway station.  
(s). Plan to accelerate disasters.  
(t). Results of sex expos&eacute;.  
(u). Collyrium for my ablutions?  
(v). Where we once owned a pier, there is now a fish!  
(w). He inherits the smog.  
(x). Operating the thumbscrew has her in stitches.  
(y). Confirm how old she is (just to be mean).  
(z). A titter ran up to the squaw.  
(zz). Gymnasts work out side-by-side in saloons.

(1). Age.  
(2). Aver.  
(3). Apparent.  
(4). Bare.  
(5). Bars.  
(6). Boots.  
(7). Call.  
(8). Cat.  
(9). Crash.  
(10). Crewel.  
(11). Cross.  
(12). Cry.  
(13). Dock.  
(14). Felloe.  
(15). Firing.  
(16). French.  
(17). Giver.  
(18). Had.  
(19). Haha.  
(20). Hardy.  
(21). Heir.  
(22). Hood.  
(23). I.  
(24). I.O.U.s.  
(49). Row.  
(50). Sly.  
(51). Star.  
(25). Imp.  
(26). Indian.  
(27). Iron.  
(28). Jacob's.  
(29). Kings.  
(30). Knight.  
(31). Ladder.  
(32). Letter.  
(33). Light.  
(34). Liner.  
(35). Lore.  
(36). Main.  
(37). Man.  
(38). Mimi.  
(39). Mini.  
(40). Odd.  
(41). Paddington.  
(42). Parallel.  
(43). Pin.  
(44). Pole.  
(45). Program.  
(46). Public.  
(47). Relations.  
(48). Rotten.  
(52). Wash.  
(53). Watch.  
(54). Work.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 15

(a). Hack writer keeps his coins in a row.  (34,1) Penny Aligner.  
(b). Money all tied up in this?  (49,18) Trussed Fund.  
(c). Pile on the whip?  (9,30) Cat Nap.  
(d). Crazy about Ringo's playmates?  (4,31) Betel Nut.  
(e). Singer Nags?  (22,32) Horse Opera.  
(f). Helper on Old West carriage.  (44,20) Stage Hand.  
(g). Coinvestment in a low dive.  (23,50) Joint Venture.  
(h). New England mohel.  (53,11) Yankee Clipper.  
(i). Employ Mehitabel's friend in the ranks.  (21,2) Hire Archy.  
(j). Serious times.  (13,12) Dog Daze.  
(k). Golden journey?  (19,48) Guilt Trip.  
(l). Donate kisses.  (27,41) Lip Service.  
(m). Important event for yachtsmen and lions.  (29,39) Mane Sail.  
(n). Where British skiagraphs are kept.  (42,7) Shadow Cabinet.  
(o). Lucia's &ldquo;Mad Scene&rdquo;?  (36,14) Psycho Drama.  
(p). Siege perilous.  (15,10) Electric Chair.  
(q). Tiny chivalrous man is feeble but never on Sunday—or Saturday.  (52,26) Week Knight.  
(r). Cushion litigation.  (35,8) Pillow Case.  
(s). Cobbler-composer.  (43,28) Shoe Man.  
(t). Cockney drink sends you into orbit.  (16,3) Eye Ball  
(u). Where funambulists practice.  (38,51) Rope Walk.  
(v). This can't hold much (40,5) Sand Box.  
(w). Did Miss Piggy transvect this disease?  (45,17) Swine Flew.  
(x). Chinese Cat.  (33,47) Peiping Tom.  
(y). Used car tester.  (46,25) Tire Kicker.  
(z). An Olympian bribe?  (6,24) By Jove. (Please see page 16 for information about prizes.)

The correct answer is (37) Roam.  We neglected to mention
that the name of the European winner of Paring Pairs No. 14
was Anne Cutler of Cambridge, England.  The winner of No.
15 had not been selected at press time.

## Paring Pairs Prizes

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or &pound;18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI*; or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box 199,
Aylesbury, Bucks, HP20 ITQ England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer.  Please use a postcard*.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Our Marvelous Native Tongue: The Life and Times of the English Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780812910384/Marvelous-Native-Tongue-Life-Times-0812910389/plp)
Robert Claiborne, (Times Books, 1983), x + 339pp.

This history of English, from its remote ancestor spoken
by Indo-European tribesmen probably in the valley of the
Danube 8,000 years ago to what is becoming the world
language, is written by a well-known amateur wordsmith in the
honorable line of Partridge.  It has the virtues and vices of the
genre.  It is enthusiastic, readable, and good fun; but in parts it
is undisciplined, tendentious, and inaccurate.  It certainly
needed a sterner editor to cut out more of the endearing
digressions.

Mr. Claiborne is unfortunate in his excursions into English
history.  To state as a fact that King Arthur established Camelot
near Colchester is to beg a huge question.  To suppose that King
Canute tried to stop the tide misunderstands the late and
unreliable legend.  To call Shakespeare &ldquo;the butcher's son from
Stratford&rdquo; is, *pace* John Aubrey, at best inadequate.

He is not much happier in his adventures in literary
criticism.  Beatrice may well be described as one of the
cleverest and therefore most delightful heroines who ever trod
stage, which is a value judgment; but the play in which she
appears cannot be described as *Measure for Measure* without
some risk of dramatic inexactitude.  His poor opinion of Milton
is his own problem.  But to declare that by the time of
Alexander Pope poetry had become and remains a distinctly
minor branch of English letters is a judgment so idiosyncratic
as to verge on the agreeably dotty.

Digressions apart, the main theme of the book follows the
growth of English through a series of leaps and bounds such as
the transition from West Germanic to Old English, the infusion
of French at the Norman Conquest, the first flowering with
Chaucer and Caxton, the leap across the Atlantic, and the
proliferation today into dozens of national dialects.  This is
thoroughly and interestingly done, though it sometimes gets
stuck in a rut of long lists of related words.  That's all about
animal words; now let's have a catalogue of seafaring words.

There is also the preference of the amateur for an
interesting explanation rather than a plausible or probable one.
We all do it, even the great and good Eric Partridge.  For
example, if you insist on digging for the etymology of that
notorious place-name *London*, I doubt whether you are wise to
go for *Lon-dunum* (wild-beast town).  I prefer a personal name
such as *Londinos* (the bold one) or even *Llyn-Din* (the hill by
the pool) to those wild beasts.  But it is not a question that
admits a final answer, and it is misleading to pretend that it
does.

Or, for another example, to take another famous crux,
consider the etymology of *O.K.*  I can see that it is more
romantic to suppose that it is a word from the West African
language, Wolof, brought into the southern states of America
by slaves.  But to state unequivocally: &ldquo;Its (*O.K.'s*) source was
unquestionably one of various West African expressions such as
*o-ke* or *waw-ke*&rdquo; is to go too far.  The serious historian and
scholar of language should indicate that there is no form of
acceptable documentation to support the wild conjecture.  All
probability points to the jocular alteration &ldquo;orl korrect&rdquo; as the
origin.  It is the difference between enthusiasm and scholarship.

The man is an enthusiast, dammit.  And we need such
people.  I think he is sounder (not surprisingly) on American
than Australian, and certainly British regional accents.  He is
often entertaining and a prolific source of useful, useless, and
doubtful information.  He is good on the purpose of language
and the present decline of written English.  He is a journalist,
not an academic; for which relief, much thanks (*Measure for
Measure?*).  His book is readable in parts, entertaining in many
parts, crammed with all sorts of linguistic matter and antimatter,
on the side of the angels in most things, dotty in parts,
plain wrong in parts.

*Philip Howard*


#### EPISTOLA {N.H. Behr}

The letter from Mr. George S. Welsh of North Carolina
[XI, No. 1] regarding the origin of *hooch* and its meanings
reminded me of a somewhat similar word that is found in *The
Voyage of the &ldquo;Discovery,&rdquo;* by Captain Robert Falcon Scott,
the British Antarctic explorer (Thomas Nelson &amp; Sons, 2 vols.,
London, 1905).  Describing here his first expedition to the South
Polar Regions he uses the term *hoosh* for 'the thick hot soup
that constituted the sledging meal.'  It was made by boiling up
a cauldron of water and adding the pemmican, biscuit,
oatmeal, etc., which each man was carrying on the overland
sledging journeys.  The daily allowance was 35-1/2 ounces!

Incidentally, Wentworth and Flexner give a further meaning
for *hooch*: &ldquo;The hoochy-cootch dance&rdquo;(?).  Both the *Shorter
Oxford* and *Wyld* give its origin as Alaskan.  Were the
Hoochimoo people from Alaska?  They date it from 1903.  The
*SOED* also gives *hoosh* as 'a thick soup,' date 1905, but labels it
&ldquo;slang&rdquo;—perhaps from Capt. Scott.

*[N.H. Behr, Ramat Gan, Israel]*


#### EPISTOLA {Harold Mann}

It certainly takes bottle to take issue with the redoubtable
and respected Philip Howard [XI, 1] (*pace* Dr. Aman), but
might not the gallant gunner be straying into a minefield?  I
have a strong suspicion that in these days of upward mobility
and patronage by journalists, rhyming slang has become subject
to a certain amount of wilfull coinage.  Support for this view
has just turned up unexpectedly in Laurie Lee's &ldquo;As I walked
out one Midsummer Morning,&rdquo; where he writes &ldquo;Rhyming
Slang...had not at that time been self-consciously elevated
into a saloon-bar affectation.&rdquo;

As to the earlier use of *bottle* in the sense of 'use' or
'worth,' what about *not much cop* 'bottle of pop'?  In this sense
*bottle and glass* (='arse') does not apply, and if the word
developed into meaning 'courage' or 'nerve' it still doesn't
apply.  On Mr. Howard's terms, if one can *lose one's bottle*,
there must have been an earlier expression—to *lose one's arse*.
Well, was there?

*Aristotle* is interesting as I've seen *harris* in print, meaning
'bum' (arse), but was puzzled by it.  However I remain
unconvinced about some of these.  In my experience rhyming
slang uses homelier elements, *butcher's hook, four by two,
mince-pies*, and so on.  This is not to suggest that Cockneys are
ignorant, but that *Aristotle, Richard the Third*, and *Berkely
Hunt* (formerly *grumble and grunt*) would not be the first
things to come to mind.

In fact, rhyming slang may well be not only a minefield, so
to speak, but a minefield sown in shifting sands.

*[Harold Mann, Faversham, Kent]*


### OBITER DICTA: *The (Proper?) Pronunciation of Proper Names*
*Laurence Urdang*

A recent work on loanwords in English [*Loanwords Index*,
Laurence Urdang and Frank R. Abate, Gale, 1983] lists
more than 14,000 words and phrases &ldquo;That Are Not Fully
Assimilated into English and Retain a Measure of Their
Foreign Orthography, Pronunciation, or Flavor.&rdquo;  This book is
not an original selection but a compilation of the entries in 18
of the most widely available dictionaries listing such borrowings,
as well as a special list of 640 Japanese words that
appeared first in VERBATIM [IX,1].  Not included in the sources
(hence, excluded from the *Index*) are thousands of proper
names and adjectives.  Yet they are familiar to speakers of
English of various vintages and interests: some are names of
people in music, science, politics, geography, literature, art, and
just about any field you can think of.

Aside from those interested in music, art, and literature,
insular America (before 1941) paid little attention to what was
going on abroad.  To be sure, we knew the &ldquo;native&rdquo; pronunciation
of certain places that figured prominently in history—we
had a choice between *Paris* and (the usually jocular) &ldquo;Paree&rdquo;;
we knew that *Cairo*, Egypt, was pronounced differently from
*Cairo* (KAYROE), Illinois; we referred to Albert *Einstein*, not
&ldquo;Eensteen&rdquo;; and even the untaught could learn enough about
the rules of a foreign tongue to come close to some approximation
of the native pronunciation.

Curiously, some foreign cities had long ago acquired an
established English pronunciation while others had not: we
know about &ldquo;Paree,&rdquo; but the pronunciation in English is PARIS;
but we say LEE-AWN for *Lyons*: one doesn't hear &ldquo;lions&rdquo;; and
we say NEES for *Nice*, not &ldquo;nice.&rdquo;  Some place names have been
changed in spelling, by English speakers or others: *Rome* for
*Roma, Florence* for *Firenze, Venice* for *Venezia, Munich* for
*M&uuml;nchen, Leghorn* for *Livorno*, etc., though some of these are
corruptions.

Most recently, the 19th-century system for transcribing
Chinese into Roman letters was revised in order to better
reflect the pronunciation in the original language.  Thus, we
now have *Beijing* instead of *Peking*.

Notwithstanding the fact that English speakers ought to
know better—look at the mismatches between spelling and
pronunciation in English that can drive any sober person to
drink—they persist in believing their eyes instead of their ears.
*Kowalski* is pronounced with a *w* because it is spelt with a *w*,
despite the fact that in Polish the *w* is pronounced as a *v*.
People have no difficulty pronouncing my surname the way the
family does—ERR dang—until they are told how it is spelt,
whereupon they say &ldquo;YOUR dang.&rdquo;  People in England, for some
unexplained reason, have less difficulty than Americans.  The
French, Italians, Spanish and Germans pronounce it their own
ways, but they are entirely consistent and, once they have
heard it pronounced, can spell it.

If an accepted English name already exists for a place,
there is no point in changing the name back to the native form.
*Poland* should remain that and not become *Polska; Germany*
should not be changed to *Deutschland*, or *Spain* to *Espa&ntilde;a*.  On
the other hand, we have come to learn and live with the names
of new African nations (and place names).  English spelling
pronunciations persist for *Mexico* and other places, but we
seem to be capable of good approximations for *Chile, Argentina*,
and other country names; though we still say KYOOBA for
*Cuba* instead of KOOBA, and there are thousands of other
examples.

World War II brought its share of foreign place names,
rarely pronounced in English before 1941 and, in many cases,
never even heard of by Americans: *Irrawaddy, Ploesti, Katowice,
Peenem&uuml;nde*, etc.  The spelling of some foreign languages
has diacritics, which Americans usually ignore: *G&ouml;teborg* and
*Peenem&uuml;nde* are pronounced as if the accents did not exist, but
*Bogot&aacute;* (Colombia), which has a stress accent, is given (at least)
an approximation.  *Bogota* (New Jersey) is pronounced as one
might expect in English—B&#92;?&#92;G&Omacr;&#92;?&#92;t&#92;?&#92;.

In the past few years, Poland has come prominently into
the news.  At first, newscasters were heard to say WALESSA for
*Wal&eogon;*, and his first name, *Lech*, suffered outrageous fortune
and made him sound like a profligate.  *Solidarno&sacute;&cacute;*, readily
translatable into *Solidarity*, fared better.  Soon, however, newscasters
picked up an amazingly close approximation of the
Polish pronunciation of Wa&#92;?&#92;&eogon;sa's name—VAWENSA—and even
caught the ichlaut sound in *Lech*.

All the more curious, then, is the recent (29 July 1984)
*New York Times Magazine* article on *&#92;?&#92;&oacute;d&zacute;*, which suggests that
the English pronunciation is similar to that of *loge* (L&Omacr;ZH): a
closer pronunciation would be WOODZH, which no one would
have much difficulty with.  Besides, whence the *loge* pronunciation?
A spelling pronunciation would surely be L&Omacr;DZ.

Americans may, unless they are particularly careful (or
affected), say BOCK for *Bach*, S&Amacr;NTSANZ for *Saint-Sa&euml;ns*, and
even PICASO for *Picasso*; certainly, we hear the *g* pronounced
in *Modigliani*; and I know an American who tells people his
name, *Castagno*, is pronounced KASTAGN&Omacr;.  Americans are
capable of saying K&Auml;ST&Auml;NY&Omacr;, but the family apparently cares
more that the name be spelt correctly than pronounced
correctly.  More and more often one encounters people at the
other end of the phone who say, &ldquo;This is Ellie&rdquo; (or George, or
whatever) and, when asked &ldquo;Ellie what?&rdquo; reply &ldquo;Oh, I have an
unpronounceable last name.&rdquo;  What utter rubbish!  How can
anyone have an &ldquo;unpronounceable&rdquo; name?  If they finally yield
it up, it usually turns out to be something like *Tagliatello*, or
*Warszinski*—that wasn't so hard, now, was it?

Spelling pronunciations seem to have gained ground over
traditional pronunciations in Connecticut with GREENWITCH
and NORWITCH; as for stress, *New Ha'*ven was once about
halfway between these extremes, but one increasingly hears
*New'* Haven.

Alas, the *Cholmondleys* have had to change the spelling of
their name to *Chumley*, the *Featherstonehaughs* to *Fanshaw*,
the *Cockburns* to *Coburn*; those *Taliaferros* who did not change
to *Tolliver* now tell people their name is pronounced TALYA-FERO.
If it's any consolation, many British persist in pronouncing
the second *c* in Connecticut.  Nobody's perfect.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;3 year old teacher needed for pre-school.  Experienced preferred.&rdquo;
[From *The DeLand-Sun News*, 23 August 1984.  Submitted
by Richard E. Langford, DeLand, Florida.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;No one can really know which side of the fence McKinnon is
straddling.&rdquo;  [From *The West Palm Beach Post*, 9 June 1984.
Submitted by J. B. Lawrence, San Bernardino, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Man held in fire at his psychotherapist's home.&rdquo;  [Headline
from *The Los Angeles Times*, 8 January 1982.  Submitted by
Neill D. Hicks, North Hollywood, California.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. D, I, S, P, O, S, I, T, I, O, N, S (10)  
6\. Mongrel left lock (4)  
10\. Article, with the words on top?  What is this? (2,5-8) &amp; 27*ac*  
11\. For smash hit, urge Arlo (7)  
12\. Whipped, slashed, beheaded (6)  
14\. Left, could be sore (if so, not one of the *ac*'s) (5)  
16\. Preceding VERBATIM's youngest child?  (4, 5)  
18\. Are water colors best for these?  (9)  
21\. Kiosk in St. Andrews Place (5)  
22\. French garlic, right to left (6)  
24\. Clipped greeting confused a whole number (7)  
27\. See 10*ac* (9, 6)  
28\. The Spirit of Iceland? (4)  
29\. Merchandise, and places to load it (They don't mind finishing last) (4,6)

**Down**

1\. Always the same: out of coins (10)  
2\. Santa zigzags over continent for a Romanov (9)  
3\. Rage from range war (5)  
4\. How a Moor made amour?  (3,4)  
5\. Gang fights' noises (7)  
7\. Not quite unclear, it's relative (5)  
8\. Left one single (4)  
9\. Clubs about out of undergarments (8)  
13\. Nesters end squabble, show affection (10)  
15\. This kind of driver isn't usually what we hear (8)  
17\. Astronomer's rat grazes erratically (4-5)  
19\. Little Italian musicmaker (7)  
20\. Skied around dead ends, slipped (7)  
23\. Smell a city in Italia (5)  
25\. Pound the first hump (5)  
26\. Measure of Sierra crests (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Intruder.  
9\. Enervate.  
10\. Stoa.  
11\. Philadelphia.  
13\. Sierra.  
14\. Rotating.  
15\. Enliven.  
16\. Aspired.  
20\. Treasure.  
22\. Raking.  
23\. Unassailable.  
25\. Noes.  
26\. Taciturn.  
27\. Every one.

**Down**

1\. Notation.  
2\. Reappraisals.  
4\. Dominate.  
5\. Repairs.  
6\. Cement.  
7\. Mash.  
8\. Deranged.  
12\. Patrick Henry.  
15\. Entrusts.  
17\. Scrabble.  
18\. Einstein.  
19\. Beeline.  
21\. Uranus.  
24\. Arch.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A landlord argued before the Supreme Court Thursday that
he had a vested right to a condom conversion before the Santa
Monica rent control law passed.&rdquo;  [From *the Los Angeles Daily
Journal*, 27 December 1983.  Submitted by Eduardo Rodriguez, Los Angeles, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Weaver said throughout the changes of ownership, the inn has
managed to retain the original architecture, Italian Eight.&rdquo;
[From *The Orlando Sentinel*, 25 January 1984.  Submitted by
Adelaide A. Orton, Winter Park, Florida.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v11n3_Winter_1985)