--- 
title: "VOL XI, No 1 [Summer, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## And Oh, the Smell of Your Spile...
*Norman Ward, University of Saskatchewan*

Are spoonerisms words?  The *OED* is unwontedly laconic
about the spoonerism, defining it as &ldquo;an accidental
transposition of the initial sounds, or other parts, of two or
more words,&rdquo; and nodding courteously to Rev. W.A. Spooner
as the source of the term; but it says little more.  On *word*,
however, the *OED* lets itself go for several columns, sometimes
moving the reader to mutter, &ldquo;Surely that's true of spoonerisms?&rdquo;
But on the whole it is clear that the answer to the
question above must be a regretful no.

Yet spoonerisms in the right context can be memorable,
making a greater impact than the mere words which gave birth
to them; and telling about them often requires some anecdotal
stage-setting.  More than four decades ago, for example, when
one of the prices one paid for attending university was
involuntary servitude in an alleged officers' training corps, I
was a member of a company of laggards which contained few
citizens likely to qualify even as privates, let alone people with
military responsibilities.  We were not entirely stupid; but where
companies A to E held many zealots who later distinguished
themselves in the field, F company consisted largely of people
with other pursuits in mind, mainly academic.  We were, in
fact, the dregs of the libraries and laboratories, men who, on
parade, were daily sustained by the hope that something would
go wrong.

When, therefore, we were told that an eminent general
was going to inspect us on an announced date, we sought to
add interest to the proceedings by an early morning distribution
of (to my recollection) wet potassium iodide in the drill
hall, the chemical an unwitting contribution from the science
faculty.  Moist potassium iodide is (or was then) dull, inert,
purply stuff, but dry it is wonderful.  The slightest friction sets
it off with a crack, so that at the inspection the marching boots
of dozens of students were accompanied by a steady rattle of
mysterious musketry fire.  Companies A to E and their establishments
were gratifyingly baffled, although the inspecting general
did not seem particularly pleased.  Our own sergeant, on civvy
street a shipping clerk in a local store, was not among those
taken in.  &ldquo;I don't know what went on here this afternoon,&rdquo; he
told us as we were lined up for dismissal, &ldquo;but I know you
bastards did it.&rdquo;  For several minutes he was impressively
eloquent for a shipping clerk, and after a pungent harangue he
issued an unforgettable warning.  &ldquo;And as long as I'm your
sergeant,&rdquo; he concluded, &ldquo;I don't want any repetition of it.  Not
in any shay, wape, or form.&rdquo;

Every member of Company F was, I'm sure, thereafter
marked for life.  If the sergeant had not spoonerized his code,
we would all have dismissed it as no more reliable than any
other fragment of wartime propaganda.  But his spoonerism not
only gave his words a unique identity; it elevated them to new
levels of sound and consciousness, fresh creations as endearing
as favorite notes of music.  The sergeant's name, oddly enough,
offers evidence of a related phenomenon in another way: I
associate it with geographical expanses of some dampness, but
I cannot recall whether he was *Sergeant Marsh* or *Swamp* or,
for that matter *Slough*.  If I'd ever heard him referred to as
*Fergeant Sen* or *Bergeant Sog* or, best of all, *Mergeant Sorass*,
I'd know to this day who he was.

The sergeant's spoonerism (the word has no synonym)
revealed another characteristic of the genre: it did consist of
real words, but words without meaning in the context where
they appeared.  Appeared may be the wrong term, for in my
experience the best spoonerisms are heard, not seen.  They do
turn up in print, usually being exploited for comic effect, but it
is probably no accident that an able exponent of the written
spoonerism, the late Col. Stoopnagle, was a reformed broadcaster;
his finest effort was heard on the air:

>East is west, and west is best,  
And never the main shall tweet.

Post-inspection analyses of Wergeant Setlands' admonition
suggested that the unintended spoonerism is a bane of broadcasters.
One of my university colleagues was the son of the
owner, manager, or manipulator of a local radio station, and
the technology of the day did not permit much pre-recording
of the spoken word; my friend often spelled off the regular
announcers on weekends, and I was interested to learn that
going on the air &ldquo;live,&rdquo; without much experience or time for
rehearsal, also meant broadcasting under the unrelieved threat
of lousing up a script.

There was even a pecking order among radio spoonerisms.
The bottom rung was the news, where unexpected spoonerisms,
especially of proper names, might pass almost unnoticed.
It was my friend's opinion that a casual mention of Churchill's
associate, *Cuff Dooper*, or Roosevelt's *Stenry Himson*, was
acceptable to the listeners because they thought those were real
names.  (Lowell Thomas was less lucky when he invented the
celebrated *Sir Stifford Crapps*.)

The addicts of sports reports were fussier than the aficionados
of plain news, and a well-meant naming of the *St. Blooie
Rowns*, then capering about in the baseball leagues, or of the
*New Yank Yorkees*, no matter how obvious the error, was likely
to bring not merely corrections but reflections on the hapless
announcer's intelligence and ancestry.  Familiar names, interestingly
enough, were in less danger of getting spoonerized than
those of, say, boxers or jockeys or race-horses, who on the air
enjoyed less regular seasons than professional teams.  The same
fact explained why there were fewer complaints about some of
the individual stars; like a name in the news, a champion who
appeared sporadically could be anybody.

That was emphatically not true of commercial announcements.
A listener who has paid an honest dollar to hear his
wares touted on the air is not likely to be satisfied by what may
strike him as a frivolous mislabeling of his precious product,
and my friend advised me that he agonized regularly over what
he might say about several subjects, particularly if he disliked
the stuff or its sponsor.  He tried to anticipate possible spoonerisms,
and learned (or claimed he did) that those which
employed sounds beginning with a vowel were more improbable
than those with strong consonants.  He was not often
worried about real estate becoming *eel restate*, or old books
turning into *bold ooks*; spoonerisms like that did not sound real,
and it is of the essence of a good spoonerism that it ought at
least to seem to make sense.  Thus while my adviser had no fear
of general subjects like *ublic paccountants* and *esh frice*, he
was haunted by specific products with names that could
emerge as *Weerless Pieners* and *Eggnoot Wheedles*.

Like the limerick, some spoonerisms seem destined to
follow the course of greatest impropriety, if not pornography;
and for weeks my announcer pronounced with great care the
label of a prosperous country restaurant.  But one unclear day
he lost it, and invited all who listened to take the family to dine
at the *Piss and Wiggle*.  Not long thereafter he decided that
broadcasting was not for him, and it's probably just as well.
God knows what he might have made of such modern
merchandisers as Crazy Lum's Bicycles, Trott's Waterbeds, or
Lucky Phyl's Donuts.

Nowadays, of course, he'd have the protection of both
technology and unions, the one allowing for the erasure of
errors through pre-recording, the other likely to insist on
rehearsal time for even spontaneous ad libs.  Even so, the
deadly rhythm of some phrases (and most spoonerisms follow
the rhythm of the original words) remains to drown out the
best efforts of professional talkers.  Not long ago I heard a
commentator on American affairs speak critically of the *Kissin-Nixonger
Era*, and nothing else he said so plainly caught what
he meant.  One of Canada's best-known analysts reached the
summit of his career with the identification of a federal cabinet
member as the *Minister of Hell and Wealthfare*.  At a more
modest level, I once electrified a class by announcing that I was
going to lecture on some *common farts of political paulties*.  (I
did, too, naming names.)

If spoonerisms can be both vivid and memorable, it may
strike the hearers that at least the more dramatic among them
should be enshrined in dictionaries or other reference works.
But most dictionaries are very large now: adding the spoonerisms
that are the potential accompaniment of almost any pair
of words would make them unwieldy beyond management.
Besides, most of us get through every day with the help of
familiar sounds not in dictionaries: the noises of children and
animals, of automobiles, trains, and airplanes, can be described
and defined on paper, but not many of them can be accurately
reproduced with phonetic symbols.  Even when dictionary
entries are involved, the ambiguity of television commercials
has created a new dimension in meaninglessness for what used
to be common words.  Few of us know all our friends and
acquaintances by words with meanings, since names usually
get into dictionaries only under circumstances that apply to
any other words.  The lack of recognition accorded spoonerisms,
however significant each may be in a particular context, is not
so surprising after all.

Still, I like spoonerisms, especially when somebody else is
the inventor.  In my country's other language, incidentally, Rev.
Spooner gets no credit at all.  The French for spoonerism is
*contre-petterie*, and the related infinitive can be rendered 'to
imitate derisively'; if you trace that far enough you run into
roots that suggest sundry popping sounds, as in &ldquo;hoist with his
own petard.&rdquo;  Shakespeare used that phrase, which makes me
wonder what the English called spoonerisms before Rev. W. A.
was born in 1844.

>*They Said That?!*
>
>Man wants but little here below.  —John D. Rockefeller.
>
>In all labor there is profit.    —motto of St. Elegius Lying-In Hospital.
>
>I was an hungered and ye gave me meat. —Wendy's Restaurants.
>
>In my father's house are many mansions.—Christina Onassis.
>
>I have played the fool and have erred exceedingly. —Richard M. Nixon.
>
>These filthy dreamers defile the flesh.    —Sigmund Freud.
>
>How forcible are right words.    —William Safire.
>
>&ldquo;A fool and his mother are soon parted.&rdquo; —Motto of National Mother's Day Committee.
>
>&ldquo;If you've got it, flout it.&rdquo;   —Dolly Parton.
>
>&ldquo;No man is a hero to his varlet.&rdquo;   —King Arthur.

## Language Crimes: The Case of the Missing Vocabulary
*Richard L. Faust, New York, New York*

The pounding on my office door startled me out of my
afternoon meditation—it sounded like the knock of doom.
Through the glass panel I could see what looked like the
silhouette of a recruitment-poster figure—burly, with a military
cap, but no rifle in sight as yet, strong and impatient.  As I
stared at my name on the glass door—AHA (beautifully legible
from both sides)—some inner voice urged me not to respond.
My oriental ancestors often said, &ldquo;Listen when the heart
knocks, for the future is speaking,&rdquo; but I was curious, and the
noisemaker was obviously there because of the other two words
on my door: PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR.

&ldquo;Come in!' &rdquo; I called with some trepidation, and it was
the start of a new case.

What came through the door would have been quite
suitable as one of the Dragon Palace guards for my ancestors, a
cross between a bulldog and a giant.  It spoke: &ldquo;You the head
man, bud?  My name is Drummond.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Aha is the name I bear.  Will you sit down?&rdquo;

&ldquo;We can't tarry in town, mister.  You got to come with
me.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Where are we going?&rdquo; I asked tremulously.

&ldquo;To The Saurus,&rdquo; he answered, holding the door open for
me.  I grabbed my fedora.

In the car I had a chance to think.  The Saurus!  It was
legendary, the fabled domain belonging to the Irish billionaire
R. O'Gets, who had made his money by building vocabularies
all over the world.  His was the greatest name in vocabulary
building, but such fame was purchased at a price—he lived now
as a recluse on his large estate.  The Saurus was named for a
variety of lizard that can change its coloration to suit any
circumstances.  It was rumored that the estate had fallen into
desuetude because no one wanted large vocabularies any more.
All around the area one could see mansions decaying.  There
were newer things to build today, like missile bases.

With Drummond at the wheel, the trip took only 40
minutes.  Within the gates, I gazed at the cloistered wonders: I
saw arcane roots growing everywhere, untended and unused;
rusted signs still linked the interconnecting fields, but antonyms
could be seen sprouting among the synonyms.  I caught a
glimpse of something tall in the distance, probably the original
vocabulary drill, now no longer pumping.

The house itself was a gigantic edifice composed of Greek
and Latin elements supported on a Germanic foundation.
Dadoes from all over the world formed the major decorations.
As I was ushered into the house it almost seemed to be
cracking apart; the odor of neglect was in the air.  But there
was something else, something that made my spine tingle—a
feeling of suppressed energy, a pressure waiting to be released
once more upon the world when a new generation of builders
might be born: it was the feeling of raw word power.

O'Gets was wheeled into the drawing room by someone
named Suffix, a faithful follower, but only after Prefix had
come before to offer me a brandy.  The staff was minuscule.

&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; O'Gets exclaimed, &ldquo;I'll get right to the point.
Someone has stolen my oldest and rarest vocabulary: gems like
*opalescent* and *nacreous*, and priceless items like *scrimshaw*.  I
want them back!' &rdquo;

I calmly asked, &ldquo;Where were they kept?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Where most vocabularies are kept—on the shelf.  It was
actually my latent vocabulary, but very valuable, extensive and
barely touched, made up of words the world has hardly known.
And now they're gone.&rdquo;  He sobbed piteously.

I took refuge in the wisdom of my oriental ancestors, who
always said: &ldquo;Remain obdurate when others deliquesce.&rdquo;  I
pursued my questioning.

&ldquo;Who else lives here?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Only Webster, my teenage grandson, who romps at
random in the house.  But he has little interest in my treasures,
for he spends his time helping college students write papers, a
noble task I'm sure, but far removed from subtle etymologies.
And then there is Semantha, my adopted daughter, whose
Semantic ways give comfort and order to my old age.  But they
would not steal!  They know the full meaning of such an act.
Besides, the vocabularies that remain provide enough currency
for us all.&rdquo;

If only my friend Billy Emerald were here, he might be
able to get a handle on this case.  But this was one I had to
solve alone.  The problem was that there was no one who had
any reason to commit the crime.  The servants, of course, were
not under suspicion since they had never wanted or used
vocabularies of any distinction or value—that's why they were
servants.  But I recalled an old proverb: &ldquo;He who steals a
minaret knows where to hide it.&rdquo;  Every thief has a use for
what he takes and a place to hide it, but who needed a
vocabulary these days?

My wise ancestors always said, &ldquo;When all seems mysterious,
ask the classic questions.&rdquo;  So I asked, &ldquo;Was anything else
taken?&rdquo;

It was the breakthrough I needed, for O'Gets replied,
&ldquo;Yes.  But nothing important—only a new video vocabulary
game I was developing called Nam Cap.  It was based on
reversals: reverse spellings, reverse order, etc.  But it is worthless
compared with the priceless items that were taken, like
*didapper* and *nautch*.&rdquo;

In spite of his new interest in video, R. O'Gets's views
were quite retrograde.  No wonder that the great vocabulary
builders are out of work and the world of words lies fallow.  His
video game provided the solution; I knew how to find the thief.

&ldquo;Give me a list of the names of everyone in the house,&rdquo; I
said.

Within five minutes, the latent and priceless vocabulary
was found and was back on the shelf, and I had been
ceremoniously handed a single word: *remuneration*.

Before the police took him away, I had a chat with
Drummond.

&ldquo;You and I have been blessed with the good fortune of
special names.  I have lived happily with my palindrome and
can understand some of your strong feeling about your name.
But why steal the video game?&rdquo;

He raised his chin proudly, looking even more like a
bulldog:

&ldquo;I did it for my country.  It wasn't just that my name
would be on millions of games but that the logo, the picture,
would be there too, in red, white and blue, stirring up faith in
our country again, bringing back patriotism.  I could see the
three inspiring figures—the one in bandages, the one with the
flag, and the little boy—bringing back greatness to our land,
giving us a marching beat.  My name would replace Nam Cap,
which is a dumb name for any game; it sounds Vietnamese, too
Asian for an American game, and besides the bastards have
cornered enough of the electronics mar....&rdquo;  He stopped,
stared at me, then turned and left silently.

Back in my office I kicked off my shoes.  My thoughts
began brewing along with the tea.  Surely my oriental ancestors
would not have taken umbrage, for they lived by proverbs like
&ldquo;An unintended wound heals quickly.&rdquo;  When I wrote up the
case, I took great delight in waiting to the end to write, very
slowly and in my best calligraphic style, the name of the thief:
Drummond Fife.


#### EPISTOLA {Zellig Bach}

The comment by Donald R. Ricklin [IX,3] completely
misses the point of my paper &ldquo;Neither 'God' Nor 'Aleichem' Is
a Last Name&rdquo; [IX,1].  He writes: &ldquo;... Gilford is a peasant in ...
*Aleichem*, the play, as one might say, 'in Shakespeare' instead
of 'In *Love's Labour's Lost*.' &rdquo;  But herein is the very fallacy:
*Shakespeare* is a last name, while *Aleichem* by itself, without
*Sholem*, is not.

The same erroneous reference to the truncated name
&ldquo;Aleichem&rdquo; is occasionally found not just in a theater review,
where Ricklin mistakenly believes such usage might be justified,
but also in a book review.  For instance, Joyce Carol Oates,
reviewing a book of a collection of Sholem Aleichem's stories in
English [*The New York Times Book Review*, July 8, 1979, p.l]:
&ldquo;Even the grimmest and most heart-breaking of the tales... is
related in *Aleichem's* characteristic voice—conversational,
breezy, ironic....&rdquo;  [Italics added]

Bel Kaufman, Sholem Aleichem's granddaughter and an
author in her own right (*Up the Down Staircase*) informs me
[personal communication, January 9, 1983] that some years ago
the family thought of hyphenating the two parts of the name
*Sholem Aleichem* to prevent this very confusion.

It is of interest that, as a compound expression, *Sholemaleichem*,
the traditional Yiddish greeting meaning 'peace be
with you,' is, indeed, hyphenated [Uriel Weinreich: *Modern
English-Yiddish Yiddish-English Dictionary*.  YIVO Institute for
Jewish Research/McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York: 1968].
Although *Sholem* was his real first name (he was also called
Solomon in Russian), in the context of his pen name *Sholem*
should not, in this specific and exceptional case, be regarded as
a first name, nor *Aleichem* as a last name, but should be
regarded together, as an integrated compound whole with a
singular meaning, not to be split asunder.

The best justification and strongest evidence for this
position can be found in the author's own work.  Many of his
stories were written in the form of monologues in which he let
his characters speak and in which he portrayed himself as the
verbatim chronicler, a device which allowed him to &ldquo;record&rdquo;
directly the way his people spoke.  Not infrequently the speakers
in these stories would familiarly address themselves to the
writer, for instance, &ldquo;You know, Mr. Sholem Aleichem ...&rdquo; but
never, ever was he addressed in these stories as &ldquo;Mr.
Aleichem&rdquo;—that is, never did Sholem Aleichem &ldquo;address&rdquo;
himself in his own writing, through his characters, as &ldquo;Mr.
Aleichem.&rdquo;  This was simply unimaginable because, as I
described in my above-cited paper, both the literal and symbolic
meanings and nuances of the compound pen name do not
admit such truncation.

*[Zellig Bach, Lakehurst, New Jersey]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Walker's Rhyming Dictionary of the English Language, in Which the Whole Language Is Arranged According to Its Terminations*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/rhyming-dictionary-english-language-whole-language-arranged-according-its-terminations/)
J. Walker, revised and enlarged by Lawrence H. Dawson, supplement compiled by Michael Freeman, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1924, 1983), vii + 583pp.

[*The scene is a seedy room in a loft.  A desk is to one side, piled
high with papers; an elderly typewriter is barely visible above
the papers.  Nearby, a battered upright stands against the wall.
An old imitation-leather couch, springs exposed here and there,
bespeaks wear and tear and poverty.  From the ceiling hang
bare light bulbs of such low wattage that the interior is
scarcely discernible in the smoky gloom.  George is seated at the
piano; Ira, his brother, sits at the desk, holding his head.
Despair is the mood.*]

IRA: Dammit, George, I won't do another lyric with
*tune, soon, spoon, June*, or *moon* in it, and I
can't combine *goon, loon, prune, poltroon, rune,
baboon*, and *platoon* into anything that makes
sense.

GEORGE: (*Noodling at the piano*.)  Okay, Ira, okay.  Don't
get so excited.  I have my troubles, too.  For
years I've been unable to interest a publisher in
*Rhapsody in Pink*.  (*Musing*.)  Maybe I ought to
change the name....  What do you think of
*Rhapsody in Mauve*?

IRA:  For God's sake, George!

GEO.: ...*in Cerise?*

IRA: George, we're not getting anywhere.  Neither
one of us has had any inspiration in months.
The last money we made was the $10 you got
for playing in that honkytonk over near
Broadway.  We have to do *something*.

[*There is a knock at the door.  George rises to open it*.]

GEO.: Yes?

MESSENGER: You George and Ira?

GEO.: Yeah.

MESS.: Ya mudda sent me ova wid dis here book faw
ya.

GEO.: My mother?!

MESS.: Yeah.  Sign here.

GEO.: (*Signing*.)  Ira, do you suppose Ma has given up
sending jars of chicken soup? Maybe hunger has
driven us all mad.

[*Messenger leaves.  George crosses to desk, unwrapping book*.]

IRA: Let's see.

[*They bend over the book*.]

TOGETHER: (*Reading*.)  *Walker's Rhyming Dictionary*.

IRA: (*Puzzled*.)  What are we supposed to do with
this?  Eat it?

GEO.: Let's see.  (*Scanning through book*.)  Hey, Ira!
How about this: can you come up with a lyric
rhyming *choreography* with *stereography* and
*cardiography*?

IRA: George, please!Be serious!

GEO.: I am being serious!  Just think!  You could write
undying lyrics, which I could set to music,
using this book.  How about &ldquo;You sleek geek/You
reek from fenugreek&rdquo;?

IRA: Beautiful, George.  It doesn't even scan.

GEO.: That's okay.  Suppose you set Ogden Nash to
music?  That wouldn't scan, either.  Take a look
at this book, Ira, maybe you'll get an idea.

IRA: (*Reading*.)  Hey, this is great, George.  Give me a
few minutes.

[*George returns to piano and beats out his famous composition,
&ldquo;Boogie-woogie to Read By.&rdquo;  Ira continues to read, then starts
to write furiously.  George completes the piece just as...*]

IRA: (*Almost shouting with excitement*.)  This is it,
George!  I've got it.

GEO.: (*Eager with anticipation*.)  Let's hear it, let's
hear it.

IRA: I see it as a romantic ballad, George.
(*Wistfully*.)  It'll be another *Begin with Bay'gin*.

GEO.: That's begeen', Ira; Bay'gin was the prime
minister of Israel.  The title is *Begin the
Beguine*.

IRA: So what?  Just listen to this: (*Recites*.)

When I see her samba
I shout &ldquo;Ai!  Caramba!&rdquo;
She slips me a mamba
While I eat my tsamba.
Viola da gamba—

GEO.: (*Interrupting*.)  Wait a minute!  Just a minute!
What's a tsamba?

IRA: According to the Supplement to *Walker's,
tsamba* is a Tibetan barley dish.

GEO.: Isn't that pretty far-fetched?  What's the viola da
gamba doing there?

IRA: Poetic license, George.  Poetic license.  I'm just
stringing you along....

GEO.: What's romantic about mamba and tsamba?

IRA: Romance is in the eye of the beholder.

GEO.: I think you'd better try something else, Ira.

IRA: (*Leafing through book.  Stops*.)  I've got it!

GEO.: Let's have it.

IRA:  How's this?

>When push comes to shove,  
As heaven knows above  
I really am in love  
with you.
>
>We stand in the breeze  
You almost start to sneeze  
I get down on my knees—  
Adieu.

GEO.:  Please!  For heaven's sake!  Even if I could write
music to that, who'd want to listen to it?!

IRA:  Is this better?
I'm filled with pusillanimity
Whenever you're in the vicinity....

GEO.: Give it up, Ira!

IRA:  No!  I won't give up.  This book is an
inspiration.  Maybe we can come up with a title
that'll help.

GEO.: Like what?

IRA: How about, &ldquo;His Eye Is on the Marrow&rdquo;?

GEO.: No.

IRA: &ldquo;Alexander's Rag-content Bond&rdquo;?

GEO.: Ira!

IRA: &ldquo;Effaceable You&rdquo;?

GEO.: !

IRA: &ldquo;White and Gray, You Are the One&rdquo;?

[*George picks up a batch of sheet music and throws it at Ira as
the curtain falls.*]

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *World Dictionaries in Print: A Guide To General and Subject Dictionaries in World Languages*
(R.R. Bowker Company, 1983), xv + 579pp.

Although no mention is made of it in the section Further
Reading, at the end of the Foreword of the work under review,
*Dictionaries, Encyclopedias, and Other Word-Related Books*,
edited by Annie M. Brewer, Gale Research Company, is a very
useful adjunct to this book.  A Supplement to the Third Edition
was published recently.  As the title makes clear, *World Dictionaries
in Print (WDP)* covers only those works in print.  While
Mrs. Brewer's books are much broader in scope, they are based
on the catalogue at the Library of Congress and hence do not
include some foreign and some American works of reference
that are apparently not (yet) in the L.C. collection.

*WDP* starts out a little confused: it has both a Foreword
and a Preface (they are, as far as I know, merely Germanic and
Latin variant names of the same sort of thing).  Although a note
on James Campbell appears at the end of the Foreword, the
Foreword is not attributed to him; at the end of the Preface,
under Acknowledgements [*sic*] appears a note of thanks to
Campbell for &ldquo;his excellent essay: 'Suggestions for Acquiring
Foreign Reference Books,' &rdquo; though the three paragraphs dealing
with that subject appear as part of the Foreword, under the
title &ldquo;Buying from the Foreign Book Dealer.&rdquo;

The book is organized into a Subject Index, Title Index,
Author/Editor/Compiler Index, and a Language Index; the last
33 pages are devoted to a Key to Publishers' and Distributors'
Abbreviations.

In such an array, my first inclination is to seek out my own
name in the Author/Editor/Compiler Index.  It appears eight
times for only 14 titles, with more than a few errors.  My given
name is misspelt &ldquo;Laurance&rdquo; once and &ldquo;Lawrence&rdquo; twice, and
my surname is misspelt &ldquo;Urdung&rdquo; once [see VERBATIM I, 2].
In one instance, an improper cross reference is made to a
subeditor; one title is listed twice; and about 60 (yes, *60*) other
dictionaries are not listed at all or are miscredited.  Some
appear under L (for Laurence Urdang Associates, Ltd.), and
one spells my surname &ldquo;Ordang.&rdquo;  For example, the following
titles are not listed:

>*Collins English Dictionary, Collins* [U.K.]
>
>*Penguin Dictionary of Electronics, Penguin* [U.K.]
>
>*Dictionary of Philosophy, Macmillan &amp; Pan* [U.K.]
>
>*Hamlyn Dictionary of Biblical Quotations, Hamlyn*
[U.K.], Facts on File [U.S.]
>
>*Treasury of Biblical Quotations*, Nelson [U.S.], Pickering
[U.S.] &amp; Inglis [U.K.]
>
>*Mosby's Medical &amp; Nursing Dictionary*, C.V. Mosby
>
>*Timetables of American History*, Simon &amp; Schuster
>
>*Twentieth Century American Nicknames*, Wilson  
...etc.

Many of those not listed are British books, but *WDP* lists other
titles that are not readily available in America.  Bowker cannot
be held responsible for failing to list, with the proper attribution,
an editor if the publisher has decided to discontinue
listing his name (as in the case of the *Random House College
Dictionary*, of which I was listed as editor in chief till the 2nd
Edition was published, containing about 7% new matter,
whereupon my name was removed, and the *Random House
Unabridged*, of which Jess Stein was listed as editor in chief
and I as managing editor: neither credit appears in *WDP*,
despite the continued listing on the book's title page).  But
Bowker *can* be called to task for listing Flexner, Stuart Berg, as
&ldquo;Bergflexner, Stuart,&rdquo; and for numerous other proofreaders'
and other errors.

There is much useful information in *WDP* notwithstanding,
and the four main indexes make it readily accessible.  Yet
there are omissions that are quite unforgivable, like the *Shakespeare
Concordance* published by Harvard University Press
(Belknap), and what is there is not easy to find because of the
misspellings.

In sum, *WDP* contains a large number of errors and omits
many works it ought to have included.  If you can live with that
sort of frustration, then this book is for you; if not, use the
Gale book referred to earlier or the catalogue of a library with
an exceptional collection, though neither of the last two is as
likely to provide information as up to date as that in *WDP*—
alas!

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Searching for Aboriginal Languages: Memoirs of a Field Worker*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780702219337/Searching-Aboriginal-Languages-Memoirs-Field-0702219339/plp)
R.M.W. Dixon, (University of Queensland Press, 1984), 344 pp.

A few years ago we had a linguistics conference in
Adelaide which attracted a number of people from remote
areas in central and northern Australia.  I got the impression
that some of these people were a little shy with city linguists
(even my students who went along), seeing them as people
with access to good libraries, in touch with modern movements,
and skilled in linguistic theory.  Be that as it may, I
know my students were full of humble admiration for these
real linguists from the front line, in daily contact with still
living Aboriginal languages.  The armchair linguist may achieve
all sorts of fame but he often wonders what life for the frontline
linguist, the field worker, is really like.  Now he (or of
course she) and anyone else interested may find out something
of this by acquiring a very readable account of a field worker's
experiences in this book by R.M.W. Dixon, who is thoroughly
at home in both worlds.

It is a reminder that linguistics is a very human subject (it
is an odd commentary on some modern trends in linguistics
that we need to be reminded).  To begin with, we are allowed
to perceive that even the best investigating linguist is human,
not endowed with some superhuman skill that effortlessly
elicits the patterns of remote languages, but obliged to work
through guesses and trial and error just as any of us would.
Dixon is more thorough than some in undertaking to learn to
use the languages he studied, to make errors, in fact, to test his
hypotheses.  We also learn that the academic linguist is not the
only linguist involved in recording a language.  He works in
conjunction with native-speaking informants who vary considerably
in their willingness and ability to help.  An outstanding
one, like Bob Dixon's Chloe Grant, has all the qualities of a
good postgraduate student except for the ability to read and
write.  Chloe identified herself with the project, volunteered
information and analysis, worked out principles of gender in
Dyirbal (involving a knowledge of Dyirbal science), developed
theories of language (not all of which would win wide
approval), and was virtually a co-author of parts of Dixon's
published account of the Dyirbal language.

What gives especial humanity to Bob Dixon's book is his
respect for the Aboriginals he encountered.  Often there are
poignant touches; there was the Aboriginal who saw a building
labeled Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies and, having
always wanted to study, went in only to be told the Aborigines
were studied, not studying; and there was the informant
favoring Dixon because he was English and not American,
having been told at school that &ldquo;Australians&rdquo; came from
England, without quite understanding that he was not meant
to be included.

The pervasive tone is one of respect for the Aboriginal
people.  There were Europeans in the north who had lived in
areas where there were many Aborigines and who got on well
with them and were kind to them, who nevertheless assured
Dixon that Aborigines had &ldquo;no language&rdquo; (just a few grunts) or
had language with &ldquo;no grammar.&rdquo;  The mere fact that the
intricacies of the grammar of one of these languages was a
subject for study would at least dispel that idea; this nontechnical
book about languages yields a surprising amount of linguistic
knowledge.  Usually the information comes in the shape of a
mystery story, a puzzle about a detail of a language: Why are
there monosyllabic words in Barbaram when related languages
seemed universally disyllabic?  Why does the Yidiny language
have two separate words for 'what'?

There is always oddness and fun to be had with language.
Odd that the first word the field worker encountered was the
Barbaram word for 'dog.'  It was *dog*!  (One of the mysterious
monosyllables, explained by regular phonetic change and not a
justification for the monogenesis of language as hypothesized
by Chloe Grant in her more speculative moods.)  Phonetic
considerations, such as the absence of &ldquo;s&rdquo; or &ldquo;f&rdquo; in most
Aboriginal languages, explain borrowed words like *naybu*
'knife' or *mijiji* 'woman' (from &ldquo;missus&rdquo;).  Imagination accounts
for the Dyirbal word *maralu* 'a shirt,' a word originally
meaning 'hollow log' because when the Dyirbal people first saw
a European pulling on a starched shirt they were reminded of a
bandicoot seeking shelter in a hollow log.

A recent issue of *The Times Higher Education Supplement*
printed a cartoon showing two academics sitting at desks on an
open lawn, one saying to the other, &ldquo;At least there's nothing
left to be taken away.&rdquo;  Desks were a luxury beyond the reach
of Professor Dixon and his informants.  It was not permitted for
Europeans to visit Aboriginals in their homes, and so work was
done sitting under a tree.  At least the biting ants that fell from
it were, according to the informant, &ldquo;good for you.&rdquo;

Like my students, I am full of humble admiration for field
workers.  Since I read Dixon's book, they have become less
shadowy and remote, a good deal more human, but no less
admirable.  The book has the merits of an autobiography and a
travelogue, in both cases fluently written; but its further
dimension, its linguistic interest, makes it a travelogue of the
mind, a richer insight into Aboriginal life than is usually
available.

*G.W. Turner, University of Adelaide*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Who's Troubled?*

Deputy chief subeditor is the sort of title that leads you up
to the top of the hill and leads you down again.  But Bill Bryson
works as one for no less a paper than *The Times*, and that gives
him exceptional qualifications for compiling *The Penguin Dictionary
of Troublesome Words*.  Not a cloistered academic with
a penchant for particles and participles but an experienced
journalist used to the hurly-burly of newspaper offices from
Iowa to Bournemouth, he is now charged with watching the
tongue of The Thunderer.  So he ought to be a reliable guide
through the minefields of contemporary usage in English and
American.  And, up to a point, Sir William, he is.  He knows
only too well that writers aiming at trendiness or emphasis are
apt to hit more magpies than bulls, and he is right to hoist a
red flag of warning over *fortuitous, flaunt* and *flounder*, over
*straitjacket* and *co-equal*, and over a score of spellings that trip
up the unwary.

Difficulties in following Mr. Bryson arise, however, when
he moves out from the subeditor's legitimate sphere of helping
writers to say what they intended and starts trying to legislate
for the language more generally.  Things get worse—and one
can only sympathize with cub reporters on *The Times*—as it
becomes clear that his policy is an odd mixture of liberal
*laissez-faire* and conservative dogmatism.  On the number of
*data*, for instance, Mr. Bryson is prepared, after carefully
weighing pros and cons, to pass the singular.  He sets aside the
protests of purists, explaining that &ldquo;in English usage etymology
doesn't always count for much.&rdquo;  How often is &ldquo;not always,&rdquo;
though?  Well, Mr. Bryson won't accept *trivia* as a singular,
should we happen to want to use the word, because &ldquo;there is
no singular form.&rdquo;  As well as Latin grammatical niceness,
ancient dramatic practice is invoked.  Though we are to be
allowed any number of antagonists (despite *nec quarta loqui
persona laboret*), *protagonist* cannot, we are solemnly informed,
properly be applied to more than one person.  Perhaps so, but
will that argument change anybody's linguistic habits in the
twentieth century?

Similar points can be made about several of Mr. Bryson's
observations.  For all of us who like to identify words on the
wing there is something of interest in the reminder that
&ldquo;epidemic&rdquo; is related to &ldquo;democracy&rdquo; and so originally referred
only to diseases afflicting the human race.  But nobody ought to
be worried that the meaning of the word has stretched over the
centuries.  Certainly *epizootic*, which Mr. Bryson appears to
favor, cannot look forward to a bright future.  English does not
need the discrimination that term would offer, even if it were
not doomed because there would always be confusion over its
pronunciation.  Academic principle rules again in the comment
that *flak* should never be given a c before the k because it is a
contraction derived from *Fliegerabwehrkanone*.  True enough,
but it is by no means unprecedented for English to modify the
spelling of a word as it borrows it and bends its meaning.
Besides, the form *flak-jacket*, which is frequently needed in
reports of embassy sieges and the like, simply looks too much
like a misprint to survive for long.  The truth of the matter, as
Mr. Bryson admits when he quotes his colleague Philip Howard,
is that etymology demonstrably does not control the
development of a word once it has been launched.

What is more useful than complaining that words change
is exploring how they develop and why.  Change is not
synonymous with decay, and if there is rot, only good example
will stop it, not pedantic precept.  There is, to be sure, a good
deal of slipshod writing around, but Mr. Bryson is unlikely to
win friends or influence people by displaying scant sensitivity
to the modern tongue.  It is true that we managed with just
*weather* for a long time.  Nowadays, *weather conditions* are
what people sometimes talk about.  Is that just fashion?  The
telecasters urge for pompous polysyllables?  Perhaps.  But it
probably also reflects some growing awareness of the interplay
of atmospheric forces that bring the showers.  *Weather* may
have been good enough for shepherds hoping for red skies at
night, but isobars and satellite pictures suggest *weather conditions*.
Again, accountants know quite as well as Mr. Bryson
what is meant by *anticipated income*, so we had better agree
that there must be some reason why company chairmen are
regularly allowed to write that the firm had not &ldquo;anticipated
losses on its underwriting operations.&rdquo;  The word conveys
rather more than just *expect*, implying, it appears, something
about taking appropriate steps.

Many of Mr. Bryson's difficulties stem from his overrespectful
attitude to dictionaries.  He sees them as prescribing
usage, rather than describing it, though it is only the latter role
that gives them validity.  His position is shown in a long
paragraph on *warn*.  He quotes a sentence from the *Daily
Telegraph*: &ldquo;British Rail warned that snow was bound to have a
serious effect on its service today.&rdquo;  The meaning is perfectly
clear, but Mr. Bryson becomes very uneasy on discovering no
authority for this intransitive use of the verb, even though he
considers the distinction rather fussy.  He concludes with the
disturbing thought that those who use it &ldquo;do so at the peril of
being called incorrect.&rdquo;  It is hard to think there is any real risk.
But the caution is typical of Mr. Bryson, who is always fretting
about being caught out in some impropriety in what he
variously calls formal, careful, and serious situations.  Worse
still, he can be snobbish towards those he considers less well
educated than himself.  There may often be a touch of irony, a
sort of verbal glorious Technicolor, when people insist on
pronouncing as many syllables as possible in &ldquo;Ye olde worlde
teashoppe.&rdquo;  Even if there isn't, there is no need to administer a
magisterial put-down, as Alexander taught Marcus Aurelius a
very long time ago.

*Christopher Smith, Norwich, Norfolk*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Penguin Dictionary of Troublesome Words*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/20556/brysons-dictionary-of-troublesome-words-by-bill-bryson/9780385679954) and [*I Stand Corrected, More on Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780812910971/Stand-Corrected-Language-Safire-William-0812910974/plp)
Bill Bryson, (Penguin, 1984), 173pp. and William Safire, (Times Books, 1984), ix + 468pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Anyone writing as much about any subject as Bill Safire
writes about language (omitting comment on his regular forays
into politics) is bound to generate some deadly prose now and
then, and Bill is no exception.  The important thing that most
language professionals overlook is the fact that he is a reporter
of language trends and anomalies.  To be sure, he offers his own
opinions, with which his readers sometimes take issue; but at
least he takes a stand, and the lively exchange between him
and his readers, which he diligently reports, without any
(apparent) embarrassment, is revealing of the way people feel
about language and, perhaps more important from the standpoint
of Safire's publishers, makes good reading, too.

As millions know, Bill Safire's column, &ldquo;On Language,&rdquo;
appears as a regular feature of *The New York Times Magazine*.
This book is a compilation of selections from those articles in
which he has proffered commentary that is either controversial
or just plain wrong; hence, the title.  It is the third collection of
his essays to appear in book form.

Bill Safire writing about language probably provokes more
controversy than Bill Safire writing about politics.  In any event,
they don't give out Pulitzer prizes (as far as I know) for writing
columns on language, and it is not insignificant that Bill was
awarded one for his political writings.  The controversies are
often settled by his &ldquo;Lexicographic Irregulars,&rdquo; a raggle-taggle
band of linguistic gypsies who, with true Talmudic reasoning,
can find support for any side of any question of English usage.
Safire calls on them from time to time for help in gathering
citational evidence for usage and lexicon that eludes the
mavens at Oxford, Merriam-Webster, Barnhart, and elsewhere:
Safire, in short, is the answer to a maven's prayer.

The Lexicographic Irregulars include, in addition to &ldquo;regular&rdquo;
lexicographers, professors from Harvard, Michigan,
Amherst, and other centers of learning, as well as members of
the general public who are perceptive observers of the language.
They frequently come up with evidentiary information
that would be hard to come by through ordinary means.  For
instance, though lexicographers generally agree in disputing the
origin of *posh* as an acronym for 'port out, starboard home,'
Ellen Thackara wrote to Safire from Switzerland:

>When I lived in the Orient the P. &amp; O. (Pacific &amp; Orient)
Line out of London *did* put beside the names of
important people &ldquo;POSH,&rdquo; so they would have the
cooler side of the ship.  [p. 280]

As no rebuttal to this was forthcoming from the Irregulars, we
may regard the problem as unresolved, and you may draw your
own conclusion from the evidence.  (For instance, suppose *posh*
was used to designate V.I.P.s because it was already current in
the sense of 'luxurious' and was only later &ldquo;derived&rdquo; from 'port
out, starboard home'; why would P. &amp; O. designations always,
necessarily, assume a return trip?)

That is not a problem to settle here, even if we could; it is
mentioned only in order to illustrate the sorts of things Safire
deals with.  Some may criticize his lack of formal training as a
linguist.  To them I would say that at least he broaches subjects
that nettle us all and successfully evokes comment from
amateur and professional alike.  His influence is broad—too
broad, perhaps, for the tastes of his academic critics.  But, while
it must be readily acknowledged that language is the *province*
of linguists, it is not their *property*, and only good can come
from an energetic airing of questions that many of Safire's
readers may not have entertained before.  In other words, Safire
makes people think, and there can be only good in that (so long
as they don't become restless).

There is no nook or cranny of language untouched by
Safire's probe: pronunciation (of *Thule*, for example); idioms
and phrases (*social safety net, out there*); translation (*d&eacute;colletage*);
words (*egghead*); usage (*everywhere*); grammar (*dived/
dove*); syntax (double genitives); etymology (*posh, hooligan*),
and so on.  No sooner does Safire express an opinion about
something in the language than a reader pounces on him with
an argument, sometimes a correction.  Opinion about language
is give and take, and Safire writes evocatively and provocatively,
eliciting responses from Cassidy, Steinmetz, Barnhart,
Mish, Guralnik, Flexner, Bailey, and other lexicographers as
well as from Barzun, Bolinger, Reagan, Shelley Berman, James
D. McCawley, Peter Viereck, Norman Schur, Allen Walker
Read, Allen Metcalf, Miroslav Rensky, Eugene McCarthy, and
Arthur J. Morgan, to name a few prominent users of and
commentators on language.

Although most of the questions raised are answered, not
all of the problems are solved, which is only to be expected.  It
is extremely interesting and useful to have, in one place, such a
wealth of commentary expressed by people who obviously
think seriously about language, know what they are talking
about, and are able to articulate their ideas so well.  Safire
adroitly applies Platonic dialectic to the medium he serves,
presenting argument, reply, reaction, response, riposte, and
rejoinder in true *Dialogue* fashion.

This is an enormously useful book.  Whether you agree
with Safire or with his correspondents, you will find much food
for thought here.  Except for a few inconsistencies (putting
*double genitive* under *genitive, double* but *double negatives
under double*), the index is excellent, and we can thank heaven
for it.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Christopher M. Lauer}

About the debate [X, 3] between Charles Suhor and those
he calls &ldquo;pop grammarians&rdquo;: a plague on both their houses.
Neither the elitists of John Simon's camp nor the all-licensing
apologists of Suhor's offer real help where it is needed.  Just as
no run-of-the-armory opponent of gun control would normally
read Art Buchwald's satiric squibs about the NRA, no one who
really needs to become more conscious and careful about his
use of the language is likely to be reading the columns of the
pop grammarians.  Suhor is apparently a defender of the
findings of such documents as the CCCC's &ldquo;Student's [*sic*]
Right to their Own Language&rdquo; which he mentions on page 9.
Presumably, he is in favor of letting students express themselves
without obliging them to correct their spelling and
grammar.  This position provides an after-the-fact rationale for
incompetent, lazy, or distracted teachers whose students never
learn—or learn too late—that writing is an act of communication
rather than of egoistic expression.

I encourage my own students to learn the rules before
they break them and try to get them to predict how their own
constructions will act on their reader's understanding.  I tell
them that their reader's eye and brain are constantly predicting
the next word, phrase, even the next punctuation mark down
the line of ink.  When these predictions are fulfilled, the
reader's attention is on the meaning and hardly notices the
language itself; when the predictions are not fulfilled, the
reader is surprised, at least for a split second, at least subconsciously.
In the time it takes to read the parts of a sentence (or
hear one, for that matter), the mind performs thousands of
these predictions and responses.  When the reader is surprised,
his attention is turned away from *what* is being said and
toward *how* it is being said.  The best writers use these surprises
deliberately; the effect of the resulting dynamic interaction is
called style.  Less effective writers produce surprises that have
no relevant emphatic function but, because the reader's expectations
are violated, merely distract from the meaning.

A misspelled word causes a momentary trip in a practiced
reader's mind; a dangling participle causes him, if only for an
infinitesimal moment, to mis-predict the rest of the sentence; a
disagreement between subject and verb makes him reread the
clause, befuddled.  In Suhor's own article, for example, typographical
errors, mixed metaphors, and misplaced possessive
apostrophes accumulate to obscure the writer's arguments:

>Writing letters to pop grammarians isn't just a matter
of intellectual jousting; it is a way of lowering the ego
stakes in discussion of the volatile issues at hand.
>
>(page 7)

Here, visions of knights, gamblers, and incendiaries jostle
in the mind's eye; the point of the sentence is not illuminated.
The sentence fragment (typographical error?)  &ldquo;Is a puzzlement.&rdquo;
(page 8) is followed by

>When I debated John Simon..., he invented an
obscure sentence in which failure to observe the standard
forms of *lie* and *lay* supposedly lay [*sic*] to an
obscene interpretation: &ldquo;Last Sunday I laid in bed for
several hours.&rdquo;  (page 8)

The interruption of my own reading process at this point
in Suhor's article at least gave me a moment to wonder if this
Deputy Executive Director of the National Council of Teachers
of English is opposed to my asking my students to make the
distinction between *lie* and *lay*.

Of course typographical errors (&ldquo;discountinued&rdquo; on page 9
is a wonderful portmanteau neologism) can't really be blamed
on the author, but the distraction, the weakening of the
communication results anyway.  A more disastrous violation of
the reader's predictions is logical fallacy.  Suhor cites clich&eacute;s
from the works of E.B. White, William Buckley, and Tom
Wolfe and concludes:

>It would seem, then, that respected writers from both
the past and present use language far more playfully
and freely than we normally admit.

Suhor's implication here, that the use of clich&eacute;s is evidence of a
writer's playfulness and liberality, is hardly what most readers
would foresee as an inference from these examples.

The objection even to minor, unintended glitches (see
OBITER DICTA: &ldquo;Grammar vs. Common Sense&rdquo; in the same
issue) is not that they fail to communicate but that they can,
collectively, weaken communication and that they signal the
writer's inability or unwillingness to concern himself with his
reader's understanding.

While none of my students are in any danger of reading
too much of Simon, Middleton, Newman, or Mitchell and, as a
result &ldquo;gagging on their own obsessions with perfection&rdquo; (page
9), they may all be in danger of coming under the lax guidance
of teachers who find, in Suhor and others, justification for their
holistic tolerance of schlock.

*[Christopher M. Lauer, Midland School, Los Olivos, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

All of us who are interested in the art and craft of
translation have, I suppose, our personal chamber of horrors.
Marcy S. Powell's article, &ldquo;Traduttore Traditore&rdquo; [X, 1],
prompted me to revisit mine and to share with VERBATIM
readers my own favorite *traduzione/tradimento*.

It occurs in a 1957 anthology, in a Spanish translation of
Emily Dickinson's &ldquo;I never saw a moor...&rdquo;, and is so deliciously
logical in its inaccuracy that one can only stand in awe
before the monumental misunderstanding.  The translator—
himself a well-respected Catalano-Mexican poet, whom charity
and professional sympathy restrain me from identifying—
encountered Dickinson's well-known lines &ldquo;I never saw a moor,
/ I never saw the sea; / Yet I know how the heather looks, /
And what a wave must be...&rdquo; and confidently rendered them
as follows (italics my own):

>Jam&aacute;s he visto a un *sarraceno*
y jam&aacute;s el mar contempl&eacute;.
>
>Pero s&eacute; c&oacute;mo es el *pagano*
y c&oacute;mo la ola debe ser.

Clearly, our poet was misled by his misreading of &ldquo;heathen&rdquo;
for *heather* (which he apparently took for a misprint), and by
the logical relationship between this supposed &ldquo;heathen&rdquo;
(*'pagano'*) and the *moor ('sarraceno')*; a misreading all the
easier to appreciate if we remember that, to a Hispanic, the
spelling *moor*, without a capital, might well be thought to
indicate nationality.

The mistakes would be delightful if Dickinson weren't the
loser.  But thanks to our translator's treason—or treasons—the
Belle of Amherst's poem rings false for Hispanophones.

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Gary Muldoon}

In &ldquo;A Grandfather Stories&rdquo; [X, 4], one of the &ldquo;Erie
Canalese and other arcane expressions&rdquo; is *I have seen the
elephant*.  It is defined as 'once bitten, twice shy.'

In *Forgotten News*, by Jack Finney (Doubleday, 1983), the
author recounts an 1857 inquest of a murder.  To &ldquo;see the
elephant&rdquo; he defines as &ldquo;nineteenth century slang for seeing
the world, widening one's experience&rdquo; (p. 74).

*[Gary Muldoon, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ottilia Koel}

Ann E. Bennaton's article [X,4] reminded me of a fellow I
used to know in London: he came from Hungary, of aristocratic
background, and had learned English from a governess.
He was a good bridge player and in no time was introduced to
upper-class families and invited to card parties.  On one occasion,
when he was the winner, his hostess called him &ldquo;You
lucky dog.&rdquo;  Next time around her ladyship was the winner and
my friend took leave of her by calling her &ldquo;You lucky bitch.&rdquo;
He was never invited back.

*[Ottilia Koel]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Levitt}

No, your Editor's Note to the review of *Colemanballs* on
page 22 of the Spring 1984 issue is wrong, I'm delighted to say.
Early in his career as a BBC sports commentator, and late at
night, David Coleman got into a fearful tangle with studio
gremlins, and was provoked into shouting at the engineers or
producers, at the peak of the awfulness, &ldquo;Well, you made a
right balls of that, didn't you?,&rdquo; more in anger than in sorrow.
But he was still on the air, and the world heard him.  Well, I
did—and there were others.  *Private Eye* never forgets these
things; &ldquo;Colemanballs&rdquo; has been the title of their column of
commentators' accidents ever since.

*[John Levitt, University of Keele]*


### CORRIGENDA

&ldquo;Yiddish for Fun and Profit,&rdquo; by Lillian Mermin Feinsilver
[IX,2]: P. 1, &para;3, line 3: for Needelman&rdquo; read &ldquo;Needleman.&rdquo;

P. 2, Col. 2, penultimate line: for &ldquo;panty&rdquo; read &ldquo;pant&rdquo;; for
&ldquo;Gotka&rdquo; read &ldquo;Gotke.&rdquo;

P. 2, col. 2, &para;3, penultimate line: insert comma before closing
quote.

P. 2, col. 2, &para;4 3rd line from end: for &ldquo;to&rdquo; read &ldquo;and.&rdquo;

P. 2, col. 2, &para;5, line 11: following &ldquo;*What's the matter with*&rdquo;
and before closing bracket, insert &ldquo;—recorded in 1962&rdquo;; line
12: following &ldquo;*What is there to... about*&rdquo; and before closing
bracket, insert &ldquo;—recorded in 1970&rdquo;; line 13: for &ldquo;1962&rdquo; read
&ldquo;1938&rdquo;; line 15: for &ldquo;1970&rdquo; read &ldquo;1958.&rdquo;

On the &ldquo;excellency of the *English
language*&rdquo;:

Now its beauties are most conspicuous in the four
particular articles here undermentioned; that is to say, it is
free and easy; and, in short, more sweet and harmonious,
and by consequence preferable to any living language
whatsoever.

Its freedom and facility, in the first place is demonstrable,
since it is in a great measure exempt from that
multiplicity of cases and flexions, which clog or encumber
almost all others, and render them for that reason extremely
intricate, difficult and abstruse.  Our *adjectives* being all
invariable, make the concordance with their *substantives*
remarkably plain and easy: the *English pronouns*, likewise
are not half so confused and perplexed as either those of the
*Latin* or the *French*.  And scarce any thing can more easily
be conquered than the conjugation of *English* verbs:
Besides, our language is burdened with no such thing as
*verbs reciprocal*, which render the *French tongue* in particular
very dark and obscure; and very often discourage
foreigners from the study of it.

To illustrate its copiousness, very little need be said,
since it is too manifest and self evident to be denied; for
besides the antient *Dutch*, which the *English* retain in the
*Saxon* monosyllables; the literati, of *England*, like so many
industrious bees, have collected the quintessence of divers
foreign languages, and rejected their refuse or dross; by
which artful management, and their assiduity, they have
improved their mother-tongue to that prodigious degree,
that all such foreigners as have an adequate idea of the
genius of it, are perfectly charmed to observe, that neither
their own, nor any other language whatsoever, can stand in
competition with it; and at the same time, to find a great
variety of their own terms so happily transplanted and
blended with it that they seem to thrive better in *England*
than in their own native soil.

And whereas the *French* is to[o] much limited and
constrained, and through its over-niceness is grown in some
measure barren, spiritless, and insipid; the *English*, on the
other hand, is become prodigiously copious and luxuriant
through its innate power of making such *compounds* and
*derivatives* as are very comprehensive, emphatical, and
proper to contract any expression into a narrow compass; it
must be allowed that neither the *Greek* itself, nor the *Latin*,
can compound or join many words together in a more
agreeable manner, which is one of the most shining beauties
that any language can possibly boast of.  In a word, there is
no sentiment or thought that can be expressed in a greater
flow of words, or with more propriety and better grace,
than in the *English tongue*.

As to its harmony and sweetness, it must be confessed
that the *Italian* abounds with vowels, as the Dutch does
with consonants, which renders the first too effeminate, and
the last too rugged and uncouth; whereas the *English* has,
through a happy intermixture, the advantage of them both.
We cannot but allow that the Italian language is peculiarly
delicate, soft, and pleasing to the ear; but then it glides
along like a purling stream.  The *French*, doubtless, is very
nice and courtly, but then it has too much in it that savours
of effeminacy and affectation.  The *Spanish*, it is true, is very
solemn and majestic; but it is too apt to be stormy and
tempestuous, and carries a kind of terror along with it.  The
*German* is very manly indeed, but it is harsh and unpolite;
whereas the *English*, by judiciously borrowing a little here
and a little there, from each of them, gives strength of
consonants to the *Italian*, the full and perfect sounds of
syllables to the *French*, the variety of terminations with
much gentler accents to the *Spanish*, and dissolves the
*Dutch* consonants with greater facility and ease.

Now what can possibly be wanting to the perfection of
that language, where substance and solidity combine with
pleasure; where copiousness unites with delicacy, beauty
with majesty, and expedition with gravity and sedateness!
And such doubtless is the composition of the English.

I shall now conclude ... with the observations of two
very judicious critics, who, though masters of divers languages,
hold our *English* tongue in the highest veneration.

>&ldquo;As the *English* language (says the first) is at this
present juncture arrived at so great pitch of perfection,
is so very copious and expressive, by the accession
of the life and spirit of divers other tongues with
which it is blended, it were greatly to be wished, that
a stop might be put to that boundless practice of
naturalizing foreign words, of which the *English* seem
too extravagantly fond; and that for the future all
neological and factitious terms should be laid aside,
except some few that might possibly be introduced
with judgment and precaution.
Was the *English*
nation (says the last) but contented with making
improvements on that grain which they have already,
without over-stocking themselves by importation from
foreign ports, and putting their language in a perpetual
ferment, it would contribute greatly to its future
credit and reputation.&rdquo;
>
>*A Complete and Universal Dictionary of the English
language, Comprehending The Explanation, Pronunciation,
Origin &amp; Synonymies of each Word...* by the
Revd. James Barclay.  A New Edition enlarged,
improved &amp; adapted to the present state of Science.
Brightly &amp; Childs, Bungay, 1812.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Explaining why a larger area is needed for a new building,
&ldquo;The Salvation Army's downtown location has simply outgrown
its needs.&rdquo;  [From the 6 p.m. newscast by Andy Saenz,
KVUE-TV, Austin, June 26, 1984.  Submitted by Helen H.
Rugeley, Austin, Texas.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Number One benefactor of the education reform
project would be the student.&rdquo;  [From comments made by Gib
Lewis, Speaker of the House (Texas), KVUE-TV, Austin,
several times.  Submitted by Helen H. Rugeley, Austin, Texas.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;When I enter gifted classrooms, I often see posters that
admonish children to be polite, kind, or generous.  As any
preacher or rabbit can tell you, moral messages are better
conveyed by subtle stories...&rdquo; [From *Story Art*, January,
February, March, 1984, page 6.  Submitted by Sylvia Khan, North Hollywood, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Wooden toys for children that last.&rdquo;  [From the headline
of a Do It Yourself column in *The Miami Herald*, May 13,
1984, p. 2H.  Submitted by Mrs. Murray M. Kassel, Ft.
Lauderdale, Florida.].

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Guide to Chaucer's Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=13248390683&cm_sp=plp-_-9780806126654-_-new)
David Burnley, (University of Oklahoma Press, 1983), xvi + 264 pp.

Since (J.) David Burnley intends his *Guide* for *serious* (i.e.,
academic) Chaucerians, much of it may not interest many
readers of VERBATIM; more surprising, perhaps, is the fact that
so much of it will.

The worst is first.  In chapters one to four, Burnley reviews
&ldquo;The Language of the Text&rdquo;—that is, &ldquo;Chaucer's Grammar,
&ldquo;Time and Tense,&rdquo; &ldquo;Negation,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Textual Coherence.&rdquo;  The
etymological connection of *grammar* and *glamor* has deservedly
become everyone's favorite example of just how misleading
etymology can be.  Inevitably, there are times when the very
matter of these chapters (not Burnley's presentation) would
numb a pulsar.  But Burnley's discussion is always correct,
clear, complete and—best of all—concise.  Furthermore, the
reader may, as Chaucer himself allowed, &ldquo;Turne over the leef.&rdquo;
Even in these chapters, however, one discovers some fascinating
peculiarities of Chaucer's language.  For example, particularly
fascinating is Burnley's consideration of multiple negation
as a device for achieving intensification natural to oral rather
than written communication (pp. 65-68).

There are two quite distinct ways to appreciate Burnley's
final five chapters on the &ldquo;Variation, Context, and Style&rdquo; of
Chaucer's language.  One may read them in order (as any
Chaucerian should do) and study in order the implications of
fourteenth-century &ldquo;Linguistic Diversity,&rdquo; of &ldquo;Chaucer's
Vocabulary,&rdquo; its &ldquo;Register and Propriety&rdquo; and &ldquo;Levels of
Style,&rdquo; and the connotative systems of word-associations that
the author refers to as &ldquo;The Architecture of Chaucer's Language.&rdquo;
Or one may simply refer to the insights of these
chapters conveniently by means of the &ldquo;Index of Words&rdquo; (pp.
257-61).

I count some 428 items listed in this index, and I find it
most illuminating (albeit, at times, humiliating) to look up
words that seem familiar.  For example, Burnley explains that
the reference to Palamon's *prisoun* in &ldquo;The Knight's Tale&rdquo; does
not modify his jail (nor even his gaol); rather, it is a French
legalism for 'detention aggravated by reduced rations and
deprivation of other comforts' (p. 160).  One may also use the
index to discover that such terms as *lemman, gent, suete brid,
fetys*, and other such specifically courtly terminology (which
English poetry had inherited from the French romances)
already seemed to Chaucer and his audience often d&eacute;mod&eacute;,
d&eacute;class&eacute;—no longer so groov&eacute;, en effet.  Burnley demonstrates
particularly well that Chaucer frequently used (or abused) such
*termes*, or technical vocabularies, as favorite comic devices.
Ignorance can kill the comedy, though, when a reader fails to
recognize a *term* as such; more significantly, the significance of
a Middle English word can be too simplistically thought
synonymous with its modern derivative, and this lexical sloth
can result in major misinterpretations of Chaucer's meaning.
What is thought known and is not remains more dangerous
than what is known to be not known.

Of course, if one is still an adolescent who likes to hide in
closets, one may also use Burnley's index to look up such
favorites as *bele chose, coillons, quoniam*, and *swyven*.  There
exist, however, much fuller discussions of Chaucer's bawdy
than the *Guide*.  So, too, there exist many, more thorough
analyses of the foreign influences on Chaucer's vocabulary.
(Burnley's fine footnoting will lead the interested reader to
these more technical studies.)  And, even though one may
discover well over four hundred elaborate definitions (including
that of *diffinicioun*) in this *Guide*, it makes no pretense to itself
serving as a glossary of Chaucer's total vocabulary.  On the
contrary, the author explains how arbitrary and pointless it can
be to count all the words recorded in a poet's whole canon.  He
then suggests a most interesting and (to this reader) convincing
principle—that would-be exhaustive glossaries often generate a
false sense of precision about Chaucer's specific meaning(s):
&ldquo;Paradoxically, the simple vocabulary, by its very inadequacy
for providing an instant translation has its own value ...&rdquo;; it
forces the reader &ldquo;to ponder the context of occurrence&rdquo; (pp.
201-2).  The thumb is still no substitute for the brain.

In sum, I recommend David Burnley's *A Guide to Chaucer's
Language* to all who enjoy reading (and understanding)
Chaucer's poetry in the original—and, since all should, to all.

*William A. Quinn*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

One Hand Clapping Dept.
&ldquo;When a hundred tapping feet thunder like one—you're at
42nd Street.&rdquo;  [From a television commercial for the musical.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the D.C. Story clocks are of such striking quality
they're hard to forget ...&rdquo; [From Cahill &amp; Company Reader's
Catalogue, Spring 1984, p. 18.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;She is currently with a law office in Oakland, California,
which represents plaintiffs in asbestos lawsuits.&rdquo;  [From &ldquo;About
the Author, Media Law, by Katherine M. Galvin, Nolo Press,
1984.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;SPEED LIMIT/15/WHEN FLASHING&rdquo; [From a sign outside
Santa Fe, New Mexico, schools.  Submitted by Reginald Dunstan, Santa Fe, New Mexico.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;House Approves Missiles With Strings Attached.&rdquo;  [From
The New York Times, Sunday, June 3, 1984.  Submitted by
Raymond Fuoss, Hamden, Connecticut.]


### OBITER DICTA
*—Playback, Raymond Chandler, Ballantine, 1958, p. 96.*

&ldquo;...He ain't in his room.  The hotel people ain't seen him
around.  I thought maybe you and the girl had some idea about
it.&rdquo;

&ldquo;The girl is screwy,&rdquo;  I said.  &ldquo;Leave her out of it.  And in
Esmeralda they don't say 'ain't seen.'  That Kansas City dialect
is an offense against public morals here.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Shove it, Mac.  When I want to get told how to talk
English I won't go to no beat-up California peeper.&rdquo;

## The Meaning of Scientific Names
*Sam Hinton, La Jolla, California*

There was no public library in Crockett, Texas, when I was
a boy, and no biology program in the high school, so
technical information about my beloved reptiles was hard to
come by.  Nevertheless, there were a few sources.  One of these
was the 1917 edition of Hegner's *College Zoology*, lent me by
Mr. Robin Burns, who taught chemistry and accounting at
Crockett High.  This book depicted one of my favorite lizards,
and labeled it &ldquo;Six-Lined Race-Runner—*Cnemidophorus sexlineatus*.&rdquo;
Even to my untrained eye, it was obvious that
*sexlineatus* meant 'six-lined,' and I assumed that the generic
term must mean 'race-runner.'  And I thought that if only one
could translate the Latin names, the real identity of an animal
would be at once evident.

But later I learned that it wasn't that way at all.  I was
right about *sexlineatus*, but wrong about *Cnemidophorus*: it
means 'greave-bearing.' And a greave turns out to be a kind of
leg-armor worn by Roman soldiers.  The word was probably
used to describe some enlarged scales on the lizard's legs, but
many other species have much more greave-like structures, and
the translation doesn't help the least bit in identifying the
animal.

The sad fact is that a scientific name doesn't have to
&ldquo;mean&rdquo; anything in translation.  There are lots of rules set
down in the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature:
the generic name (the first of the two words that designate a
particular species) should be written with an initial capital
letter and should be used as a substantive in the nominative
singular; Latin endings should be used in both genus and
species, whether the root itself is derived from Latin, Greek, a
geographical name, a personal name, or even a so-called
&ldquo;barbarous&rdquo; (non-Classical) source; the two words should agree
in gender, and so on.  But there's no rule saying that the words
must, in themselves, make sense.  It's even all right if there is a
WRONG meaning; in fact, Article 32 holds that a name cannot
be invalidated just because it gives erroneous information.  One
example of this is the name of the western American redshafted
flicker, which for more than a century bore the name
*Colaptes cafer, Cafer* means 'of Africa,' but the bird is not &ldquo;of
Africa&rdquo; at all.  The error was made by Linnaeus, who probably
got his specimen labels mixed up.

The name of this bird was recently changed, but not
because it didn't come from Africa; it was because research
showed it to be only a color phase of *Colaptes auratus*, whose
name had been applied first and so had priority.  Such changes
are necessary in order to maintain a sensible nomenclature, but
they can often result in the new name's being a nonsensical
derivation of the old one, most frequently as an anagram.  For
example, the spiny lobsters (langoustes) were formerly all
grouped in the genus *Palinurus*; this is usually said to have
come from the name of Aeneas's navigator, but it could equally
well be descriptive, referring to the undercurved tails of the
creatures.  However it was derived, later taxonomists found that
one genus was not enough to accommodate this varied group,
and a new genus had to be set up.  This was simply an anagram
of the first genus—*Panulirus*.  When working with both genera,
it isn't easy to remember which is which!

The same thing happened with another crustacean genus,
*Epialtus*.  That doesn't seem to mean very much in translation,
but at least it consists of two familiar roots.  Such is not the case
with the new genus, *Taliepus*.

Anagrams may also be used in the original names proposed
for a group.  The biologist Leach was apparently fond of
his wife, Carolina, and used the letters of her name in several
genera—*Cirolana, Nolicera, Conilera, Cilenora,* and *Nerocila*.

It is quite within the rules to use a name that is simply an
arbitrary collection of letters; as long as they look like Latinized
Greek, they are quite acceptable.  Such names include *Oxynoe,
Clancula, Milbora, Mycelis, Salifa, Tolpis*, and *Torix*.

A very common type of name is the patronym, named in
honor of some person.  Leaders in taxonomy are very frequently
honored in this manner.  The name of the late Carl Hubbs, for
example, is encountered over and over among fishes; there is a
genus *Hubbsia* and any number of species called *hubbsi*.  (The
rules forbid the use of the same name for more than one genus,
but this does not apply to the specific name.)  The level of
honor is sometimes debatable; I have only one species for me—
a large louse that infests red-tailed hawks in East Texas.

Dr. Chester Stock, my paleontology professor at UCLA
(he visited there for one semester), used to complain that some
patronyms just didn't sound right.  I remember his words: &ldquo;Not
only do these names not mean anything; sometimes they sound
like hell!  I found some bones of a Pleistocene antelope that
looked to me like the present Indian animal with a great name:
*Tetraceros*.  But a so-called friend of mine had to put it in a new
genus he called *Stockoceros*.  Now I ask you: *Stockoceros*?&rdquo; This
good friend was probably the same one who honored other
friends in the same way, so that we have the fossil genera
*Hayoceros, Osbornoceros*, and *Merriamoceros*.

It is possible to make pejorative use of a supposedly
honorific taxon.  One graduate student in parasitology came to
dislike his major professor, whose name, let us say, was Smith.
So, when he had safely left Smith's institution, the student
named a particularly loathsome spiny-headed parasitic worm
for Prof. Smith; he did not, however, use the common form
*smithii*, but made it *smithicola* instead—and this means
dweller in Smith!'

There is a romantic story that tells of a young conchologist
who set up a species name as *annae*, in honor of Ann, his
fiancee.  Later work showed that the species should be divided
into several subspecies; meanwhile, Ann had jilted him, so he
named his first subspecies ... *annae inconstans*.

Occasionally, names have been so silly that the International
Commission on Zoological Nomenclature has chosen to
invalidate them.  One whimsical British entomologist had set up
such genera as *Polichisme* (pronounced, of course, &ldquo;Polly kiss
me&rdquo;), *Florachisme, Nanichisme, Pegichisme*, and *Ochisme*.  For
a time, it was considered a joke to give a large name to a small
animal, and this resulted in several amphipod genera such as
*Cancell-oido-kyto-dermo-gammarus*, but these were not allowed
to stand.  A joking name for a wasp was accepted as not TOO
silly; this was Zyzzyx, made up for the purpose of being last on
anybody's list of Hymenoptera.

Vernacular names, of course, do not have to follow any
sorts of rules, although the American Ornithologists Union and
the Audubon Society make very strong recommendations about
this in regard to the common names of birds.  A tremendous
number of animals simply have no accepted vernacular names,
so they must be invented when showing these animals to the
public.  I often had to do this when I was Director of the
Aquarium-Museum at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
and often fell back upon the common practice of translating
the scientific name.  Thus a freshwater fish named *Dormitator
maculatus* can be presented as The Spotted Sleeper.  But some
names are simply not appropriate to this manipulation.  I never
wanted to Anglify a little joke that Linnaeus himself perpetrated
in naming a large but flaccid sea anemone *Metridium
senile*.  But I did learn that one should not be too quick to guess
at a meaning.  One of our west coast slipper shells, which is
always found fastened to the top of a larger snail, is called
*Crepidula fornicata*.  As in my youth, I guessed what the
specific name might mean and hesitated to translate it onto a
label for the public.  Fortunately, this time I had ample
resources, and a quick check showed that the root *fornix* means
'arched' and that the word I didn't want to use came about
because the prostitutes of Rome used to frequent the lower
levels of buildings, where the arched vaulting was visible.  So
*Arched Limpet* became a thoroughly respectable common
name.

## More Nervous Onomasticae
*D.S. Bland, Ph.D., Southbourne, Dorset*

It seems to me that Laurence Urdang was rather restrained
in his listing of the meanings associated with our given
names [*VIII*, 3].  I make no apology for the fact that my
additions contain some rather more outspoken examples.

*Albert*, *Prince Albert*, watch chain with cross-bar.

*Benjamin*, favorite (and youngest) child.

*Bob*, 1. (*Br.*) pre-decimal shilling.  2. *Bob's your uncle!*  British
expression indicating successful completion of a
task.  3. (a) *dry-bob*, Eton schoolboy who plays cricket.
(b) *wet-bob*, ditto, who rows.

*Bobby*, British policeman, from Sir Robert Peel who
reformed the police system in 1829.

*Catherine, Catherine Wheel*, whirling firework, from St.
Catherine.

*Charles, Charles's Wain*, the constellation Ursa Major.

*Charlie*, 1.  (*Br.*) *a proper* (or *right*) *Charlie*, a downright
fool. 

2\.  North-Vietnamese soldier.

*Dick*, penis.

*Fanny*, 1. buttocks.  2. (*Br.*) female pudenda.  3. Also found
in British phrase *sweet Fanny Adams* which has an
interesting history.  In 1867 a Fanny Adams was murdered
and her dismembered body thrown into a river.
This seems to have prompted sailors in the Royal
Navy to apply her name to their issue of tinned mutton
!  Then the phrase took on the meaning of 'nothing
at all,' and is often contracted to *sweet F.A.*  But this
extension is an example of &ldquo;switch language&rdquo; (e.g.,
*Judas Priest* for *Jesus Christ*) as it is a concealed way
of saying &ldquo;sweet fuck-all.&rdquo;  4. (*Br.*) *my Aunt Fanny*,
an expression of disbelief.

*Geordie, George*, (*Br.*) generic name for inhabitants of
North-East England, particularly centered on Newcastle
upon Tyne.

*Guy, Guy Fawkes*, 1. oddly dressed person, from the
stuffed effigy burnt on Bonfire Night (5 November).
2\.  to imitate someone with intention to ridicule.

*Herbert*, (*Br.*) *right Herbert*, a stupid fellow.

*Jack*, 1. (*Br.*) *jack it in*, resign.  2. *every man Jack*, everybody.
3\. *Jack tar*, British sailor.  4. *Jackass*.  5. *jack
boot*.  6. *Jack Frost*.  7. (*Br.*) *jack-in-office*.  8. *jack-knife.*

9\.  *jack-of-all-trades*.  10. *jack-pot*.  11. *jack-rabbit*.  12.
*before you can say Jack Robinson*.  13. *jackanapes*.  14.
*jack*, ship's flag, smaller than ensign....  And many
more.

*Jane*, 1. *Lady Jane*, female pudenda.  2.  *Janeite*, admirer of
Jane Austen's novels.

*Jessie*, (*Br.*, derogatory) effeminate male.

*Jim, Jim Crow*.

*Jimmy*, 1.  (*Br.*) *jimmy riddle,* rhyming slang for *piddle*.  2.
variant of *Jemmy,* a device for forcing one's way into
something.

*Jock*, generic name for Scotsmen.

*John*, 1.  *John Hancock*, one's personal signature.  2.  *John
Barleycorn*, personification of whiskey.  3.  *John Chinaman*.
4\.  *John Citizen*.  5.  *John Collins*.  6.  *John Doe*.
7\.  *John Q. Public*.

*Johnny, Johnny-come-lately* also means an *arriviste* or self-seeking
person.

*Lizzie, tin lizzie*, model-T Ford.

*Magdalen*, also means a reformed prostitute.

*Maria, Black Maria*, paddy wagon.

*Molly*, effeminate man.  2.  *mollycoddle,* to pamper.

*Nora*, (*Br.*) *bloody Nora!*  expression of surprise.

*Oliver*, (*Br.*) *snotty Oliver*, unkempt person.

*Peter, 1. blue Peter*, ship's flag hoisted before sailing.  2.
*Peter Pan*, person who refuses to age.  3.  (*slang*) a
penis.

*Pete, for Pete's sake!*

*Randolph*, dim. *Randy*.  The association with *randy* 'lustful'
is almost inevitable.  (But see the final paragraph
below.)

*Richard, Richard Roe*, John Doe's cousin.

*Roger*, 1.  to copulate with.  2.  *Jolly Roger* (a) pirate's flag,
(b) penis.  3.  *Roger the lodger*, hero of British limerick,
as well known as lucky Pierre.

*Sally*, 1.  (*Br.*) *Aunt Sally*, game with wooden peg at which
balls or sticks are thrown, or carved figure in fairground
as target for prizes, and so, figuratively, an
object of attack.  (To *put up an Aunt Sally* is much
the same as *flying a kite*.)  2.  (*Br.*) *Sally Lunn*, sweet
tea-cake.

*Sheila*, Australian and New Zealand equivalent of *Judy*, any
girl.

*Simon, Simon Pure*, the genuine article.

*Taffy, David*, generic name for a Welshman.

*Teddy*, 1.  *teddy bear*.  2.  (*Br.*) *teddy boy*, youth affecting
Edwardian style of dress.

*Thomas, doubting Thomas,* skeptical person, from the
apostle.

*Tom, 1.  peeping Tom.*  2.  (*Br.*) *tom-tit*, rhyming slang for
*shit*.  3.  *tomboy*.  4.  *Tom Collins.*  5.  *Tom Thumb* (also
*Br. rhyming slang* for *rum*).  6.  *Tom Tiddler's ground*,
(a) children's game.  (b) opportunity to make money
without effort....  And many more.

*Tony*, annual theatrical award, from *Antoinette Perry*, U.S.
actress.

*Willie*, (*Br.*) penis, used by parents to young boys.

I would maintain that there is absolutely no connotative
connection between *Bill* (William) and *bill* (invoice), any more
than there is between *Pat* (Patrick), *pat* (soft blow with the
hand) and *pat* (right on cue).  They are quite different words
which happen to be spelled alike.  It was for this reason that I
deleted *jerry* 'chamber pot' from *jeroboam*, 'large wine goblet,'
from the draft of this article, and hesitated over *Randolph*.  I
am not reminded of a chamber pot when I address Gerald by
the diminutive of his name.  But I decided to leave *Randy* in
because the connotation must be there unless one is blessed
with a mind as pure as untrodden snow.

## A Quiz About Sexist Language
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

Language is like a window through which we look at the
world.  Recently, many people have begun to wonder if
our window on the world has a glass that distorts our view.  If
language reflects culture and in turn influences culture, could it
be that the window through which we see &ldquo;reality&rdquo; is filled
with ripples, cracks, smudges, blind spots, and filters so that we
cannot see things with a clear and unbiased eye?  In short, is
language prejudiced?

To the estimated five percent of the population that is left-handed,
many devices—from doorknobs to school desks, from
musical instruments to athletic gear—seem to be designed for
right-handed people.  In &ldquo;The Sinister Side of Language&rdquo; [IV,
4], J. Frank Schulman inquired whether language itself is also
designed for the right-handed majority.  Schulman began with
the question &ldquo;Why does *left* get such a bad deal from
language?&rdquo;  and showed how leftist words like *left, sinister,
gauche, linkisch*, and *izquierda* evoke unfavorable connotations,
while words like *right, dexterous, adroit*, and *derecho*
enjoy admirable reputations.

In &ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo; [VII, 1] Sterling Eisiminger found
that &ldquo;*white* generally connotes fairness (*that's white of you*),
harmlessness (*white magic*), professionalism (*white collar*), surrender
or peace (*white flag*), and the white race (*white
slavery*)... *Black*, on the other hand, in most languages has
generally negative connotations.&rdquo;  Eisiminger demonstrated
that, despite a few exceptions like *black belt* and *in the black*,
pejorative words and phrases like *blacklist, blackmail, black
market*, and *black-hearted* &ldquo;are overwhelmingly in the majority
and may be a factor in the widespread prejudice against the
Negro [twelve per cent of the American population].&rdquo;  After all,
what can you expect from a language in which the white pastry
is called *angel food cake* and the dark one *devil's food cake?*

Women comprise the majority of almost every country in
the world, yet the English language stigmatizes women as an
inferior group of human beings, undermines their self-images,
and restricts their perceptions of life's possibilities.  To underscore
and amplify this contention, I offer a quiz about sexism
and the English language.  Please answer the following questions
as precisely and honestly as you can and compare your
responses with the comments that come afterwards.

>1\.  In each pair, which term carries more respect?  *bachelor-spinster,
master-mistress, sir-madam, poet-poetess,
major-majorette, governor-governess*.
>
>2\.  If a king rules a kingdom, what does a queen rule?
If a man mans a station, what does a woman do?  If a
man fathers a movement, what does a woman do?
>
>3\.  What do you picture when you hear or read the following
expressions?:
>
>*Neanderthal Man, Industrial Man, Language separates
mankind from the other creatures, Everyone should
guard his valuables*.
>
>4\.  In each pair, which name forms the basis for the
other?  *Victor-Victoria, Paul-Paulette, Joseph-Josephine,
Henry-Henrietta*.
>
>5\.  Which of the following people are married, and
which are single?
>
>*Mr. John Smith, Mrs. John Smith, Miss Mary Jones, Ms.
Gloria Steinem*.
>
>6\.  Identify five eponyms, uncapitalized English words,
that have their origin in people's names.
>
>7\.  What qualities do you think of when you hear or
read the words *manly* and *womanly?*  Compare your
answers with the complete definitions that you find in
your unabridged dictionary.

1\.  In question one, above, clearly the first word in each
twosome carries more prestige than the second.  Let's start with
*spinster*, a word that began its life meaning simply &ldquo;a person
(usually a woman) who spins.&rdquo;  Today *spinster* suggests a
rejected, dried-up &ldquo;old maid,&rdquo; so much so that some single
women are driven to adopt the ludicrous term *bachelor girl* to
describe their status.

What about *master* and *mistress*, both formed from the same
root?  We can see the power and respect accorded *master* in
such expressions as *master craftsman, MasterCard,* and *master
of my fate*.  *Mistress*, on the other hand, has taken on so much
illicit sexual meaning that we often avoid using the word
altogether.

And the situation is much the same with *sir* and *madam: sir* is
unfailingly a term of respect, while *madam* has acquired the
whiff of the brothel manager.  As feminist Gloria Steinem has
pointed out, how would a man feel if he were graduated with a
&ldquo;spinster of arts degree&rdquo;—or a &ldquo;mistress of arts degree,&rdquo; for
that matter?

The other masculine forms in the first question also carry an
added degree of power and excellence.  *Poetess* suggests a
diminutive, quaint, drawing-room version of a poet.  A
*majorette* is a mere twirler of batons (certainly not a major
activity), and a *governess* governs only the romper room.  In her
successful bid for the Connecticut governorship, the late Ella
Grasso had to contend with the opposition's slogan &ldquo;Connecticut
Doesn't Need a Governess.&rdquo;

2\.  *Queens*, of course, do not rule &ldquo;queendoms,&rdquo; and
nobody &ldquo;womans&rdquo; a station or &ldquo;mothers&rdquo; a movement.  These
gaps in our language are significant.  Apparently we feel that
nouns like *queendom* and verbs like *woman* and *mother* are too
weak and too connotatively distracting.  But language can
change.  *To father* may mean little more than to provide the
sperm necessary for birth, and *to mother* may mean much
more.  A new verb in our language, *to parent*, may be just the
androgynous word we need to unite the two sexes in mutual
activity.

3\.  Do words like *man, mankind*, and *he* embrace women?
This question has been tested by sociologists who asked 300
college students to select illustrations from pictures they supplied
for chapters in a textbook.  One set of respondents was
given the titles &ldquo;Social Man,&rdquo; &ldquo;Industrial Man,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Political
Man&rdquo; and the other set the titles &ldquo;Society,&rdquo; &ldquo;Industrial Life,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Politics.&rdquo;  Results indicated that the word *man* evoked
pictures of males participating in that activity far more than
women or children.  Another survey revealed that children from
kindergarten to seventh grade interpreted the sentences &ldquo;Man
must work in order to eat&rdquo; and &ldquo;Around the world man is
happy&rdquo; to mean male people, not female.

Regarding the singular pronoun *he*, it should be pointed out
that two centuries ago the so-called plural pronoun was perfectly
acceptable in sentences like &ldquo;Everyone should guard
their valuables&rdquo; and that many languages today avoid sexual
discrimination in their pronouns, as in the Turkish *o*, which can
mean either *he* or *she*.

4\.  Though there are many exceptions, female names in
our society are often derivatives of male names, as in the
examples above.  In contrast, males are assigned strong, independent
first names and retain their fathers' last names their
whole life long.  When first names like *Marion* and *Shirley* come
to be shared by both sexes, their use for males is generally
discontinued.

5\.  Social custom announces the potential sexual availability
of a woman in her name.  *Mr.* John Smith may be married or
single, but *Mrs.* John Smith is definitely married.  In addition,
she has acquired her husband's last name, passively and
proprietarily defined in relationship to his identity.  *Miss* Mary
Jones is, of course, unattached—and fair game.  This is the
unequal state of affairs that women are protesting when they
ask to be identified as *Ms.*, rather than *Miss* or *Mrs.*, or simply
as *Mary Jones*.

6\.  The chances are that your list is composed entirely of
words descended from the names of men, such as *sandwich,
silhouette, lynch, poinsettia, pasteurize,* and *guillotine*.  Except
for a handful of mythological eponyms like *aphrodisiac, venereal*,
and *cereal*, the only common uncapitalized English words
that issue from the names of women are *tawdry*, a clipping of
*(Sain)t Audrey*, the patron of Ely, and *bloomers*, a pluralized
designation for the once fashionable puffy ladies drawers that
Mrs. Amelia Jenks Bloomer helped to publicize (and here, of
course, the last name is the husband's).

7\.  The definitions of what it means to be manly or
womanly make it impossible for a woman to want fully to be a
woman.  One entry in *Webster's Third New International
Dictionary* tells us that *manly* means &ldquo;having the qualities of a
man, not effeminate or timorous: bold, resolute, open in
conduct and bearing; of undaunted courage, gallant, brave.&rdquo;
Why, we may ask, are these qualities not also appropriate to a
woman?

*Womanly*, in the same lexicon, means &ldquo;characteristic of,
belonging to, or suitable to women: conforming to or motivating
a woman's nature and attitudes rather than a man's.&rdquo;
Examples given are &ldquo;Convinced that drawing was a waste of
time, if not downright womanly ...&rdquo; and &ldquo;the usual womanly
volubility.&rdquo;

The whole concept of manliness evokes such positive suggestions
that it is a special compliment to call a man a *he-man* or a
*virile* man.  Both *virtue* and *virile* descend from the Indo-European
*vir* 'man,' and, in each of these terms we are
implying that the person is doubly virtuous because he is
doubly a man.

We limit and diminish males and females alike when we
use sexist language, for we thereby abandon that which makes
us human: the capacity to distinguish, discriminate, compare,
and evaluate.  In doing that, we lose our control of language
and let ourselves become its prisoner.

The history of any living language is the history of
constant change.  I believe that our language can change so that
men, women, and children can be free to imagine and explore
the full range of their human potential.  I believe that our
language can become more humane by becoming more truly
human and that such an evolution will make people feel better
about themselves and the world in which they live and move
and have their being.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Truth in Advertising: Thomas Baking Company advertises its
croissants on TV as being &ldquo;as French as our English muffins are
English.&rdquo;  As all Englishmen (and many visitors to England)
know, there is no such thing in England as an &ldquo;English
muffin,&rdquo; the closest thing being a crumpet, to which the muffin
bears only a remote resemblance.  Sampling Thomas's croissants
confirms the accuracy of the slogan.

## Antipodean Newsletter: *Can I have a baby?*
*G.W. Turner*

It has been said (by me, actually, among others) that the
smallest possible dialect is the language of one person, the
idiolect.  But this is not really true because an idiolect is many
languages, formal and informal, technical and nontechnical,
spoken and written, according to situation and audience.  The
real ultimate atom of language must be one of these, the
smallest social unit, the language shared with one familiar
person in one familiar situation.  The language that grows up in
a family is a prime example.

If you could eavesdrop on the language used by my wife
and me after thirty-five years together, you might hear me say
&ldquo;I'll see what the stove says,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Can I have a baby?,&rdquo; or
&ldquo;Shall I put milk down or shall we use Buster's?,&rdquo; or &ldquo;I'll put it
in Baby.&rdquo;  Of course there are more private topics than these
but explaining these random samples will be enough for one
newsletter.

The only reliable clock in our household is the electric
clock on the electric stove, so that &ldquo;I'll see what the stove says&rdquo;
is a rational answer to a request for the exact time.  &ldquo;Can I
have a baby?&rdquo; needs a more complex background beginning
with our attempt to grow a bottle-brush tree (an Australian tree
with crimson flowers resembling bottlebrushes).  To help it
along, I gave it a mulch of compost from the heap where we
throw vegetable waste.  There must have been tomato seeds in
it because our bottle-brush was surrounded and more or less
suffocated by tomato plants.  Some of the tomatoes were little
marbles that were very tasty.  We called them *baby tomatoes* or
just *babies*.  If I wanted one of these for my cold-tomato-on-hot-toast
at breakfast time, how else would I ask if not &ldquo;Can I have
a baby?&rdquo;

&ldquo;To put the milk down&rdquo; is merely to put out a milk-bottle
as a signal to the milkman that we want milk.  Buster is a cat
who scorns our fat-reduced milk and requires full-cream milk of
his own, which is specially bought.  The milk is kept in the
smaller of two refrigerators, called *Baby* to distinguish it from
*Leonard* who has his name on the door.

Every family will have its collection of family words.  At
some points these private languages merge with public language.
Domestic words like the name for a cloth used to dry
dishes (*tea-towel?  tea-cloth?*) or the soft edge of a loaf that has
been broken in two tend to vary from family to family.  My
wife and I might refer to kookaburras or magpies as *kookies* or
*maggies*.  The second is in fairly general use, the first (I think)
not.

Children are a prime source of &ldquo;family language.&rdquo;  &ldquo;I
didn't have a nice day&rdquo; is one of our contributions.  Our (then)
small son anticipated the usual question after an outing with
the somewhat rarer negative version.  Some children had teased
him by convincing him that there was a &ldquo;hittapotamus&rdquo; in the
next paddock.  Or we refer to a neighbor's place as *C'meely
bank*, perpetuating a youthful reader's version of the name on
the gate: *Comely Bank*.

The purpose of private languages, if something that grows
up so naturally can be analyzed in terms of purpose, is to
define or give substance to a habit of intimacy, of family unity,
of belonging to something that has become established.  In this
it resembles regional varieties of language.  In calling a magpie
a *maggie* I may be sharing a word with my wife or asserting
that I am Australian.  (Neither need be particularly self-conscious.)

These private languages are no less real than public
language but they will never be recorded.  Perhaps some
philological Kinsey will get into the intimate reaches of conjugal
language someday but in the meantime everyone can
supply from experience some linguistic facts not generally
known.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Writer's Art*](https://www.abebooks.com/signed/Writers-Art-James-Kilpatrick-Foreword-William/18014435153/bd)
James J. Kilpatrick, (Andrews, McMeel &amp; Parker, Inc., 1984), 254pp. 

Millions know Jack Kilpatrick, some as the author of a
regular column in the *Washington Post*, some as the serious,
concerned panelist on Martin Agronsky's television program,
and some as the erstwhile sparring partner of Shana Alexander
on 60 *Minutes*.  Always the gentleman, Kilpatrick is characterized
best by his incisiveness, his calm demeanor, his wit, his
friendly Irish mug, and his conservativism.  The last of these is
one of the elemental properties reflected in his view of
language; the other property is the simple fact that he is an
artistic practitioner of writing—and, as one who has heard him
speak, I must add of speaking, as well.

I am quoted in the Introduction, describing myself as a
descriptive linguist, along with a description of the meaning of
*descriptive*.  Although all of that is true, it may be somewhat
misleading in the context of this book—especially in that of its
title—for I strive for purism in any attempts I might make at
introducing art into my uses on language.  In other words, when
it comes to creating language rather than commenting on it, I
am probably at least as puritanical as Kilpatrick considers
himself to be.

[It might be useful, here, to add a note regarding the
attitudes of some linguists I know.  When asked why, if they
condone all sorts of solecisms in the language of others, they
tend to avoid them so carefully in their own usage, they reply
that that is simply the way they talk.  Do *you* believe them?]

Without going into the details too deeply, *The Writer's Art*
offers a number of useful, easy-to-understand guidelines on how
to clean up your writing act.  When trying to teach or learn
rules, one can scarcely be wishy-washy about it, and it ill
behooves the perspiring teacher or the aspiring writer to be
&ldquo;descriptive&rdquo;—descriptive of *what?*  Only of what he is writing
about, not of the techniques he should acquire and use.
Supported and illustrated by an excellent selection of citations
from writings of all kinds, Kilpatrick warns against nonsense,
among other things.  Many examples, some quite hilarious, are
cited in Chapter 4, &ldquo;The Things We Ought Not to Do,&rdquo; which
begins on page 57.  This is fairly typical of the advice given in
the book, but I am unsure whether the author omitted the
main premise out of respect or kindness toward the reader: I
am reasonably certain that the omission cannot be attributed to
squeamishness or shyness, as Kilpatrick is not known to suffer
from either.  What is this Main Premise?  Very simply, it is that
if you want to clean up your *writing* act you should start by
cleaning up your *thinking* act.  The fact, the ineluctable fact, is
that most people who are incapable of setting down their
thoughts on paper are likewise incapable of uttering them in
speech and, ultimately, are incapable of thinking clearly.

Not all, of course.  I have met some people who are very
articulate speakers but poor writers.  If they could be taught the
technique of writing down what they might normally say, they
would make passable and, in some (rare) cases, good writers.

One cannot blame Kilpatrick for exercising restraint in
insulting his readers.  Since it is unlikely that anyone reads
VERBATIM in order to improve (much less acquire) writing
skills, I have no such compunction.  Our readers have enough
sense to shut up when they have nothing to say or write,
(though the same might not be said about &ldquo;our&rdquo; editor);
aspiring untalented writers seldom have the sense or the
sensitivity to stop and turn to basketweaving or some other
occupation that may exploit their other talents.  The reason for
this is probably that editors to whom such hacks submit their
writing are too kind, replying with a rejection slip that carries
the message &ldquo;Your article does not fit into our publishing
schedule,&rdquo; or in some other way failing to discourage the writer
from setting pen to paper ever again.  Unfortunately, literacy
has too long been confused with literary ability in the minds of
those learning to read and write.  To be sure, everyone ought to
be taught to read and write as well as possible, but the
conquest of a rudimentary technique should not be confused
with the ability to create art.  Someone who has learned to
paint a wall with a roller does not presume to being a
portraitist; why should someone who has learned how to put
words on paper presume to being a writer?

Kilpatrick makes no promises: &ldquo;The country fiddler brings
skill to his instrument, and often a remarkable level of skill;
Menuhin on a Stradivarius is something else.  My hope in this
book is not to make greater Menuhins, but to make better
fiddlers.&rdquo;  [page 11] I should have preferred the omission of
&ldquo;greater,&rdquo; but no matter.  The important analogy is of a writer
to a country fiddler, *who brings an often remarkable level of
skill to his instrument*.  People who think they can learn writing
skills by reading this (or any other) book are simply wrong:
those with some skills can learn to sharpen them.  The way to
learn how to write is to read and write constantly, not by
reading a book about writing, just as the way to &ldquo;a more
powerful vocabulary&rdquo; is by reading assiduously and remembering
well, not by reading a book (or taking a course) in
vocabulary building.

The most important thing I can say about *The Writer's Art*
is that it is written well.  It is lively, fast-moving, interesting,
original, amusing, entertaining, and, like its author, incisive.
There is no doubt that, put in the right hands, it can do a great
deal of good, even for those who &ldquo;fiddle&rdquo; with the language.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Training Programs in Child Abuse and Neglect.&rdquo;  [Caption
on a brochure from the Children's Institute International.
Submitted by Jean P. MacAllister, Beverly Hills, California.]


#### EPISTOLA {Reinhold Aman, Ph.D.}

Philip Howard's fawning &ldquo;review&rdquo; of Enright's A Mania
for Sentences [X,3] is a disgrace.  Worse, it's unethical.

Seasoned readers of book reviews first look at the author's
and reviewer's names to see whether they are known enemies
or friends, then judge the fairness of the review by this key
factor.  When I saw Howard reviewing his buddy's book, I
knew that his &ldquo;review&rdquo; would be gushy.  If you read Howard's
uncritical, shameless plug for his pal, you noticed that it
contained not a single negative comment.  Who published
Enright's book?  His employer.  Was this a mercy job?  Instead of
sending him off to the pastures with a gold watch?

Now comes Howard's coup: out of the 211 pages of
allegedly brilliant reviews, he singles out Enright's hatchet job
on that bloody awful Maledicta, to demonstrate Enright's wit.
Of course, Enright is as witty as a penile wart.  If Howard
wanted to show his loyalty to pal Enright by taking a swipe at
Maledicta, why didn't he act like a man and use the copy I
airmailed to him?  Instead, coward Howard, the author of
Weasel Words, shows his character by weaseling out and
quoting Enright's drivel: &ldquo;Maledicta calls itself 'The International
Journal of Verbal Aggression' ... It sees itself as a band
of frank, gallant and daring intellects ...&rdquo; Good show, professor
&amp; poet Enright!  Your antecedent is a bit off: it refers to the
journal and can't also refer to a group of people, poetic license
notwithstanding.

Aside from this gross lapsus grammaticus, the poet is all
wrong: none of &ldquo;our band&rdquo; has ever called himself or herself
an &ldquo;intellect,&rdquo; as Howard and chums are wont to do for each
other.  The rest of his quotation is too silly to waste ink on.  But
if this is Enright &ldquo;in typical form,&rdquo; you might well think twice
before shelling out &pound;12.50 or about $20.00 for 211 pages of
stale huffing &amp; puffing by a pass&eacute; poet.

As my friends in business assure me, &ldquo;The only bad
publicity is no publicity.&rdquo;  So, the $5.82 postage I wasted on
airmailing a copy of Maledicta to Philip Howard wasn't a total
loss.

*[Reinhold Aman, Ph.D., Maledicta]*

## Paring Pairs Prizes

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or &pound;18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box 199,
Aylesbury, Bucks, HP20 1TQ England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer.  Please use a postcard*.

## Paring Pairs No. 14

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some clues, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Those waiting to swim?  
(b). &eacute;t&eacute;.  
(c). Basic weapon.  
(d). Caused Trojan War and no end of trouble.  
(e). Interdigitator.  
(f). Grand, central illness.  
(g). He is not an oinophile.  Pourquoi Pas?  
(h). Valet dresses lucky Frenchman.  
(i). Fortuneteller at *The Times*.  
(j). Finis.  
(k). Mission of the UN.  
(l). Seat monitor filled with ennui.  
(m). Tattooed message.  
(n). Concubine's part.  
(o). Navajo bottle.  
(p). Excessively lubricous French city.  
(q). Book peddler.  
(r). Silly fool approaching Macbeth's castle.  
(s). What Robin Hood did.  
(t). Annoying Peeping Tom.  
(u). Heavy soup.  
(v). Sanguine South Pacific betel-chewer?   
(w). Exup&eacute;ry novel about heroic departure?  
(x). Leg.  
(y). Noise at Wimbledon.  
(z). Bill sings well.

(1). Bean.  
(2). Bed.  
(3). Bloody.  
(4). Body.  
(5). Book.  
(6). Bored.  
(7). Chairman.  
(8). Coal.  
(9). Cue.  
(10). Disease.  
(11). Dunce.  
(12). End.  
(13). English.  
(14). File.  
(15). Flight.  
(16). French.  
(17). Gone.  
(18). Gun.  
(19). Hand.  
(20). Helen.  
(21). In.  
(22). Inane.  
(23). Indian.  
(24). Knight.  
(25). Loaf.  
(26). Loose.  
(27). Made.  
(28). Marian.  
(29). Mary.  
(30). No.  
(31). One.  
(32). Pain.  
(33). Paper.  
(34). Piece.  
(35). Pierre.  
(36). Pool.  
(37). Porter.  
(38). Prophet.  
(39). Racket.  
(40). Robes.  
(41). Roll.  
(42). Staple.  
(43). Stocking.  
(44). Stuffer.  
(45). Tennis.  
(46). Terminal.  
(47). Ton.  
(48). Too.  
(49). Voice.  
(50). Weaver.  
(51). Why.  
(52). Window.  
(53). Work.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 13

The correct answer is (21) Jovial.  The solutions are given
below.  The winner of No. 13 was Jinny Jones, Bethesda,
Maryland.

(a). Lashings of dried plums.  (30, 52) Prune Whip.  
(b). Many new watches have it.  (37, 18) Second Hand.  
(c). Bronx cheer for demimonde.  (32, 46) Raspberry Tart.  
(d). Supine and dead.  (1, 50) Belly Up.  
(e). Pan bad actor.  (34, 17) Roast Ham.  
(f). Only one of many in Hell.  (16, 37) Grilled Soul.  
(g). Diesel fuel from Cockney ooker.  (19, 11) Hors d'Oeuvre.  
(h). Irritating Beauty.  (7, 10) Chafing Dish.  
(i). Disarmament on the up-and-up.  (22, 35) Kosher Salt.  
(j). Soviet complaint.  (33, 51) Red Whine.  
(k). Dyspeptic German.  (40, 23) Sour Kraut.  
(l). Belgian child.  (6, 42) Brussel Sprout.  
(m). Drunken coward.  (15, 8) Fried Chicken.  
(n). Causes stir among golfers?  (47, 41) Tee Spoon.  
(o). Sane spouse.  (43, 25) Stable Mate.  
(p). Slender supplication for nutty confection.  (29, 24) Pray Lean.  
(q). Turnabout's Poe story.  (3, 2) Biter Bit.  
(r). A votre sant&eacute;!  (14, 48) French Toast.  
(s). Oviparous adder.  (13, 9) Egg Crate.  
(t). Reared to be disdainfully ironic to *Life* staff.  (53, 4) Wry Bred.  
(u). Purple rear or just dessert?  (27, 12) Plum Duff.  
(v). Found tobacco substitute.  (38, 35) Smoked Salmon.  
(w). Unusually tasty investment.  (31, 44) Rare Stake.  
(x). Situation of some delicacy.  (20, 28) Hot Potato.  
(y). Chocolate tram.  (45, 49) Sweet Trolley. 
(z). Capital English heatwave.  (25, 5) London Broil.  

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Soldier Talk*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Soldier-Cragg-Ernest-Elting/dp/B00D4MSC24)
Col. John R. Elting, U.S. Army, Ret., Sgt. Major Dan Cragg, U.S. Army, Ret., Sgt. 1st Cl., and Ernest L. Deal, U.S. Army, Ret., (Scribner's, 1984), xiv + 383pp.

This dictionary comprises approximately 3800 words and
phrases peculiar to the vocabulary of soldiers of the United
States Army from its original establishment to the present and
to that of their predecessors of the Colonial Period.  Examples
have been chosen to provide a representative selection of day-to-day
speech in the Army during peacetime and war.  They
include slang; abbreviations and acronyms; technical terms;
expressions borrowed from foreign languages, allied and enemy
forces, and civilian life; eponyms and invented words; nicknames
of famous commanders, units, weapons, and battles; and
military folklore.  There are also samples of obsolescent, little-used,
and ephemeral expressions.

Standard terms pertaining to Army regulation, rank, command,
and decorations are included when they have special
historical significance or colloquial meanings that differ notably
from their official ones.  The short appendices of U.S. Navy and
Marine Corps vocabulary contain expressions which are also
more or less common knowledge in the Army.  All of the
combat and most of the support branches of the Army are
represented, including the Air Force, both during its existence
as a branch of Army command and as an independent service.
There is also a selection of expressions used by West Point
cadets with reference to classroom and social life as well as the
daily routine and traditions of the United States Military
Academy.

Entries are dated by historic names of conflicts rather than
a chronology of the major and minor wars and lesser actions in
which the United States Army has been engaged.  Interim
periods are designated by headings such as *Ancient, Colonial,
Old, Old Army, Occupation of Japan, Post-World War II*, and
*Modern*.  Annual equivalents of each are listed in a table at the
beginning of the *Dictionary*.  About four fifths of the terms
collected in this work postdate 1860.

The bibliography consists of about two hundred titles and
contains standard military, slang, dialect, historical, and foreign-language
dictionaries, besides an up-to-date selection of
scholarly and linguistic studies.  A noteworthy feature is the
inclusion of works of fiction by soldier-authors such as *From
Here to Eternity*, by James Jones, and *The Lionheads*, by Josiah
Bunting, from which brief quotations have been excerpted to
illustrate a number of entries.

It must be said that *A Dictionary of Soldier Talk* has
aspects that are not characteristic of most military dictionaries.
The joint professional careers of the compilers span eighty-five
years, four major wars, and service in half a dozen branches of
the Army and the Marine Corps.  Their knowledge of many
terms in the *Dictionary* is first-hand, and in such cases they
have often enriched its entries with anecdotes, reminiscences,
and blunt opinions of commanders and national policies; they
have even included recipes for the preparation of powerful
alcoholic drinks.  These embellishments are lively, entertaining,
informative, often full of humor, and sometimes grim, but all
are personal, and it is this point of view and style that
permeate the *Dictionary*.

The wing weenies have worked it over long before our
throttle jockey walks out to his Thud.*

—Thud Ridge, Jack Broughton, Lippincott, 1969.

Few quotations in the *Dictionary* so well exemplify the
unintelligibility of American military argot to outsiders.  The
expressions come from Modern Air Force usage.  *Wing weenie*
is slang for a 'wing officer who serves as staff assistant to the
commander.' *Thud* is a nickname for 'the F-105 Thunderchief
fighter-bomber' used in combat throughout most of the Viet
Nam War, and a *throttle jockey* is a 'fighter pilot.'  Another,
earlier example is *Bed-Check Charlie.  Bed check* alludes to
nightly supervision of barracks by noncommissioned officers
after &ldquo;Lights Out.&rdquo;  However, *Bed-Check Charlie* refers to
antiquated enemy reconnaissance aircraft that regularly flew
over American lines at twilight during the Korean War, but
could not be picked up by radar and were too slow to be
intercepted by fast jet fighters.

The *Dictionary* contains many terms that have hidden as
well as apparent meanings, and the explanations of their covert
significance are always enlightening.  How many draftees, on
their first arrival in camp, have cheered the announcement by a
beaming sergeant that they were &ldquo;Just in time for a *GI party*&rdquo;
only to find that it had nothing to do with convivial refreshments
but meant a thorough cleaning of the barracks?  The
definition of *chief of staff* can be found in any standard
English-language dictionary—but not the information that it
also means an officer's wife.  In the era of the *Old Army*
(1919-1941), 'a commanding officer's wife' was a *COW*, but in
lower-case letters *cow* is Modem cadet slang for 'a third-year
man at West Point, Annapolis, or the Air Force Academy.'
What civilian without military experience would realize that
among male soldiers, the *Bay of Pigs* formerly meant quarters
occupied by members of the Women's Army Corps?

Even the nomenclature of weapons components has its
surprises.  *Headspace* means 'the clearance between the bolt-face
of a rifle or machine gun and the base of a chambered
cartridge'; if it is too large the weapon will not fire.  Hence it
has become a metaphor applied to stupid and inept soldiers.
But *checking the headspace*, which is an armorer's responsibility,
is also used in the Army and Marine Corps for 'any kind of
routine investigation.'  A *flash hider* is 'a device attached to the
muzzles of small arms to suppress the muzzle flash' that might
reveal their position when fired in combat; but *flash hider
removed* is Modem Medical Service slang for '*circumcision*.'

The *Dictionary* has flaws which occasionally make it
confusing and awkward to use.  Cross references and bibliographic
citations are casual and frequently not indicated at all.
There are also long entries without numbered subdivisions to
clearly separate definitions from explanatory passages and
anecdotes.  The *General Chronology*, in particular, is too idiosyncratic
and should be revised to conform with recognized
practice for dating the events of United States history.  Exact or
approximate annual dates should follow each entry word
together with abbreviations for historic periods and conflicts.
This would provide the essential chronological data and eliminate
such imprecise designations as *Ancient*, and *Old, Old
Army*.

I have no major criticisms of the *Dictionary* that the
compilers themselves have not already acknowledged: that its
coverage of Air Force terminology is insufficient; that they
have unintentionally &ldquo;slighted&rdquo; the Coast Guard; that there are
too few examples of special expressions used by black servicemen;
and that their selections from the speech of women
members of the Army may be dated.  Nevertheless, these
deficiencies do not significantly detract from the over-all merit
of the work.  Colonel Elting and Sergeants Cragg and Deal have
done a fine job of assembling from widely scattered sources the
colorful, richly varied, and abundant information which is to be
found in *A Dictionary of Soldier Talk*.  Henceforth, all who seek
to know more about this fascinating area of the American
language will be in their debt.

*K. Lawrence Parker*

## From Za-za to San-san: The Climate of Japanese Onomatopoeia
*David Galef, New York City*

Bells in Japan ring with a *jan-jan* sound; roosters cry
*kokekokko*.  &ldquo;Even the dogs in Japan,&rdquo; remarked one long-term
foreign resident, &ldquo;speak Japanese.&rdquo;  True enough: the
sound of barking is written as *wan-wan*, not all that far from
canine reality.  But what is one to make of *bata-bata*, the sound
of beating wings, or *goro-goro*, approximating the rolling of a
barrel?  This is *giseigo*, the Japanese version of onomatopoeia,
where the sound of a word imitates its meaning.

Japanese onomatopoeia is really divided into two groups,
*giseigo* and *gitaigo*.  The three characters which make up
*giseigo* mean 'mimic-voice-language,' really a word imitating a
sound.  The word *b&umacr;-b&umacr;*, for example, means 'to complain or
grunt' because it is the sound a pig makes.  *Gitaigo*, on the
other hand, is an attempt to represent the sound of an action,
subtler and more abstract than *giseigo*.  An interesting instance
of this second grouping is *sassato*, which means 'quickly' or
'promptly.' While possibly disconcerting to the foreigner trying
to learn Japanese, these expressions add a lot of color to an
otherwise polite, honorific language.  In fact, a Japanese
speaker's style has a lot to do with the amount of *giseigo* and
*gitaigo* he uses: the more sound-expressions, the more vivid the
speech.

Since the world of nature figures so prominently in
Japanese life, numerous expressions exist to capture the seasonal
phenomena.  A light wind makes a *hy&umacr;-hy&umacr;* sound; as the
wind picks up, it becomes *py&umacr;-py&umacr;*; and a gale makes a
rhythmic *by&umacr;-by&umacr;* sound.  For those who like to form lexical
rules, the *h* to *p* to *b* sequence usually represents stronger and
stronger force.  While *pata-pata*, for example, may be the flap
of little wings, *bata-bata* might represent a helicopter's massive
dislocation of air.  The *k* to *g* switch follows the same pattern.
The familiar syllabic repetition represents a continuing state.
For the Japanese, even smoothly flowing actions have this
alliterative repetition.

Rain, so quintessentially Japanese, comes in a variety of
forms: *za-za* is a downpour, heavy slanted drops soaking one to
the skin.  *Potsu-potsu* is a medium rain, striking the roof tiles,
perhaps with a pinging sound.  Finally, as the rain tapers off to
a drizzle, the sound modulates to a polite *shito-shito*.  The
clouds roll away (*goro-goro*) and the sun shines brilliantly, *san-san*.
Later, at night, the stars come out, twinkling *kira-kira*.
And once in a great while, a shooting star may go flashing *pika-pika*
toward the horizon.  The Japanese natural world has its
own distinct personality.

The Japanese represent their moods in a variety of sounds,
as well.  In moments of exasperation, they grimace *muka-muka*,
or gnash their teeth with a *giri-giri* sound.  Nervousness makes
them *waku-waku*, and real fright causes them to tremble *buru-buru*
all over.  The *shiku-shiku* sound of sobbing can be heard
right through a Japanese screen.  In the neighboring house,
someone is smiling *niko-niko* as he listens to a funny story.  The
punchline is delivered, and he gives out a big *gera-gera* belly
laugh.  In the next room, however, someone is exhausted (*kuta-kuta*)
and trying to sleep.  A half-hour later comes the *g&umacr;-g&umacr;* of
gentle snoring.  Japanese households can be very noisy and
complex in a quiet, simple way.

This is not to say that English onomatopoeia is so plain,
and in fact there are some interesting cross-cultural equivalents.
A *pocha-pocha* Japanese child becomes roly-poly in America.

The *kera-kera* laugh, a step down from the rollicking *gera-gera,*
approximates 'giggle' in English.  *Jara-Jara* in Japan is as good as
a jingle in New Jersey.  As for the annoyed *humph, fun*
(pronounced &ldquo;foon&rdquo;) is a much-used Japanese equivalent.  The
Japanese terms, however, extend to a variety of what English-speakers
would consider silent actions: *jiro-jiro* is 'to stare in
fascination,' the way many Japanese still do at foreigners.

The world of abstract actions, *gitaigo*, is more of a puzzle
to nonnative speakers.  The literal meaning of *gitaigo* is 'mimic-condition-language,'
or mimesis, though the phonic connections
seem less obvious than with the reduplicated words.  Why does
*pittari* mean 'to fit perfectly' or *sokkuri* 'to be exactly alike'?
The word *gisshiri* 'squeezed in' or 'packed full' has resonances
of the English *squished*, but why does one resolve a matter
*shikkari to* 'firmly or decisively'?  For the most part, these are
words not representable by Chinese ideograms, so the etymology
is unclear.  Written in the phonetic *kana* syllabary, they
appear to antedate the importation of Chinese characters by
several hundred years: sounds before signs.  Questioning a
number of Japanese on the subject produces the response that
words like *hakkiri* ('clearly, obviously') simply sound like their
denoted conditions.  Such is the essence of any onomatopoeia,
and though *gitaigo* tends to be more adverbial in usage than
the general *giseigo*, it may simply be that the Japanese have a
more refined phonic sense.  The onomatopoeic *giseigo* always
makes good intuitive sense: *bara-bara*, which is the sound of an
object breaking into pieces, has come to mean 'scattered' or 'on
all different levels.'  &ldquo;This English class,&rdquo; a Japanese instructor
might say of his students, &ldquo;is *bara-bara*.&rdquo;

Though it would be an exaggeration to say that there is a
Japanese sound-word for every occurrence, a full list would be
extremely long.  This is a country where trains rattle along
*goton-goton* and buzzers go *bun-bun*.  On the train, a lively
*pichi-pichi* young girl is kicking and struggling *jita-bata*, while
an old man with his clothes *boro-boro* (in tatters) looks on.  It
sounds like a scene from Japanese comics, which in fact rely
heavily on *giseigo* for their impact.  The American *pow* and *zap*
seem uninspired by comparison.  The Japanese for *pow*, incidentally,
is *pachin*, while a ray-gun's *zap* is *bii-bii*, coincidentally
the sound of a baby's crying.

The association of onomatopoeia with comics is not
accidental.  *Giseigo* and *gitaigo* remain informal, sometimes
pungent expressions, bespeaking easy usage.  That is not to say
they are slang.  Even the staid *Kenky&umacr;sha Dictionary* admits
their lexical validity.  Still, the words retain a nonrigorous
quality, not entirely fit for serious scholarship.  Far better to get
a sense of them *bura-bura*: 'wandering around aimlessly,
looking at the sights with no fixed destination in mind.'


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Vineyard Christian Fellowship of River Edge: A body of
spirit-filled Christians gathering weekly to worship, teach and
meet the needs of each other and the community.&rdquo;  [From an
advertisement in the Twin-Boro News, June 13, 1984, p. 41.
Submitted by W. Frank Kearney, Bergenfield, New Jersey.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English*](https://www.routledge.com/The-New-Partridge-Dictionary-of-Slang-and-Unconventional-English/Dalzell-Victor/p/book/9780367570491)
Eric Partridge, eighth edition ed. and rev. by Paul Beale, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1984), 1400 pp.

We all collect slang, as part of our idiosyncratic vocabularies.
No one person's slang is identical with another's.  We all
change our slang continually.  It is the most evanescent and
voguish kind of language.  The slang of the Vietnam War
period, *no way*, and all that, sound already dated over here: a
sign that the speaker is getting on, set in his or her ways.  I have
two Greek girl cousins who came out of Greece at the end of
the war, and were sent to posh English girl's boarding schools
in the 1950s.  They picked up the genteel English slang of the
period, and then went back to Greece, where their English
slang was fossilized, and did not move on with that of the rest
of us.  So they still use it today: &ldquo;Wizard beanfeast, Philip, old
bean.&rdquo;  It sounds charming, and endearing, but quaint.

The attempt to record and explain the slang of all British
English-speakers is as Herculean an enterprise as trying to
record all the grains of sand, and shells, and bits of seaweed,
and their position, on a big beach (say St. Andrews) between
one high tide and another.  To attempt it as a one-man band,
without professional academic assistance, relying only on correspondents
and fellow amateurs, is insane as well as Herculean.
Yet this was the enterprise to which Eric Partridge devoted his
long life, with Herculean success.  He published the first volume
of *A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English* in 1937.
But, having put the engine of research in motion, he could not
stop.  His Addenda and revisions grew so numerous that by
1961 they warranted a second alphabetical volume, more than
half as big as the original.  Slang and the Partridge hunt for it
have not slowed down since then.  This is his last and posthumous
work.

Partridge was working on it until six weeks before his
death at the age of 85 on 1 June 1979.  But he had handed over
his voluminous notes, comprising some 5,000 new entries, in
the autumn of 1978, to Paul Beale, the man he had chosen to
carry on his task.  Nearly 1,000 of the entries had been
contributed by Beale himself, who was one of his volunteer
army of Seven Maids with Seven Mops who were trying to
sweep the beach clear of slang.  Beale had started a regular and
copious correspondence about language with Partridge in early
1974, when the former was nearing the end of 21 years service
with the Intelligence Corps of the British Army.  The services
and war are great provokers of slang, and Partridge was always
rich in military slang, just as he was always rich in Antipodean
slang: he was born in New Zealand, and studied in Australia.

I hope that the great publication will continue to be
revised and brought up to date for as long as people speak
English.  But this is the last edition to which Partridge himself
can contribute his peculiar talents.  The biggest change has
been to conflate the two previous volumes into one fat
alphabetical run.  It was tiresome and confusing to look up, let
us say *Horse*, and find assorted and sometimes conflicting
information in Volumes I and II.  It was irritating to find *How's
your father?*  in Volume I but *How's your sister?*  in Volume II.
The other major change of presentation has been to group in a
large appendix at the back self-contained bodies of slang that
were too long to fit comfortably into the main body of the text:
for example, slang of prisoners of war in the last war; the rich
jargon of Tiddlywinks; and the profusion of undergrowth that
has grown around the word *kibosh*.

Inconsistencies, blind entries, duplications, and some
downright contradictions have been removed; though no collection
of slang can ever be free from such things.  To make room
for the new material, Paul Beale has left out a considerable
number of solecisms and catachreses, illiteracies, or phrases
couched in a grammar inconsistent with that of Standard
English, and malapropisms.  He has omitted some examples of
Cockney dialect, not because of a prejudice against Cockney,
but because he considers it a true dialect: if you include
Cockney, you should include the whole *English Dialect Dictionary*,
which would break the back of the book.

The Dictionary is intended to deal mainly with British
English.  Accordingly, Paul Beale has largely ignored the slang
of the two imported fads that swept the country while he was
preparing the work: skateboarding, and Citizens' Band radio.
Skateboarding actually did sweep the country; CB dropped
stillborn into Britain, and has been a total failure, to the grief
of manufacturers of the kit.

Here is the latest *Partridge* then.  What do we make of it?
The first thing that a new reader will notice is that nine tenths
of the slang is out of date.  Not many living Englishmen would
understand the meaning of, say, *to be fullied*, or would cry to a
friend to *snite his snitch*.  Partridge aimed at a historical
dictionary of all English slang from the beginning of gibble-gabble,
and nothing becomes obsolete quicker than slang.  His
work is a useful conflation of all previous such dictionaries and
collections from Frances Grose onwards.  Eton College slang,
for example, is taken from a publication of 1900; not much of
it would be used, or even recognized, by an Etonian today.

The second inevitable flaw in *Partridge* is that it is based
almost entirely on written sources, either previous publications
or correspondents of varying merit writing in about their
observations and interpretations of slang.  It is a melancholy,
but not surprising fact that those enthusiasts who can be
bothered to write unsolicited letters on such matters are not
necessarily the most authoritative witnesses.  In my lesser
experience, they are often nutters.

Of all parts of language, slang is more an oral than a
written form.  By the time it comes to be written down, quite
often the neophiliacs and trendy slang-makers are becoming
bored with the word and have moved on to something new.
The ideal way to make a dictionary of slang would be to send
out researchers with tape-recorders and notebooks to ask
people what they thought they meant by such-and-such a word
or phrase.  You could then draw tables and isoglosses to show
the spread and different connotations of bits of slang.  That is
the way that Harold Orton's English Dialect Survey at the
University of Leeds works.  And that has academic finance, and
has managed to cover only a small fraction of English dialect,
mostly dying rural dialect rather than growing urban dialect.
Where is the dotty, obsessive, logophile multi-billionaire who
will support such a project?  Until he comes along, thank you
and good night for Eric Partridge and Paul Beale.  They are the
best and broadest amateur slang-collectors in the field.

*Philip Howard*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The [Senate Banking] Committee's Democratic members
expressed dismay that Miss [Martha] Seger, Michigan's former
commissioner for financial institutions, hasn't written any
articles explaining her views on monetary policy and the
economy.  Sen. Donald Reigle, a Michigan Democrat, said,
&ldquo;Your views aren't generally known, and on a matter of such
enormity ... people need to know.&rdquo;  [From the Wall St. Journal,
n.d.  Submitted by Arkules &amp; Associates, Paradise Valley,
Arizona.].

## ENGLISH ENGLISH
*Philip Howard*

The image of London propagated abroad by the tourist
industry bears as little relation to the real thing as the image of
New York propagated in the other direction.  There is more to
London, thank King Lud, than the Changing of the Guard,
Tower Bridge (often misrepresented as London Bridge, and in
any case a massive blot on the riverscape), and Pearly Kings
and Queens talking Cockney; just as there is, I dare say, more
to New York than that ostentatious skyline and the tawdry
glitter of Broadway.

First Visitors to London arrive expecting to find the place
crowded with cheerful Cockneys talking to each other in
rhyming slang: &ldquo;Ullo Fred.  Come in awf de frog an' toad [road]
an' 'ave a cuppa Rosie [cup of tea].  It's on de Cain an' Abel
[table].  But wipe yer plates o' meat [feet] cos de ol' trouble an'
strife [wife]'s just scrubbed de Rory O'More [floor].  She's up de
apples an' pears [upstairs] 'avin' a bo-peep [sleep].  I'm still on
de cob an' coal [dole].  Get into that lion's lair [chair] and let's
chew the fat [have a chat].&rdquo;

Contrary to this romantic advertising agency view, rhyming
slang has always been a small part of the Muvver Tongue of
Cockney dialect.  And in any case the Blitz, the death of the
inner London docks, and the waves of new immigration have
redistributed the Cockneys miles away from the sound of Bow
Bell, and made Pearly Kings and Queens an endangered
species, preserved only for the tourists.

Nevertheless Cockney rhyming slang does still live, and
creates new words.  A recent arrival into the lexicon of London
slang is *bottle*.  Over the past few years it has come to be
widely used in informal contexts to mean 'spirits, chutzpah,
guts, courage'; what Brits used to call *spunk* a generation ago.
The word has been widely broadcast by the Milk Marketing
Board, whose advertising slogans persuade Brits to drink more
cow juice per caput than any other nation in the world.  There
was DRINKA PINTA MILKA DAY.  The latest slogan, somewhat
derivative, is GOTTA LOTTA BOTTLE, beside pictures of pint
bottles of the milk that is delivered to the British doorstep
every morning.  A persuasive motto, no doubt, for those that
like such things.  But whence the *bottle*—and wherefore—
brothers and sisters?

The word has been around for a while in low slang.  *The
Swell's Night Guide*, published in 1846, defines *no bottle*, or
*not a lot of bottle*, as 'no good or useless,' with this example:
&ldquo;She thought it would be no bottle, 'cos her rival would go in a
buster.&rdquo;  The new vogue use of *bottle* has changed its meaning
to something like 'courage.'  Rhyming slang, would you say?  If
so, what is the rhyme?  I made the mistake of raising the
question in the columns of what you quaintly describe as &ldquo;*The
London Times*&rdquo; and received a large, entertaining, and scabrous
correspondence, too rude to publish in *The Times*.

The solution to the puzzle is scatological.  Slang often is.  I
will try to put the matter politely.  But those of a nervous
disposition had better leave the page at this point.

There were many ingenious and persuasive suggestions of
the origin of *bottle*.  Could it be *bottle of wine* 'spine' as in the
metaphor of showing backbone, or being spineless?  What about
*bottle of stout* 'clout,' as in, &ldquo;She's got lots of clout in the right
places.&rdquo;  Might it be *bottle of courage* (Courage is also the name
of a mass brewer with pubs all over London: when feeling low,
you can look up almost anywhere in London and read a sign
exhorting you to TAKE COURAGE)?  I even received a learned
Hebrew exegesis from the Talmud, by which the transliteration
*bottle*, meaning 'to make something useless or void,' has moved
into the slang of British low-life.  I find this last explanation
enchanting, but unpersuasive.  There were those who declared
that *bottle* was simply a euphemism for *bottom*, in the sense of
'staying-power.'

Thumbs-down to all of those.  The answer is obvious, if I
had stopped to think about it.  The phase in full is *bottle and
glass*, and the rhyme is, I regret to have to tell you, with *arse*,
or, as you spell it so confusingly for donkeys, *ass.*

To *lose one's bottle* is to 'lose control of one's anal
sphincter, in moments of extreme fear, and dirty oneself.'  The
unpleasant phenomenon is illustrated by the old story of
Admiral Nelson.  Nelson is struck by a musket ball during a
naval engagement, and calls to his cabin-boy: &ldquo;Bring me my
scarlet jacket: I would not have the men see that I am hit.&rdquo;
Just then the First Officer hurries up, and cries: &ldquo;Admiral,
Admiral, we have just sighted another fifty French sails to
windward.&rdquo;  Nelson shouts after the cabin-boy: &ldquo;While you're
about it, bring my brown trousers.&rdquo;

There is much supporting evidence for this interpretation.
The phrase probably originated in low-life and prisoners' argot.
I was sent a poem entitled &ldquo;Requiem for a Dying Geligniter,&rdquo;
written by a man in prison and containing the line: &ldquo;And you
think of the day that your bottle gave way when popping off
one that went wrong.&rdquo;  If you go to watch West Ham, in the
East End, playing football, the crowd taunt an opposition
player to whom they have taken a dislike by making a circle
with their thumb and forefinger, and expanding and contracting
the circle rapidly.  They are miming the Cockney
phrase, &ldquo;Your bottle is going like a tanner [obsolete small coin]
and a 'alf-crahn [obsolete large coin].&rdquo;  That is to say, you have
no guts, you are scared out of your wits, you have shat
yourself, and West Ham Rules, OK?

The worst that can be said about a Punk, or a Rocker, or
any other teenage football hoodlum, is that he has lost his
*bottle*.  Do not do so, without putting on your running shoes.
Because the phrase is rude, its meaning has been unusually
obscured by a second piece of rhyming slang: *arris.  Arris* is a
shortening of *Aristotle*, rhyming slang for *bottle*, short for *bottle
and glass*, equals *arse*.  Uniquely the phrase has now acquired a
third rhyme: *plaster.  Plaster of Paris* equals *arris; arris* equals
*Aristotle; Aristotle* rhymes with *bottle; bottle* is short for *bottle
and glass; glass* rhymes with *arse*.  Hence you could hear a
Cockney say something like: &ldquo;Cor, that Richard's (*Richard the
Third*, equals *bird*, equals 'nubile young woman,' but can also
equal *turd*) got a smashing *plaster*.&rdquo;

It is agreeable to realize that the Milk Marketing Board's
proud claim that milk has GOTTA LOTTA BOTTLE would, if in
the least true, render the Board liable to prosecution under the
clean food legislation.  One is alarmed at the etymological
ignorance, or lack of curiosity, of the Eng. Lit. graduates who
dreamed it up.

Other rude rhyming slang much used by many who would
be horrified if they realized what they were saying includes
*berk [Berkeley Hunt* = the '*pudendum muliebre*']; *iron [iron
hoof* = *poof*]; and *cobblers* [*cobblers' awls* = balls].  Recently
rhyming slang has started to disguise itself with second rhymes,
so that insiders can use it without giving offense to the
outsiders.  Thus, a Greek is no longer a *bubble and squeak*, but
a *bacon*, bacon, bubble and squeak being a common order in a
cafe.  The best one I ever heard at the races was: &ldquo;She got
down on her *biscuits* and gave me a *hundred to eight.&rdquo;  Biscuits
= biscuits and cheese = knees; hundred to eight = plate =
plate of ham = gam = gamahuche*, or 'fellatio.'  It's poetry of
a vulgar sort.  But I bet that the Tourist Board don't put
anything as realistic as that in their puffs.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Words about Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/Words-David-Grambs-McClain-Printing-Company/1194679103/bd)
David Grambs, (McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1984), xix + 409pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

You may not believe it, but I spend an inordinate amount
of time thinking about alphabetical order.  I do not mean
whether L comes before or after M, or the proper order of a
sequence like *pa, PA, Pa, Pa., P.A.*, and *p.a.*  I refer to the
infuriating restrictions placed upon the presentation of certain
kinds of information by the Procrustean bed of alphabetical
order.  Alphabetical order is dandy if you want to look up a
word, like *frangipane* or *clavicembalo* in a dictionary, and if
you know how to spell it.  It is of utterly no use if, confining the
example to dictionaries, you want to look up

>1.  a word you cannot spell,
>
>2.  one or more words that were derived from a given
word in a source language,
>
>3.  all of the words ending in -*phobia*,
>
>4.  all of the words with the combination *-mpl-* in the
middle,
>
>5.  all of the words in which the *-th-* combination is
pronounced as in *hothouse*,
>
>6.  all of the loanwords in English from Swahili,
>
>7.  all of the words that have anything to do with the idea
of 'book,'
>
>8.  all of the words that form their plurals by adding *-en*
(instead of *-s, -es*, etc.),
>
>9.  all of the words that retain a &ldquo;foreign&rdquo; pronunciation in
English,

etc.  The information is all there, but it is completely inaccessible
(unless the dictionary is stored in a computer with an
elaborate database system or provided with an index).  To be
sure, there are other books, adjuncts to the dictionary, that may
list the information in a retrievable form.  But it is one of the
great frustrations of my life that one cannot find what is being
sought without going to an enormous amount of trouble,
especially when confronted with a very large dictionary.

It is a pity that David Grambs's book has to be in
alphabetical order, as it contains a huge amount of fascinating
information, and, I must confess, I find it tedious (after all
these years) to have to read a book—especially as readable a
book as this—in alphabetical order.  Yet, there are compensations,
not only in the rewards to be derived from a thorough,
consecutive read-through of the book, but also because, at the
end of some alphabetic letters, the author has provided some
specialized glossaries and other information that is thematically
oriented.  It is also adroitly referred to in the &ldquo;regular&rdquo; parts of
the book.

*Words about Words* is a dictionary of words used in
writing about writing and language.  It is very well done, and
the definitions are models of clarity, notably unwarped by the
constraints of space.  Most useful, interesting, entertaining, and
revealing are the citations that accompany most of the entries.
These, drawn from an eclectic selection of modern writing, are
not telegraphic, as one finds them in the *OED* or in Merriam-Webster's
*Unabridged*, but full and virtually whole, with syntax
intact.  There is plenty of context, and the selections are
themselves interesting to read:

>*ladies' club rhythm.*  Wolcott Gibbs's term for mannered
suspensions or discontinuities in the styling of
direct speech, or dialogue presented in sections or
bits within a sentence

I suffer myself very seriously from writers who divide
quotes from some kind of ladies' club rhythm.  &ldquo; 'I
am going,' he said, 'downtown' &rdquo; is a horror, and
unless a quote is pretty long I think it ought to stay
on one side of the verb.

—Wolcott Gibbs, in

*Editors on Editing*

That is fairly typical of the style of entry.  Not all of the entries
are quite that picturesque—how could they be?  Writers, even
the best, are not at their best when writing about writing.  But,
lest you misunderstand me, the citations are not all taken from
writers writing on writing.  For instance, here is Thomas P.
(&ldquo;Tip&rdquo;) O'Neill on *metaphor*, following the definition:

>The Speaker of the House is not a goddamned metaphor;
I have never been a metaphor and, God willing,
I never shall be.

—quoted in *The New Republic*

Would that all of our dictionaries had such citations!

Grambs, who works as an editor and translator, was on the
staff of the first edition of *The American Heritage Dictionary*.
He must have had fun doing this book, but that could not have
diminished the work involved.

The Special Entry sections, of which there are twenty,
cover such diverse subjects as Libel, Word-Game Words, Newsroom
Headline Jargon, Propaganda Devices, Irish Bulls, and
Advertising Weasel Words.  Carefully done, all are useful,
informative, and thought-provoking.

An unusual book, *Words about Words* is one of the few
that have crossed my desk in many years that is likely to have
some staying power.  It is good reading; unfortunately, its
chiefly alphabetical order will interfere with some people's
enjoyment of it, but it must be made clear that I have no
alternative to offer.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {David L. Gold}

Having published a ten-page review detailing the numerous
errors in Charles Berlitz's *Native Tongues*, I could not agree
more with Gordon B. Chamberlain's opinion of the book [X, 3];
but in defense of Berlitz one should point out that he was
citing German *Schwanz* (which, besides an unmarked word for
'tail,' is also a vulgarism meaning 'penis') and not, as the
reviewer thought, Yiddish *shvants* (sic recte), which has both of
these meanings plus that of 'fool.'

*[David L. Gold, Haifa, Israel]*


#### EPISTOLA {George S. Welsh}

In the Spring, 1983 issue [IX, 4], Robert Devereux questions
the inclusion of *hooch (hootch)* on Garland Cannon's list of
Japanese loanwords.  I believe the confusion comes from two
different meanings of the term in question.

The word referring to 'a strong or illegal liquor' does
indeed come from the name of the Indian tribe, Hoochinoo,
that brewed the beverage.

But the word *hooch* was (and is) used by soldiers in Korea
and Japan to refer to quonset huts and other structures.  It
seems to be a corruption of the Japanese *uchi* 'a dwelling.'

*[George S. Welsh, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;No gasoline will be sold to anyone in a glass container.&rdquo;
[From a sign in a gas station window in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Submitted by Veronica Egan, Tesuque, New Mexico.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

29\. Grief smears lady's  
1\. Well so, it's half done (for example, in a bun). (5)  
4\. Lowly hood busted in L.A. area.  (9)  
9\. The last thing out of Pandora's box is still in this one.  (4,5)  
10\. Put 50 on Air Bureauon the nose.  (5)  
11\. Agree while dispatched.  (6)  
12\. Transcaucasian gives Marine an upset.  (9)  
14\. What monks would do to books (to make the Dark Ages lighter?).  (10)  
16\. Note before me from celebrity.  (4)  
19\. In Chicago at first sign of New Year.  (4)  
20\. Cooper hero eyes larder obliquely.  (10)  
22\. Unbalanced arrangement of &ldquo;Tan Blues.&rdquo;  (8)  
23\. *Enterprise's* first space warp was for getaway. (6)  
26\. Nail back a vine.  (5)  
27\. Not contracted after trust assured.  (8)  
28\. Grab a copy of object.  (4,5)  

**Down**

1\. Being around chief was Ko-Ko's task.  (9)  
2\. Yawns, flipping pages.  (5)  
3\. Tom, Dick or Harry? *Nom du diable!*  (8)  
4\. Hastened to conceal, we hear.  (4)  
5\. Alter?  True, I alter writing.  (10)  
6\. Kind of clipper for Ruth?  (6)  
7\. Actions by interpretation manifest mulishness.  (9)  
8\. Bob's last; Thomas's first.  (5)  
13\. Unites scattered rock inlets.  (10)  
15\. One who takes too much interest in his work?  (4,5)  
17\. Mistakenly sent in early. Seriously!  (9)  
18\. Stretch favrics weave class tie.  (8)  
21\. The ultimate &ldquo;State of the Union&rdquo; address?  (6)  
22\. A bed in France is dark. (5)  
24\. Noon?  Correct!  (5)  
25\. Born after weekend in low joint.  (4)


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;For example, we visit a school that teaches how to pick
up girls and a blind carpenter.&rdquo;  [Milwaukee Journal TV-radio
critic reporting (February 3, 1981) on what we could learn by
watching CBS show &ldquo;That's My Line.&rdquo;  Submitted by Reinhold
Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 


**Across**

1\. is-sue.  
4\. Horoscope.  
9\. Telephone.  
10\. NASAL.  
11\. RUSTIC.  
12\. STEROIDS.  
14\. Englishman.  
16\. TAL-C.  
19\. Tree.  
20\. Cricketeer.  
22\. ENTRAILS.  
23\. NAVAH-O.  
26\. TEALS.  
27\. April fool.  
28\. AMENDMENT.  
29\. DREAD.  

**Down**

1\. INTERCEPT.    
2\. S-ALE-S.    
3\. Ex-PLIC-it.  
4\. Hoot.  
5\. REENTRANCE.  
6\. Sun-dry.  
7\. Obstinate.  
8\. Ell-is.  
13\. SHORE LEAVE.  
15\. GREAT LAKE.  
17\. Car-Po-oled.  
18\. De-tail-ed.  
21\. Passe-d.   
22\. Extra.  
24\. AMORE.  
25\. Brut(e).


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v11n1_Summer_1984)