--- 
title: "VOL XI, No 4 [Spring, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## All Present—and Unaccounted for
*Virginia M. Prichard, Raleigh, North Carolina*

When most Americans first read the name *Sirhan Sirhan*
in the newspaper, I'll bet they thought it was a
typographical error.  No teacher of English to foreign students
would have thought this.  We know all about the Arabic
proclivity for repetition as far as names are concerned.  I have
taught a *Shamoun Shamoun*, a *Hussein Hussein*, and a
*Mohamed Mohamed*.  At present, there is an *Ali Ali* in my
conversation class.  The repetition has a fine ring to it, and I've
often wondered why other languages don't take it up.  Furthermore,
it would eliminate having to explain to students that they
must write their last names first and their first names last on
forms that are going to be alphabetized.

Back in the early 1970s, when OPEC was riding high and
Arab students were arriving in the United States by the jumbo
jetload, my classes were full of *Mohameds*.  I was beginning to
suspect that every third masculine child in the Arab World was
given the Prophet's name.  I imagined an Arab mother coming
to the front door of her home to call her son in to dinner on
any street in Cairo or Amman or Ridyah.  &ldquo;Mohamed, dinner is
ready!&rdquo;  And, then, the street would be full of boys running in
all directions to get home in time to eat.  The only comparable
situation would be a mother in Dallas or Houston or Corpus
Christi going to the front door and yelling, &ldquo;Tex, come home
...dinner is served!&rdquo;

The Arab insouciance about names is something that used
to drive me wild.  Many appear to be utterly indifferent as to
which name they will use on a given day.  This led me to
suspect that Shakespeare was probably an Arab (marvelous
topic for a doctoral dissertation).  Note his insouciance: &ldquo;A rose
by any name would smell as sweet.&rdquo; How Middle Eastern!  Let
me try to explain...

One summer we had a student from Jordan named
*Mustafa Ali Al-Salem*.  All summer we referred to him either as
&ldquo;Mr. Al-Salem&rdquo; or, as we got to know him better, as &ldquo;Mustafa.&rdquo;
Sometimes he wrote &ldquo;Ali&rdquo; on his compositions.  We were
able to deal with this.  When fall came, the university to which
he transferred wrote and asked for the records of a Mr.
Shobaki.  I wrote back and told them that no Mr. Shobaki had
attended our program.  Within a week I got an irate telephone
call from Mr. Al-Salem asking me why I would not send a
recommendation for him.  I explained that no one had asked for
one.  He said that he was now Mr. Shobaki...this being a
version of the name of his hometown.  In order to be sure of
just who he really was, I asked him for the name written on his
passport, and he said that it was &ldquo;Mohamed.&rdquo;

After several similar incidents, I began to make what
seemed (to non-Arabs) to be strange announcements on the
first day of class.  Announcements such as: &ldquo;Please pick out one
name and stick to it.&rdquo;  &ldquo;It is preferable that you go by the name
written in your passport.&rdquo;  &ldquo;The computer will not understand
that *Husseini* and *Shabani* are one and the same person.&rdquo;
Students from other language backgrounds smiled and nodded,
indicating that they did not understand what on earth I was
talking about.

Think of the ramifications of going by any name you wish
on any given day of the week!  Someday I'm going to pick a
week and do it.  On Monday, I will be *Virginia*, cool and
elegant and unflappable.  On Tuesday, I will be *Ginny*, mischievous
and without a care in the world.  I think I would like to be
*Greta* on Wednesday... mysterious, withdrawn, and exciting
to know.  Thursday it will be *Gina*, warm and laughing and
sensual.  And, Friday's girl will be *Patricia*, very upper class and
Eastern establishment...or would that be *Millicent?*  How
marvelous to answer the phone in the office and say.  &ldquo;Miss
Prichard? She's not in today.  This is Miss Meade.  Would you
like to leave a message?&rdquo;  If everyone engaged in this practice,
governments would topple.  No one would have to be in any
office at any time.  Forms and bureaucratic procedures would
go by the board.  Banks would fold.  I can think of no faster way
of creating chaos.

Among certain tribal people, there is no such thing as a
family name that is passed down from one generation to
another.  I began to get a glimmering of this when I first taught
some Afghanis who told me that they all came from the same
family but had names that did not faintly resemble one
another.  (Incidentally, they all settled in Raleigh and established
the Afghani Roofing Company.  I passed a building under
construction recently, and every man on the roof sported a
mustache and flashing white teeth.  They all waved and yelled
at me in accented English.)  According to tribal custom, the first
name is the person's given name (as it is in English); the
second name is his father's name; and the third name is his
grandfather's name.  Thus, in each succeeding generation, the
first two names move back one slot each and, so, the son of
*Akbar Walid Farouk* becomes *Ahmed Akbar Walid*.  I believe
that the Scandinavians also followed this practice until their
governments, wishing to tax them or take census counts of
them, made them light on one name and stick to it.  Scandinavian
immigrant families entering the United States together but
under entirely different names blew the minds of immigration
officials, who frequently gave up all efforts to unscramble the
situation and assigned them all the name of their hometown.
Maybe Mr. &ldquo;Shobaki&rdquo; was just following this old procedure
when he did the same thing for himself!

One final comment about Arab names before moving on
to names in other cultures.  One tends to think of Arab culture
as being the ultimate in male chauvinism, but Arab wives, at
least the professional women I've met, keep their own names
and do not lose their identity as American women do when
they marry.

I can always tell when I have a Brazilian student in my
class because the national origin of his first name never
matches the national origin of his first name.  Thus, a *Silvio
MacDonald*, an *Edison Bittencourt*, a *Pedro Tanaka*, or a
*Woodrow Wilson da Silva* is indisputably a Brazilian.  It's as
though the parents had said to themselves as they went to
register the birth of their child, &ldquo;Our last name is Portuguese
(or Japanese or whatever) and, so, to be democratic or to
promote the principle of fair play, the first name should be
something completely incongruous in order to represent the
potpourri that is Brazil.&rdquo;  Where else in the world can you find
a person with a Serbo-Croatian first name and a Welsh last
name?  This practice seems in keeping with the Brazilian love
of the unexpected, of inconsistency and contradiction.  There is
a happy carelessness about it that I love.

When the names of Spanish-speaking Latins crop up, there
are other difficulties and delights.  First of all, any woman who
has the least interest in equal rights for women will salute the
Latin habit of giving equal importance to the names of both
parents.  In Spanish-speaking countries, a person carries the
names, as well as the genes, of both parents.  How logical and
fair!  (In Virginia we do this by giving the mother's family name
as a first name, but this causes great confusion about who is a
man and who is a woman.  *Shirley Godwin* can be a boy and
*Bland Tucker* a girl.)

Let's take the student named *Fernando L&oacute;pez-Rodriguez.
L&oacute;pez* is the name of Fernando's father, and *Rodriguez* is the
name of his mother.  Unfortunately, university computers in the
U.S. tend to light on the final name when giving out grade
reports or, else, to divide up the grades and assign half to a
person named *L&oacute;pez* and half to a person named *Rodriguez*.
This has led me to make other strange announcements on the
first day of class, announcements such as: &ldquo;Don't forget your
mothers but forget your mothers' names while you're here.&rdquo;
&ldquo;The computer will think that *L&oacute;pez* and *Rodriguez* are two
different students and will act accordingly.&rdquo;  The non-Latin
students nod and smile to indicate that they do not understand
what is being said.

When a Latin American married woman appears, things
get really complicated.  Let's take the case of *Carmen Consuelo
Hern&aacute;ndez-Martinez de Alvarado*.  This incredible (to a North
American) list of names represents one person but gives credit
to the following people: the person herself, her father, her
mother, and her husband, in that order.  The computer usually
breaks down completely at this point.

When the first *Jesus* appeared in my class, he came as
rather a shock.  But, one can cope when one realizes that it is
pronounced &ldquo;Hey-sus.&rdquo;  The *Mohameds* out-number the *Jesuses*
about three to one, if that signifies anything.  In one semester,
there were three *Angels* taking grammar with me.  But, it is
Spain itself that sends out people with the most religious names
of all.  I vividly remember *Immaculada de Dios Ortiz-Gonzalez.*
She called herself &ldquo;Lala.&rdquo;

Over the years I have learned to call the rolls of my classes
with aplomb and a fair amount of accuracy (to the astonishment
of my students who are accustomed to hearing their
names mispronounced on American lips).  For sheer length, I
nominate Thai names as undisputed champions.  There is
seldom space for anything but an initial of the given name
after the family name is written down.  For tongue-twisting
difficulty I nominate Polish names.  For deceptive simplicity I
nominate Chinese names.

I challenge anyone to call the following roll aloud: *Chongrungreong,
Vaidyanathan, Naichienmai, Szalkowicz, Bamroon-grugsa,
Kioumourtzogglou*, and *Tychkowski*.  I can do it without
batting an eye.  But, I was stumped by the name of Mr. *Ng*.  I
asked him to pronounce it for me.  You can pronounce it too if
you follow the directions I provide here.  Pinch your nose with
your thumb and forefinger, close your mouth, and make the
sound you would make if you were swallowing loudly.  That's it
...Mr. *Ng*.

I enjoy trilling and rolling Spanish &ldquo;r's&rdquo; and clearing the
phlegm from my throat to make Farsee and Arabic guttural
sounds.  I'm still waiting in anticipation for an African student
with a click sound in his name.  The variety is endless, and it
makes calling class rolls an exercise in showmanship.

The easiest names seem to be the Korean ones.  Evidently,
there are three great families in Korea: the *Lees*, the *Parks,* and
the *Kims*.  Representatives from the first two made me wonder
if, somehow, a couple of Virginians had strayed into the class.
But, the *Kims* far and away outnumber all the *Lees* and the
*Parks* combined.  My rough estimate is that the *Kims* constitute
86.4 percent of the population of Korea, and I would dearly
love to see a telephone directory of the city of Seoul.  I wonder
how one finds a particular *Kim* in it.  Maybe they list people by
their occupations as is done in Denmark.

I suppose that I've saved Chinese names for last because I
met my Waterloo with them.  The problem is that the letters in
our alphabet cannot hope to represent accurately the subtle
distinctions of Chinese.  If one reads Chinese names the way
they are written in English, they will not resemble the sounds
the students make when they say them.  For example, *Shi,
Hsieh*, and *Hsu* have nearly the same sound.  I've often
wondered in near despair if they choose representations that
are purposely off the mark or if there is simply no way to
represent the sounds correctly.  Now that we are getting
students from the People's Republic of China, there is an
entirely different system of representation to deal with, one
that I find easier, more logical, and closer to the real thing.
(*Beijing* is closer to the mark than &ldquo;Peiping.&rdquo;) The representations
take some getting used to.  If a student from the Republic
of China, Taiwan, writes his name as *Shi*, a student with the
same name from the PRC will write it *Xie*.

The roll of a conversation class a few years ago contained
the following names: *Chan, Chang, Chen, Cheng, Chien, Chin*,
and *Chung*.  I made these distinctions rather well, I thought,
until I began to call on a specific student to answer a question.
When I said, &ldquo;Please answer, Mr. Cheng,&rdquo; seven voices spoke
up.  (The same thing happens with a class of *Huangs, Hwangs,*
and *Wangs*.)  For convenience and to the great amusement of
the Chinese, I referred to them thereafter as Mister One,
Mister Two, Mister Three, and so on.  But, I felt defeated and
unhappy until I learned that they have similar problems
unscrambling the English names *Joe, Joan, Joann, Jan, Jim,
Jean*, and *John*.  Still, if I required them to pronounce all the *ls*
and *rs* in *Harrelson Hall* correctly, I should be able to make
recognizable distinctions between Chinese names.

Certain individual Chinese names are a joy in themselves.
When I call on *Cheng-Chung Chan*, I think of far-away temple
bells tinkling in the wind.  I could never make it clear to Mr.
*Chu-Tren Lee* why I thought that he should say his first name
twice.  But, my all-time favorite name was *Chi-Fu Johnson Sit:*
we really had to work on the pronunciation of his last name
because of the Chinese difficulty with the difference between
the &ldquo;s&rdquo; and &ldquo;sh&rdquo; sounds.

Ordinarily, the Chinese write their names in reverse order.
That is, the family name comes first and the given name comes
last.  Imagine getting up in front of a class in which half the
people write their names in the usual order and the other half
write them in reverse order and telling them to reverse the
order of their names on the class cards for alphabetical
purposes.  This has led me to make still other strange announcements
on the first day of class.  Announcements such as: &ldquo;Write
your names in regular Chinese order.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Do not reverse your
names so that they will be reversed.&rdquo;  This is the time that the
European students begin to wonder about me, but the Chinese
understand.

Now a rather delicate aspect of the whole business of
names must be dealt with.  This concerns names that are
perfectly all right and even beautiful in the original languages
but that are taboo words in English.  When I glance down the
roll and see such a name, I inwardly thank God that there are
no native speakers of English in the class.  There was an older
student with a four-letter-word name in one of the first classes I
ever taught.  I deliberately mispronounced it, giving it two
syllables and &ldquo;cleaning it up&rdquo; so to speak.  He always shot back
the correct pronunciation in a loud voice, jolting me and
setting my teeth on edge.  There were no snickers in the class
because no students knew the word in English at that early
stage of their stay—Thank heavens!

Vietnamese names can knock out the novice teacher who
does not know how they are pronounced in Vietnamese.  In the
original Vietnamese, they are quite innocuous-sounding.  Since
the airlift in 1975, the class rolls have been sprinkled with such
names as: *Hoa, Phuoc, Dong*, and *Bich*.  I am accustomed to
them now, but, at first, I went into a kind of culture shock.
Once there was a man named Mr. *Phucfoam* in my grammar
class.  As soon as I could catch him alone, I told him that the
first syllable of his name was always silent in English.  I had to
telephone the foreign student adviser about him, and I referred
to him as &ldquo;Mr. Delfen.&rdquo;  (For male readers, *Delfen* is the brand
name of a well-known contraceptive cream.)  He said, &ldquo;We have
no such student.&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;Think about it for a minute.&rdquo;  He
did, and his laugh was so loud that I could have put down the
phone and opened the window and heard it.

Sometimes certain class rolls have pizazz and appeal and
stick in my memory.  I have three favorites.  One was the
football game roll which always made me feel like a cheerleader
because it contained the names *Yah, Rey*, and *Bravo*.
Next was the revolutionary roll of the class that contained
*Castro, Guevara*, and *DeBray*.  And, my favorite of all time was
the bell-like Chinese roll mentioned before.  When I called it
out, I thought to myself, &ldquo;Eat your heart out, Edgar Allan
Poe.&rdquo;

## Crank This Sucker Up!
*David Minugh, University of Stockholm*

*I* am looking at a cartoon from Bloom County: the main
characters have been lying in a wheelchair improving their
tans and are now about to start back home, and so a few
friends from the animal world climb on aboard for a free ride.
It is at this point that one of them (a porcupine, to be exact)
leans forward into the coming slipstream and commands,
&ldquo;Crank this sucker up!&rdquo; Suddenly we are at a crossroads in
lexical history: while I immediately link *to crank something up*
with men in leather hats and goggles, spoked tires and Model T
Fords, what am I to do with *sucker*?  *All-day suckers* and
*jawbreakers* of my penny-candy youth?  Some obscure sexual
rite involving wheelchairs, porcupines and bears?  Associations
to fish mouths and insect footpads, or to strawberry runners or
tobacco plants?

A casual search through my various dictionaries revealed
numerous possible meanings for *sucker*, but none of them
supported the obvious interpretation: 'thing, object.'  Yet I soon
realized that other examples were not hard to find, even in the
limited material available here in Sweden:

>...the Bloom County quote (Berke Breathed, *Washington
Post*, 1983), reprinted in *Profiles* (a computer
magazine), Jan./Feb. 84, p. 34.
>
>In the comic strip *B.C.*, the &ldquo;Fat Broad&rdquo; is apparently
particularly enamoured of the word: on
(release date) Sept. 16 she discovers a bottle on
the beach and says, &ldquo;Beach litter!... I HATE litter
!  I think I'll bust this sucker into a million
pieces.&rdquo;  On (release date) Oct. 28, when she is
soliciting signatures for the ERA, her message is
&ldquo;Sign this sucker (i.e., the petition) or I'll ram
the clipboard down your throat.&rdquo;
>
>*Newsweek's* Election Special (Nov./Dec. 1984, pp. 56, 57) &ldquo;quotes&rdquo; Mondale campaign staffer Joe
Trippi on his fears about the Iowa primaries:
&ldquo;*We could lose this sucker,* he thought.  *We're
taking on water.  We could lose,&rdquo;* and again, &ldquo;*We
could lose this sucker,* he thought.&rdquo;

What apparently has happened is that *sucker* has developed
a new meaning (which is actually only a potential
meaning): like *thing*, or *object*, or *whatchamacallit*, it can now
refer to any context-determined inanimate object.  It also seems
to have a wider range of reference than many other possible
substitutes, such as *gadget*, which would work only for the
wheelchair example, or *doodad*, which does not even seem to
be appropriate there.  The object referred to is clearly identified
by the context, and in my examples is consistently used with
the demonstrative *this*.  (It would, however, surely be acceptable
to be searching for your theater tickets and mutter, &ldquo;I bet I
left those suckers at home!&rdquo;)

The above examples all indicate a fairly high state of
emotional involvement about the issue or action involved,
rather than about the specific object itself.  If used about a
person, however, *sucker* would inevitably get entangled with
the primary meaning it has about people: 'someone easily
fooled,' which implies disparagement.  Saying &ldquo;That sucker
doesn't know enough to come in out of the rain&rdquo; would thus
seem to be distinctly possible, but I am dubious about &ldquo;*Joe
should be first trumpeter—that sucker really knows how to blow
that horn!&rdquo;

One of the major problems with lexical extension, or for
that matter, any innovation in language, is determining when it
was first used (and when a nonce usage becomes an established
usage?).  Scholars may well be able to document earlier occurrences,
whether written or spoken, but that simply pushes the
problem a bit further into the past.  (Rare exceptions do, of
course, occur, as with *yesteryear*, which the *OED* unequivocally
credits to D. G. Rossetti.)  In cases like the present one,
the extension in meaning almost certainly first occurred in
spoken English, which makes matters even more difficult.

Additionally, there is the problem of observing the evidence
that actually exists, since we often begin using an item
without consciously perceiving that it is new.  In the specific
case at hand, I now realize that I twice translated *sucker* into
Swedish (the *B.C.* texts) before even noticing that the sense in
which it was used was actually an extension in meaning.  Once
the observer has become &ldquo;sensitized&rdquo; to a given item, however,
it seems to pop up everywhere! (This problem of &ldquo;convenient&rdquo;
evidence—evidence that shows up on demand, as it were—has
also been noted by novelists, and in fact forms one of the major
themes of Thomas Pynchon's *The Crying of Lot 49.*)

While it thus may be difficult or impossible to establish the
exact date when this use of *sucker* first surfaced, it does not
seem nearly as difficult to understand why it occurred: *sucker*
happens to rhyme with a relatively potent swear-word, *fucker*
and strongly resembles yet another, *cocksucker*, both of which
are &ldquo;strong&rdquo; swear-words that are not restricted in reference, as
they can be used about both people and objects: *I didn't do
anything; the fucker/son-of-a-bitch/bastard/*etc.  *just broke/hit
me*—although middle-class children of my generation would
probably have said *The darn thing just broke/That darn kid
just hit me*.  Since my examples of *sucker* all come from writing
areas where strong swear-words are still taboo (the same issue
of *Newsweek* is replete with quotes like Bob Beckel's comment
on page 60, &ldquo;Y' all don't have a bleeping idea what politics is all
about,&rdquo; where a [*sic*] is surely appropriate after *bleeping*), that
might in itself seem a sufficient explanation.  A more appropriate
definition of this sense of *sucker* would then be 'darn/damn
thing' (which would also explain why, e.g., *gadget* is not as
appropriate for such situations).

Yet *sucker* is not merely another swear-word: first of all,
although obviously reminiscent of *fucker* and the equally taboo
*cocksucker*, it has for centuries successfully retained important
nonobscene (although negative) meanings about people, most
recently that of 'a person easily fooled.'  (The *OED* cites an
American example from as early as 1844.)  It is probably this
which makes it considerably more &ldquo;respectable&rdquo; than consistently
taboo words like *fucker*.  Second (and probably as a
consequence), *sucker* does not seem to be as clearly negative as
obvious swear-words that might fit in the same contexts: *Crank
this fucker/cocksucker/bastard up!*  On the other hand, the
&ldquo;Fat Broad&rdquo; clearly uses it in an aggressive manner that
suggests a covert prestige situation reminiscent of phrases like
*He's bad, man*! or *This fucker * [i.e., my car] can *really fly!*

Rather than assuming that *sucker* will achieve the neutrality
of other nonspecific reference words in English (*thing*) and
other Western European languages (e.g., French *chose, truc*,
German *Sache, Ding*), we should remember that its subterranean
links to two of our most potent swear-words instead
suggest that it may well lead a perilous existence in any future
that reintroduces more rigid concepts of decorum.

Having only recently become aware of this item, I have
not investigated it in any detail, so I'd like to toss the ball over
to you, the readers, and ask how you react to this use of *sucker,*
whether you know of previous documentation (it is conspicuously
absent from, e.g., *Partridge*) and whether you have other
candidates of a similar nature, perhaps from other languages.
...After all, it's not every day that a new such (non-)word
appears.

As a closing note, I might add an anecdote from my early
days in Sweden.  Swedish has several nonspecific standard
words for 'thing'—*sak* (etymologically connected with our *sake,
forsake), ting or tingest* (cf. our *thing*)—and several informal
equivalents, *grej* and *pryl*.  While learning Swedish, I had of
course acquired them rather early.  When I subsequently went
into a hardware store to buy an awl (a spur-of-the-moment
purchase), I had no idea of the Swedish word I needed, so I
happily used the nonspecific word *pryl*, and to my amazement
the store clerk immediately produced a selection of awls.  Little
did I know that the basic sense of *pryl* was precisely that—an
awl!


### OBITER DICTA

We have had fun with Menu Barbarisms in *VERBATIM* in
the past—&ldquo;smothered onions,&rdquo; &ldquo;roast beef with au jus sauce on
the side,&rdquo; etc.—and I thought that as a pleasant diversion and a
tribute, we would reprint a menu prepared for me some years
ago by a friend, the poet Sylvia Spencer, who died last
September.  [She credited Muriel Pelton for &ldquo;special
assistance.&rdquo;]

>*Appetizers*                     
*Little Thrimp Red Herring*         
*Strained Muscles*                
*Soups*                            
*Du Four Duck Soup*             
*es*                                
*Tongue in Cheek A Turkey Ham Actor*    
*Addled Brains*                          
>                                      
>*Fish*                           
*Sole Survivor Flounder Around*       
*Shippery Eels Kettle of Fish*      
*Salads*                              
*Salad Days Storm Tossed*          
>                                 
>*Vegetables*                       
*Beats Everything Pure Corn*            
*Fourteen Carrots Two Peas in a Pod*    
*Hot Potato Wild Oats*              
>                                        
>*Breads, etc.*                      
*Honey Bun Piano Rolls Butter Fingers*  
*Frightful Jam*  
>
>*Sauces*  
*For the Goose For the Gander*  
*The Sauce (alcoholic)*  
*Eggs*  
*Good Eggs Egg on Face*  
*Chef's Specials*  
*pes de Chine*  
*A Loaf of Bread and Jug of Wine (for two)*  
>
>*Desserts*  
*es Cute Cookies Sweetie Pie*  
*me Cake Walk*  
*Fruits, etc.*  
*Top Banana Plum Crazy Big Apple*  
*Nuts! The Berries Blind Dates*  
>
>*Beverages*  
*Tea Total Coffee Break*  
*Hop Scotch Cotton Gin Small Beer*  
*Molotov Cocktail Bourbon (House of)*  
*Yo-Ho-Ho and a Bottle of Rum*  
>
>*Digestils*  
*Bitter Pills*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Have several very old dresses from grandmother in beautiful
condition.&rdquo;  [From the swop section, *Yankee*, December 1984.
Submitted by Cynthia King, Morgan Hill, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The carcass of a pregnant cow was found at a residence near
Plain City with the unborn calf laying alongside.&rdquo;  [From an
article in *The Columbia Citizen-Journal*, December 29, 1984.
Submitted by Joseph B. Grigsby, Marysville, Ohio.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Every Little Breeze Seems to Whisper Lues.&rdquo;  [Popular song
during French epidemic of English disease.  Or was it the
English epidemic of the French disease?]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The company will release its first how-to videos, which will
give step-by-step instructions for making a desk draw.&rdquo;  [From
*The Boston Globe,* 16 November 1984.  Submitted by Judi
Chamberlin, Somerville, Massachusetts.]

## Of Spooner, Spoonerisms and Other Matters
*John Ferguson, Selly Oak Colleges, Birmingham*

The Rev. Dr. Spooner (1844-1930), Warden of New College,
Oxford (1903-24), has been immortalized in the
word *spoonerism*.  This is curious, for it seems, on the evidence
of those who knew him best, that the spoonerism was a verbal
felicity which he did not perpetrate.  The only spoonerism
which is possibly authentic comes in his announcement of a
hymn as &ldquo;Kinkering kongs.&rdquo;  This surely must be authentic;
otherwise, how could his name have ever been affixed to such
transpositions?  It is the more plausible in that it does not form
a classic spoonerism in which, as Norman Ward suggests [XI,1],
the transposition creates real but incongruous words.  The best
of all spoonerisms, *pace* Mr. Ward, do not produce &ldquo;words
without meaning in the context where they appeared,&rdquo; but
words with a surprising significance.

To return first to the historical Dr. Spooner.  Two reminiscences
recall the real man.  One comes from Aldous Huxley,
who recalled him preaching at a village church outside Oxford.
After the ascription at the sermon's end he was descending the
steps of the pulpit, when a thoughtful look came over his face
and he turned round and said, &ldquo;I feel that I should explain that
in my recent remarks every time I mentioned Aristotle I
intended the Apostle Paul.&rdquo;  One wonders what the honest
villagers made of the sermon!  Another story comes from Lionel
Casson.  He had just been elected a Fellow of New, and
happened to meet the Warden in the Quad.  Spooner said to
him, &ldquo;Ah, my dear chap, you must come along at four o'clock.
We're inducting Casson, our new fellow.&rdquo;  &ldquo;But, Warden, I am
Casson.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Well, never mind, my dear chap, come along just the
same.&rdquo;

Of the apocryphal spoonerisms two are particularly ingenious.
One consists of words allegedly spoken to an erring
undergraduate: &ldquo;You have hissed all my mystery lectures, you
have tasted two whole worms, and now you must leave Oxford
by the town drain.&rdquo;  The other relates to a compulsory examination
at Oxford in divinity, known as Divvers.  (This was a
typical piece of Oxford slang, some of which has passed into
wider usage, as *brekker* for breakfast, *rugger* and *soccer* for two
forms of football.  A wastepaper basket became a *wagger pagger
bagger*, and the prince of Wales the *Pragger Wagger.*)  The
examination involved an oral, and Spooner was taking a
candidate through the New Testament version of the Lord's
Prayer.  The candidate's efforts were halting.  &ldquo;Come on, come
on,&rdquo; said Spooner impatiently.  &ldquo;Forgive us our debts as we also
forget our divvers.&rdquo;  Leading worship in a Presbyterian church
in St. Paul, Minnesota, where the usual form of the Lord's
Prayer involves &ldquo;debts&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;trespasses&rdquo; (as is normal
in England), I always had to let my voice drop after &ldquo;Forgive
us our debts,&rdquo; for fear that I should say the wrong thing!

There was a richly loved minister at Emmanuel Congregational
Church in Cambridge, the Rev. Henry Child Carter,
whose ministry extended from 1910 to 1942.  He was a great
pastor.  When you were with him you absorbed his whole
attention; it is not surprising that he then put you from his
mind.  He met a Girtonian [a student at Girton College, one of
the two women's colleges at Cambridge] in the streets of
Cambridge and said, &ldquo;You must come and have tea with us
some time.&rdquo;  She replied, &ldquo;I've just been having lunch with
you.&rdquo;  That was not a spoonerism, but it was something of a
spoonerism.  From the pulpit he produced an exquisite spoonerism
when he began a sermon &ldquo;Our subject today is Youth with
a capital double-U.&rdquo;  He also managed an amiable spoonerism
in the notice &ldquo;Those who wish to join this expedition must
please shine the seat in the lobby.&rdquo;

It has not always been noticed how a spoonerism is simply
a device used in many children's riddles: &ldquo;What is the
difference between a thunderstorm and a lion with a thorn in
its paw?&rdquo;  &ldquo;One pours with rain, the other roars with pain.&rdquo;
&ldquo;What is the difference between a careful man and a verger?&rdquo;
&ldquo;One minds his Ps and Qs, the other minds his keys and
pews.&rdquo;  Such conundrums certainly go back to the beginning of
the present century, since in the Hon. Hugh Rowley's *Puniana*
(1902), which contains some of the most ghastly puns ever
perpetrated, we find &ldquo;What's the difference between an old
maid and a girl fond of a red-haired Irishman?&rdquo; &ldquo;One loves a
cat and parrots, the other a Pat and carrots!&rdquo; and &ldquo;What is the
difference between a light dragoon and a lady with her head
shaved?&rdquo;  &ldquo;One is careless and happy, the other hairless and
cappy&rdquo; and &ldquo;What's the difference between a mouse and a
young lady?&rdquo;  &ldquo;One wishes to harm the cheese, the other to
charm the he's&rdquo; and &ldquo;What's the difference between a calf and
a lady who lets her dress draggle in the mud?&rdquo;  &ldquo;One sucks milk
and the other mucks silk&rdquo; and &ldquo;What's the difference between
your last will and testament and a man who has eaten as much
as he can?&rdquo;  &ldquo;One is signed and dated, the other dined and
sated.&rdquo;  But in some 2000 riddles only these five represent true
spoonerisms.  It is certain that they are not based on any real or
alleged verbal slips by Dr. Spooner, partly on chronological
grounds, partly because they are not dissimilar from similar
quips which are not true spoonerisms, such as, &ldquo;What's the
difference between a fish dinner and a racing establishment?&rdquo;
&ldquo;At the one a man finds his sauces for his table, and in the
other he finds his stable for his horses.&rdquo;  That is a double pun,
not a spoonerism at all.  But it fulfills a principle of the
spoonerism; it is formed of two words (or phrases) which fit
together in the old context and which must, in their new form,
fit together to make new sense.

It may be useful to bring in alongside the spoonerism
other forms of verbal gaffe.  The *malapropism*, of course, comes
from Sheridan's Mrs. Malaprop.  Such are &ldquo;Illiterate him, I say,
quite from your memory,&rdquo; &ldquo;A progeny of learning,&rdquo; &ldquo;It gives
me the hydrostatics to such a degree,&rdquo; &ldquo;a nice derangement of
epitaphs,&rdquo; &ldquo;She's as headstrong as an allegory on the banks of
the Nile,&rdquo; &ldquo;I own the soft impeachment.&rdquo; (Slightly different is
&ldquo;You are not like Cerberus, three gentlemen at once, are you?&rdquo;)
There was an excellent malapropism in the *Punch* cartoon of
the portly lady trying to catch a train, who &ldquo;splintered up the
platform.&rdquo;

The term *Bunnyism* has not passed into general currency,
but could usefully do so.  It is, according to Charlie Rice, &ldquo;an
oddball remark, a sort of glancing blow at logic that seems to
make sense until you start unraveling it.&rdquo;  The word derives
from Bunny, wife of Hollywood director Norman McLeod.
There is an affectionate account of her in Corey Ford's *The
Time of Laughter*.  She was liable to say such things as, &ldquo;You
can't blame me for making a mistake now and then.  After all,
nobody's human,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Norm is always telling me a thing one
day and out the other,&rdquo; or &ldquo;It was so dark that you couldn't see
your face in front of you.&rdquo;  She complimented a hostess &ldquo;This is
the best salad I ever put in my whole mouth.&rdquo;  She remarked to
a noisy party, &ldquo;Sssh!  Remember this isn't the only house you're
in.&rdquo;  Seeing a starlet worse for drink she whispered, &ldquo;Look at
her!  And she's old enough to be my daughter!&rdquo;

Charlie Rice claims his own mother as an outstanding
Bunnyist.  She would say to the children when they asked
awkward questions &ldquo;Never ask questions about things you
don't understand.&rdquo;  Her daughter was going out with a bit of
petticoat showing.  As she adjusted it for her Mrs. Rice said,
&ldquo;Remember, dear, a lady should never hint to a gentleman that
she has anything on under her dress.&rdquo;  On hearing that an
escaped convict had been caught locally, she cried, &ldquo;Good
heavens, we could all have been murdered in our graves!&rdquo;  To
the fourth wrong number she snapped, &ldquo;My dear sir, if that is
the wrong number, will you kindly tell me what is the right
number?&rdquo;  Charlie Rice's favorite was a note pinned to the
door: &ldquo;Charles.  I had to go to the dentist.  If you get home
before I do, I hid the key under the doormat.  Love, Mother.&rdquo;
Mrs. Rice had a standard saying &ldquo;It's only fair to turn a deaf
ear to all opinions.&rdquo;  Charlie Rice quotes one or two more
Bunnyisms, such as the advice he received from a professor:
&ldquo;Don't worry—never burn your bridges before you come to
them,&rdquo; or the button motto &ldquo;Help Stamp Out Mental Health,&rdquo;
or the simple &ldquo;I'm always getting the horse before the cart.&rdquo;

William Deedes, UK Minister without Portfolio, and later
editor of *The Daily Telegraph*, is a Bunnyist.  His employees
speak of *Deedesisms:* &ldquo;Don't burn your boots&rdquo; he said to a
reporter leaving for another paper.  He said of Lord Carrington
that &ldquo;he weighs a lot of ice.&rdquo;  Other gems include &ldquo;You've got
to keep all your feathers in the air,&rdquo; &ldquo;You can't make an
omelette without frying eggs,&rdquo; and &ldquo;You can't have your pound
of flesh and eat it.&rdquo;

Bunnyisms have some affinities with Irish bulls.  These
must involve an element of inconsequence.  One of the most
famous is attributed to Sir Boyle Roche (1743-1807): &ldquo;Mr.
Speaker, I smell a rat.  I see him forming in the air and
darkening the sky; but I'll nip him in the bud.&rdquo;  That has not
been authenticated firmly, but he certainly asked in the Irish
Parliament in 1780, &ldquo;What has posterity done for us?&rdquo;
Another, told by Lady W. Russell, appears in G. W. E.
Russell's *Fragments from Many Tables:* &ldquo;Single misfortunes
never come alone, and the greatest is generally accompanied by
a still greater.&rdquo;  I never believed that the Irish were really like
that until the Rev. Harry Lamb, the only Irishman at a
conference, said in my presence how sorry his friends were to
have missed the conference—&ldquo;and if they'd been here, they'd
have said so for themselves.&rdquo;  I can also guarantee the report in
*Cork Evening Echo* in April, 1970, &ldquo;Whilst snow is unprecedented
at this time of year, especially in the south of Ireland, it
is certainly not unusual.&rdquo;  Also authentic is the interjection of
an Irish MP, Mr. O'Conor Power, last century, who cried, &ldquo;Mr.
Speaker, sir, since the government has let the cat out of the
bag, let us take the bull by the horns.&rdquo;

Sir Boyle Roche reminds us of the mixed metaphor.  We
should not altogether scorn the mixed metaphor.  Nigel
Strangeways, in one of the detective-stories which Cecil Day
Lewis wrote under the pen-name of Nicholas Blake, declares it
the sign of &ldquo;a vivid and proleptic imagination.&rdquo;  Does not
Hamlet have &ldquo;to take arms against a sea of troubles&rdquo;—not
perhaps the happiest of phrases, but one which passes currency?
My own favorite perpetrator of mixed metaphors is a
Nigerian friend, Tai Solarin, headmaster, educationalist, social
critic, writer.  In his column in December 1961 he produced:
&ldquo;Our government is a hydra-headed octopus that veers and
backs depending on the prevailing planetary winds, and that
oscillates and flounders and hopes, whatever happens, for the
best.  It is not purposive; it is not logical; it is not disciplined.&rdquo;
Four years later in October 1965 came this: &ldquo;Tomorrow,
Nigeria is going to become India and Pakistan.  The snowball is
becoming fatter and tumbling faster on its sharp, deadly
gradient to catastrophe—unless we arrest the glowing embers
now and completely extinguish it and save ourselves from the
inevitable conflagration.&rdquo;  Beat those if you can!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Stouffer's—as good as can be.&rdquo;  [From a TV commercial,
November 1984.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Ladies of the North Park Presbyterian church held their
annual luncheon and fashion show at the Park Lane Restaurant
last week, and members of the church showed off some
extraordinary hats, dresses and purses from a more gentile era.&rdquo;
[From *The Buffalo Rocket*, 23 May 1984.  Submitted by Joan
Murray, Buffalo, New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Outside, cats can fight, catch diseased rodents or birds, lose
their lives at the wheels of an automobile, or be picked up...&rdquo;
[From *Cat Care*, a pamphlet of the American Humane Education
Society.  Submitted by Dennis Wepman, Bronx, New York,
who isn't worried about his own cat because it doesn't have a
driver's license.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Curt was born originally in Oklahoma.&rdquo;  [From a CBS sports
cast.  Submitted by Ed Dell, Peterborough, New Hampshire.]

## Antipodean English: *Our Birthstain*

Australia had its beginnings some twelve years after the
American Declaration of Independence.  The two events were
not unconnected, for with the loss of the American colonies
Britain lost a place to send convicts sentenced to transportation.
Joseph Banks, however, came to the rescue, describing
Australia, which he had visited with Captain Cook, as an ideal
repository for these unwanted citizens.

Not all convicts were what we would now call bad men.
Some were political agitators, some had shown too much
ingenuity in coping with desperate poverty; the worst criminals
did not survive the gallows.  Nevertheless for a long time
Sydney people were reticent about origins and as late as 1899
Earl Beauchamp gave great offense when on his way to become
Governor of New South Wales he greeted colonists by adapting
Kipling's &ldquo;Song of the Cities,&rdquo; beginning &ldquo;Your birthstain have
you turned to good.&rdquo;  Now our origins have the glamour of
history and people are proud to trace their lineage to the
unfortunates who tangled with the law.

Linguists too have remembered the convicts, acknowledging
their contribution to the formation of our idiom.  For one
thing, we have in the prison records an unusually complete,
detailed account of the regional and social origins of the first
European inhabitants of Australia.  It can be said in general
that convicts were urban people (the most likely to resort to
crime and to get caught) from the south of England.  This
would account for the generally southern and urban, even
Cockney, flavor of Australian pronunciation.  Some mingling of
dialects must already have taken place in cities, and a further
smoothing out of differences and oddities has taken place.

Some words, now historical, related directly to the convict
experience.  *Assignment* 'allocation of convicts to free settlers as
unpaid servants,' *expiree* 'a convict whose sentence had
expired,' and *emancipist* 'an ex-convict or member of a party
representing the interests of ex-convicts' were once common
terms, though forgotten now.

The convicts brought with them a rich prison slang which
left Australian English with a color it has never entirely lost.  In
1812, James Hardy Vaux recorded the &ldquo;flash language&rdquo; in a
glossary of prison slang that is a distinctive component of early
Australian English.  We still talk of *old hands* 'experts at
anything, people who know their way round' or *new chums*
'greenhorns,' words originally used in a prison context.  The
*swag* was 'a thief's loot' before it became 'the bundle of
belongings of a *swagger'* ('tramp').  Up-to-date youth in the
1960s called policemen *pigs*, but Vaux recorded the convicts so
using the term long before them.

People from time to time regret that English rural terms
seem to have slipped out of Australian idiom.  No one here talks
of a *copse* or *coppice* or *glen* or *grove*.  Wordsworth's &ldquo;meadow,
grove and stream&rdquo; are not the &ldquo;language actually used by
men&rdquo; in Australia.  It is tempting to think that a contributing
reason for this is the urban background of the convict settlers,
who perhaps had little acquaintance with woods and coppices
before they came.  But perhaps the very different appearance of
the new land is enough to explain a change in topographical
terms.  A scattering of eucalyptus trees in grassy terrain must
have seemed to be something other than a *wood*; the new term
*bush*, perhaps already known by people who had known South
Africa, might have seemed more appropriate.  *Creeks* (as in
America) became longer as they were explored upstream from
the *inlets* (or 'creeks' in the English sense) at their source.
Perhaps the first land fenced was too small to be called a *field*;
the word *paddock* was extended in reference as more land was
fenced and *field* is seldom heard as a topographical term in
Australia.

Whatever the rural knowledge of the first settlers, one now
associates Australia with vast *stations* (as we call ranches)
where *mobs* of cattle and sheep are *mustered* 'rounded up' in
the *outback*.  Australian dictionaries are full of shearing terms
(though dairying terms don't seem to have the same appeal).
Actually most Australians live in cities and wouldn't know
which end of a shearing machine to use; but we treasure our
pastoral legend.  It comes as a shock to those Australians who
study the origins of their idiom to realize that the fine outback
terms are yet another legacy of our birthstain.  The original
&ldquo;station&rdquo; was a military station, specifically for convicts.  The
new settlement in Sydney was far from conventional sources of
supply.  It was necessary to develop agriculture and the obvious
workforce was at hand.  The city men knew mobs of people
better than flocks of sheep; the gathering of animals for
counting or shearing must have recalled the military *muster* or
'showing up for inspection'; the *station* grew, and as settlement
moved &ldquo;out&rdquo; and &ldquo;back&rdquo; from urban Sydney (into the *out-back*),
the words took on rural associations and a tinge of
romance comparable with that of America's Wild West.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Random House Thesaurus*](https://www.abebooks.com/Random-House-Thesaurus-Jess-Stein-Reference/30507553479/bd)
Jess Stein and Stuart Berg Flexner, eds., (Random House, 1984), 812 pp.

As the copyright page states that the *Thesaurus* is &ldquo;Based
upon the Reader's Digest *Family Word Finder*, Copyright
1975,&rdquo; we investigated the similarities and differences and
discovered that the two books are essentially the same.  The
chief differences lie in the absence, in the Random House
edition, of the anecdotal and other &ldquo;*Reader's Digest-type*&rdquo;
vignettes, the addition of some entries to fill in the gaps thus
created, and the updating of some of the example sentences.
Stuart Berg Flexner was the editor of the *Family Word Finder*,
so that is not a particularly startling revelation.  But one is given
to wonder if the Random House edition shouldn't have
retained the word *family* in its title, for not only was the
redoubtable Jess Stein involved in this book but, as the front
matter reveals, his wife, son, and daughter also got into the act.

The word *thesaurus*, as we are continually told in the
prefaces to books dealing with synonyms, comes from the
Greek word meaning 'treasury.'  In my mind, it is so strongly
associated with *Roget* and his work that I expect an arrangement
similar to his when I see *thesaurus* in the title of a book.
Perhaps I am the only person with such a bias, for Collins
recently published a (rather poor) synonym book in the U.K.
bearing *thesaurus* in its title, and that and the present work are
both in alphabetical order.  The entry for *thesaurus* in this book
generally equates it with *dictionary*, and I shall probably have
to give up my prejudices.  But connotations die hard.

In the structure of this book a sample sentence is listed at
the beginning of a string of synonyms, presumably in order to
set the context of meaning for the words that follow.  These
sometimes do fit into the context, but as one reads on down
through the list, the words become less and less substitutable.

For example,

>*gulf* *n*. *1* *A hurricane is forming in the Gulf of Mexico*:
large bay, estuary, arm of the sea, firth, fjord,
inlet, cove, lagoon.

Except for 'large bay,' which is a descriptive defining phrase
and not, properly, a synonym, none of the other words in the
list is a synonym of *gulf*.  That is quite all right with me: there
probably is no synonym for *gulf* in English (nor is there any
reason why one would be needed).  I bring it up only to
illustrate the fact that not all of the entries in this or any other
synonym dictionary (or thesaurus) list synonyms; some of them
are best considered catalogues listing types of items of which
the entry is a token.  Thus, under *gun,* we find:

>*1*  *The policeman drew his gun from its holster*: firearm;
(*variously*) revolver, pistol, automatic, .45, .38,
.22, six shooter,...

...and so on for a few lines.  For those who need a synonym
for *gun, firearm* is provided.  Note the semicolon following it.
The &ldquo;*variously*&rdquo; introduces the cataloguing part of the entry.
As one proceeds further down the list, *blunderbuss* and
*machine gun* appear, which are likely to be drawn from a
policeman's holster only in more unusual circumstances.

Going back to gulf, definition 2:

>*2*  *The earthquake left a gulf in the field.  The gulf
between the two friends widened:* chasm, abyss,
crevasse, canyon, gully, opening, rent, cleft; rift, split,
separation.

Here, apparently, the semicolon serves a different function—to
create a parallel between the first set of words and the first
sample sentence and between the second set and the second
sample.  The second sample and its synonyms are fine; but I
find the first unnatural: Is that a sentence that anyone is likely
to utter (or write)?  I doubt it.  Besides, a divider somewhere in
the first string of words is needed after *chasm*, even if one can
accept the sample sentence.

The preceding discussion illustrates some of the problems
encountered in trying to compile a synonym dictionary:
because true synonyms are rare in the language, the best one
can do (and the best a user of such a work can expect) is to
find a list of words &ldquo;reasonably&rdquo; close to one another in
meaning—words that belong to the same, broad semantic
category.

The picture changes somewhat in the treatment of words
for abstract ideas, though the problems, which become more
connotative and metaphoric, do not go away.  The main
advantages in dealing with such words is that there are
available more &ldquo;synonyms&rdquo;—words and phrases that are not
quite as remote in meaning because their meanings are somewhat
vaguer or less distinct.  Thus, although the sample sentence
is not especially good, the synonyms for *lecherous* seem
much closer to the mark than do those for an ostensive noun
(like *gun*):

>*His lecherous behavior scandalized the whole town*:
lustful, lewd, libidinous, oversexed, lascivious, salacious,
prurient, satyrlike, randy, erotic, licentious, carnal,
lubricious, ruttish, goatish.

Not everyone would agree with the order in which these words
appear, and there are those who could add enough to double
the list.  But the latter criticism is unfair, for the size of the
book determines the extent of each of its entries.

Synonym dictionaries (regardless of their structure) are
probably used more often to help a user find a word he is
searching for that is in the same semantic category as one he
can think of than it is to find a synonym for an over-used word
in his writing.  Were the latter the more usual case, it is unlikely
that a person would require listings for words of relatively low
frequency.  At $14.95, *The Random House Thesaurus* contains
11,000 main entries and (at a guess, made by counting only the
synonyms on one entire page) just under 240,000 synonyms.
*The Synonym Finder* (Rodale), which is offered in the VERBATIM
Book Club at $16.00 (bookshop price, $19.95), contains
about 20,000 main entries and more than 1,000,000 synonyms.
Both books contain antonym lists as well, which have not been
counted in these estimates.

You takes your choice and you pays your money.  [Note:
*The Synonym Finder* is also available in a British edition.  *The
Random House Thesaurus* is an American book, but its source,
the *Reader's Digest* synonym dictionary, is available in both
British and Australian editions.]

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Great Song Thesaurus*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Frederick+Lax+Roger+Smith%2C+The+Great+Song+Thesaurus&sortby=20&cm_mmc=AMZ-_-DetailPage-_-OOS-_-NOISBN)
Roger Lax and Frederick Smith, (Oxford University Press, 1984), 665pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

With entries that date from c.1226 to 1979, this impressive
catalogue of songs in English covers &ldquo;more than 10,000 song
titles with lyricists, composers, dates of popularity and pertinent
facts&rdquo; (from the dust jacket blurb).  The book is divided
into nine sections, to wit:

>I The Greatest Songs
>
>II The Award Winners
>
>III Themes, Trademarks, and Signatures
>
>IV Elegant Plagiarisms
>
>V Song Titles
>
>VI British Song Titles
>
>VII Lyricists and Composers
>
>VIII American and British Theatre, Film, Radio, and
Television
>
>IX Thesaurus of Song Titles by Subject, Key Word,
and Category

There isn't one section that I haven't found useful, interesting,
and provocative—provocative of my singing (to myself, of
course) the lyrics of some half-forgotten melody of which I was
reminded.

The &ldquo;c.1226&rdquo; refers to *Summer Is Icumen In*.  Would you
believe that *Aupr&egrave;s de Ma Blonde* dates from 1580?  or that the
&ldquo;earliest words and music&rdquo; for *Three Blind Mice* appeared in
published form in 1609?  I wonder whether Gypsy Rose Lee
knew that c.1700 was the date for *Air for the G String*.  Section
I is filled with such fascinating information.

Section II is undoubtedly useful.

Section III lists theme songs of performers and entertainers
(e.g., Jack Benny *Love in Bloom*, The Ink Spots *If I Didn't
Care*), school songs, advertising jingles, political campaign
songs, church chimes and carillons, and American bugle calls.

Of particular interest is Section IV, Elegant Plagiarisms.
My own favorite is the entry for *America*:

>*America* (My Country Tis of Thee) (1832) Based on
the music of &ldquo;God Save the King&rdquo; from England,
1744; and that, in turn, based on a melody composed
by H. Harris for the King of Denmark; later, Herr
G. B. Schumacher wrote the German words and it
became &ldquo;Heil Dir im Siegeskranz,&rdquo; onetime official
Prussian national anthem.

Goebbels could have created some telling propaganda around
that, had he only known!

Section V, Song Titles, is the longest section in the book,
covering 241 pages.  For each title are given its date, lyricist
and composer, media source (Musical Theatre, Musical Film,
etc.), stars of the original and of subsequent productions, and
some concise additional data.  For instance, about *Abdulla
Bulbul Ameer (Abdul Abulbul Amir)*:

>Based on a traditional English song, from the time of
the Crimean War.  This song was originally written for
a smoking concert at Trinity College, Dublin.  This song
was popularly revived in 1928.

(Nonsmokers please copy.) The variant title doesn't make much
sense, notwithstanding the prosody of the lyrics, for Persian
*bulbul* is usually taken to mean 'nightingale,' which fits in
neatly with the story line.  I could not resist marking off some
of the songs I know—45 out of the first 289 in this section.  I
thought that was a lot, but then I am not contestant fodder for
&ldquo;Name That Tune.&rdquo;  Here are *Come On-A-My House*, by Ross
Bagdasarian and William Saroyan, *Aloha Oe*, by Queen
Liliuokalani, and *Summer*, by Sylvester Allen, Harold Ray
Brown, Morris D. Dickerson, Gerald Goldstein, Leroy Jordan,
Lee Oscar Levitin, Charles Miller, and Howard E. Scott, which
must say something about work performed successfully by a
committee.  Some of the variants seem to conceal what might
prove to be interesting stories: the school song of the University
of Pennsylvania was taken from *Iwas Off the Blue
Canaries, or, My Last Cigar*; and the Harold Rome song
*Military Life*, was also called *The Jerk Song*; and then there is
*Some Little Bug Is Going to Find You* (Some Day), which
&ldquo;celebrates the influenza epidemic of [1915].&rdquo;

Section VI, British Song Titles, lists only those songs,
written in Britain, that did not achieve much popularity in
America.  From some of the titles, small wonder: *I Wouldn't
Leave My Little Wooden Hut for You; Ginger You're Barmy;
Where Do Flies Go in the Winter Time?;  The Flies Crawled Up
the Window; I've Never Seen a Straight Banana; When I'm
Cleaning Windows*.

Section VII, Lyricists and Composers, is impressive.  At
one extreme are those composers or lyricists who wrote only
one or two songs; but if they were songs like *Pack Up Your
Troubles in Your Old Kit Bag and Smile, Smile, Smile* (Asaf and
Powell), *The Music Goes 'Round and' Round* (Hodgson, Farley,
and Riley), *C'est Si Bon* (Hornez, Seelen, and Betti), and
*Waltzing Matilda* (Paterson, Cowan, and Lee), that was no
mean accomplishment.  This book does not reveal other, less
popular songs that might have been written by these (and
many other) composers of single hits, but one has the vision of
their authors living like royalty off royalties.  There are other
humdinger hits like *Schaefer Is the One Beer* (Jordan, Hornsby,
and German), which might be familiar to more people than
*Ave Maria* (in either version, Schubert's or Gounod's).

At the other end of the scale are Hammerstein, Berlin,
Rodgers, Hart, George and Ira Gershwin, Kern, Mercer, Porter,
Harry Warren (*At Last; Boulevard of Broken Dreams; Chattanooga
Choo Choo*, etc.), and Joe Young (*Dinah; Five Foot Two,
Eyes of Blue; How Ya Gonna Keep' Em Down on the Farm
(After They've Seen Paree)*, etc.

Section VIII lists Musical Theatre, Musical Films, and
other categories, with the songs associated with them that
became popular enough to appear in Section V. Interesting are
not so much the long-running shows (*South Pacific*—1925
performances; *Oklahoma*—2248 performances) that yielded
popular songs, but others, like *Right This Way* (15 performances),
from which came *I Can Dream Can't I* and *I'll Be
Seeing You; Through the Years* (20 performances), which gave
us *Drums in My Heart*; and *The Great Magoo* (11 performances),
whence *It's Only a Paper Moon.  The Threepenny Opera*
is listed with only 12 performances, in 1933, but that was only
the original production; it ran for years at the Theatre de Lys,
in New York City.  Thus, one must be careful to read the
authors' &ldquo;program notes.&rdquo;

As if that isn't enough, Section IX offers a &ldquo;Thesaurus of
Song Titles by Subject, Key Word, and Category.&rdquo;  Space does
not permit a thorough analysis: suffice it to say, it is very useful
if you have &ldquo;lost&rdquo; the title of a song or can recall only a bit of
the lyric.

Why all this space devoted to a song book in a periodical
that deals with language?  Because, like good poetry, lyrical
language informs, amuses, entertains, gives pleasures of manifold
manifestations, and remains evocative of episodes and
events in our lives in a manner not equaled by other forms of
human creativity.  &ldquo;They're playing our song&rdquo; has no parallel in
&ldquo;They're reciting our poem&rdquo; or &ldquo;They're exhibiting our painting.&rdquo;
The sentiments associated with *Begin the Beguine,
Dancing in the Dark,* and, perhaps for a younger generation,
*Blue Bayou* or maybe even *She's Actin' Single and I'm
Drinkin' Double* recall places, people, situations that often have
otherwise faded into the obscurity of our forgeteries.  In other
moods, songs inspire the less cynical amongst us, whether they
are martial airs like *The Caissons Go Rolling Along*, or *Over
There*; patriotic melodies like *God Save the Queen*, or *You're a
Grand Old Flag.  Hard Hearted Hannah (The Vamp of Savannah)*
and *The Girl Friend of the Whirling Dervish* make us
laugh; *Let's Do It and Bidin' My Time* (because of the rhyme
...*time/...I'm)* delight us with their clever use of words; we
understand the poignancy of *Just a Gigolo* and *Somebody
Loves Me;* the pulse quickens and the toes begin an involuntary
tattoo to the strains of *Bill Bailey Won't You Please Come
Home* and *Charleston*.  It is well documented that *Love For Sale*
was forbidden on the radio as too risqu&eacute;; it is only a rumor that
when *Gloomy Sunday* was broadcast, it resulted in so many
suicides that it was banned.  Popular music is an integral part of
our culture, pervading our lives.  Little of it may have the
majestic quality of Beethoven or draw from us the admiration
merited by a Bach fugue; but the same elements are there,
from the grandeur of *You'll Never Walk Alone* to the delicious
counterpoints in *Adi&oacute;s* and *Mine*.  From a purely semantic or
semiotic point of view, music combines more emotional and
psychological reactions than any other medium of expression.
And that is what &ldquo;language&rdquo; is all about, isn't it?

If you like music—old-time songs or modern—you will
enjoy this book, which will afford you many hours of delight in
reminiscing, showing off all the songs and lyrics you can
remember, and amazing yourself with the genius of those
whose works are documented within its pages.  I could hardly
put it down long enough to write this review.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*No Uncertain Terms*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780871962171/Uncertain-Terms-Dittrick-Mark-Kender-0871962179/plp)
Mark Dittrick and Diane Kender Dittrick, (Facts on File, 1984), 109pp.

One of the (many) shortcomings of (most) dictionaries is
their failure to resolve confusions between (or among) terms
that have meanings that are nearly the same and may be
confused.  There are two ways out of this dilemma for the
ordinary dictionary: (1) define contrastively and (2) cross refer
to similar words by a &ldquo;See also&rdquo; reference.  The first of these,
without the second, is of use only if one knows the other term
or terms.  The second is rarely resorted to in dictionaries
because a thorough system of such references would occupy
space that is usually considered more economically devoted to
other kinds of information.  Contrastive defining is difficult
unless the dictionary is compiled with the aid of a computer,
enabling definitions dealing with similar semantic areas to be
drawn together for simultaneous consideration; otherwise, the
memory of the editor must be relied on, and that is fallible.

To some extent, the more common words of the language
are treated by some dictionaries in &ldquo;synonym studies,&rdquo; brief
paragraphs at the ends of certain entries where the sense
discriminations among words of similar meanings are discussed.
For example, the *Random House Unabridged* (which happens
to be at hand at all times) shows a synonym study for
*information, knowledge*, and *wisdom* at the end of the entry
for *information*.  However, only selected entries are so dealt
with in dictionaries.

Thus, one would welcome a book like the one at hand,
namely, one that makes useful, meaningful distinctions
between *meteorite* and *meteoroid*, among *bog, fen, swamp*, etc.,
*elk* and *moose*, and so on.  Alas, neither the structure nor the
attitude of the book under review always fulfills this need.  The
authors have felt it incumbent on them to add some pizzazz,
though I cannot imagine why: the book and its purpose would
be perfectly valid had the job been done in a straightforward
way.  The first entry, to distinguish between *spire* and *steeple,*
begins with that child's rhyme, &ldquo;Here's the church,/Here's the
steeple...,&rdquo; but to what avail it is hard to say.  The style of
writing is archly cute.  Judge for yourself:

>A SPIRE: The tall, pointed *roof* of a church tower; an architectural
outgrowth of the Middle Ages, steep roofs frequently
terminated the towers of nonreligious buildings
in Northern Europe.  A spire is only a part of a church
tower, not the whole blessed thing.
>
>A small spire atop a pinnacle or turret is called a
spirelet.  A small window in a spire, usually put there
more to be illuminating to the eye on the outside than
to illuminate what the eye might see on the inside, is
called a *spire light*.
>
>As inspiring as the thought might be, the word &ldquo;spire&rdquo;
was not inspired by the word &ldquo;inspire.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Spire&rdquo; has its
roots in words that refer to plant shoots and blades of
grass that taper to a point, while &ldquo;inspire&rdquo; comes from
the Latin *spirer*, to breathe or take a breath.  A nice
coincidence, though, since so many spires are so
breathtaking.
>
>A STEEPLE: The tower *plus* the spire.  Or even a tall church
tower that isn't supporting a spire.  A steeple was originally
so called simply due to its steepness, but the
word &ldquo;steeplechase&rdquo; does trace its way back to &ldquo;steeple,&rdquo;
being at one time a cross-country horse race
whose finish line was at the base of some distant but
visible steeple.  Now, isn't that inspiring?

My response is a flat *No*.  The verbiage interferes with the
information, and the introduction of extraneous terms confuses
rather than clarifies the nature of the distinction between *spire*
and *steeple*, which was, I thought, the purpose of the
discussion.

*Meteor, meteorite*, and *meteoroid* fare no better.  I hope the
authors were responsible for the precious rhymes that introduce
some of the entries: it would be horrifying to consider the
prospect that they had been preserved elsewhere, except in
some anthology of doggerel.  It is difficult enough to distinguish
the senses of the words without being faced by:

>A METEOROID: Any small particle still traveling through
space, just waiting for the opportunity to shed its old
&ldquo;-oid&rdquo; in a blaze of glory and maybe even replace it
with a brand new &ldquo;-ite.&rdquo;

If you like that sort of thing, then buy this book.

But it seems to me that such a book, if played straight,
could be very useful and interesting.  As presented here, it rubs
me the wrong way.  Some of the &ldquo;confusions&rdquo; (or should that
be &ldquo;confusibles,&rdquo; as in Adrian Room?)  would never occur to
me.  Do people really have a problem distinguishing *tortoni*
from *spumoni*?  a *storm surge* (which I've never even heard of)
from a *tidal wave* from a *tsunami* (which, though adapted from
Japanese to distinguish a *seismic sea wave* from a *tidal wave*,
for which it was a misnomer, actually means 'tidal wave' in
Japanese)?  *clairvoyance* from *precognition* from *telepathy?*

But most of the terms selected are good: *speed/velocity;
calculator/computer; optician/optometrist/ophthalmologist*
(where is *oculist?*), and so on are useful and important, and
many people do confuse them.  Although the confusion can
usually be resolved by a dictionary, it is convenient to have at
them in a specialized work.  It is a pity that an irritatingly cute
style, which interferes with the expository promulgation of
denotative data, has been affected; a more succinct treatment,
allowing for the inclusion of many more problems than those
covered, would have been more suitable.

Which reminds me—where are *affect* and *effect?*

Confounding the issue (but further bulking up the book)
are crudely redundant illustrations, presumably for people who
either cannot read or are unaware that confusions exist.  There
is a Foreword by Stuart B. Flexner, head of the Reference
Department at Random House and, I assume, the Dittricks'
boss, as they are identified as &ldquo;contributors to the upcoming
revision&rdquo; of the *Unabridged Edition* of the *RHD*.  As this
reviewer has seen only the typescript for the book, without the
Foreword, no comment can be offered on it, though it can
scarcely be expected to be anything but complimentary.

Why do people write such books?

*Laurence Urdang*

## The Trivial Pursuit of Grammar
*Michael Gorman, University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana*

Last Christmas I played, for the first and probably the last
time, the enormously popular board/quiz game called
Trivial Pursuit.  Three things about it caused me to be glad that
it is my friend and not I who owns the set.  The first is that the
quiz element is, when played by fanatics at least, subordinated
to the board element.  An unconscionable time is taken up with
dice-rolling and the planning and execution of strategies to get
one side or the other's counter to advantageous squares on the
board.  This is all a frightful bore and takes up time that could
be spent in posing and answering questions.  The second
problem lies in the questions themselves.  In the set with which
we were playing—the &ldquo;Genus&rdquo; edition—a large proportion of
the questions are either cretinously simple or simply cretinous.
The third and most irritating of the game's defects lies in the
wincingly poor use of the English language in both questions
and answers.  To anyone with sensitivity to the language, Trivial
Pursuit is the linguistic equivalent of a dentist's drill.

The most pervasive linguistic irritant is the perpetual use
of *what* for which, as in &ldquo;What rotund cook wrote a book on
bread and a cook's catalogue?&rdquo; and &ldquo;What movie Tarzan won
the 400-meter freestyle at the 1932 Olympics?&rdquo;  Less frequent,
but equally annoying, are such things as obscure use of tenses
(as in &ldquo;What Mormon leader was said to have 27 wives?&rdquo; —here
the hapless player does not know if he or she is to think of
someone who once was thought to have been so blessed or
afflicted or, if is were meant for *was*, someone who is still
believed to have been in that state) and crass misplacement of
prepositions (as in &ldquo;What hymn did John Steinbeck get his title
*The Grapes of Wrath* from?&rdquo; and &ldquo;Who was the capital of
Ohio named for?&rdquo;).

Chatty semi-literacies abound.  &ldquo;What river is Pocahontas
buried along?&rdquo; is, presumably, supposed to sound demotic.  The
fact that sense and grammar are violated is unimportant to the
compilers.  &ldquo;What color bottles do good Rhine wines come in?&rdquo;
must sound O.K. to some tin-ear somewhere, but it makes me
cringe (leaving aside the question of whether there *are* any
good Rhine wines).  My (least) favorite breeziness is &ldquo;What did
Moses do for a living before he was called by God?&rdquo;  Boatman?
Expedition leader?  Double-glazing salesman?

Then there is the Strange Case of the Inapt Article.
Presented with &ldquo;What is the Diamond Anniversary?&rdquo; one
immediately thinks of Queen Victoria or some other person of
extreme longevity and eminence.  The answer— &ldquo;The sixtieth&rdquo;—
indicates that the compilers meant *a* for *the*.  The very next
card (in our game) gave us a question in which impurity of
utterance is matched by fuzziness of thought—&ldquo;What is considered
the sister language of English?&rdquo;  The answer—&ldquo;German&rdquo;—
did not clear up any of the questions raised.  What is a sister
language?  How does it compare with a brother/father/mother/
niece language?  Is it the daughter of a mother tongue?  This
way lies madness.

The question &ldquo;What movie teacher's students were *la
cr&egrave;me de la cr&egrave;me*?&rdquo;  would surely have raised the hackles of
Miss Jean Brodie.  Leaving aside the pervasive *what* for *which*,
the fact that the question, as posed, summons up a vision of an
Assistant Professor of Film at East Cupcake U. would certainly
have offended that completely British lady.  Moving to an
entirely different, though equally gifted character, we find
&ldquo;What nationality is tennis spoilsport Ilie Nastase?&rdquo;  I think that
they mean &ldquo;bad sport,&rdquo; though even that would be a slur on
that immensely talented player.  A *spoilsport* is &ldquo;one who acts to
spoil the plans of others,' not one who disagrees vociferously
with the decisions of referees or umpires.  (At least they spelled
*Romanian* correctly.)  While on foreign topics, we should
consider the question &ldquo;What do the French call La Manche?&rdquo;
Here the muddled expression is hidden by the seeming simplicity
of the question.  However, there is no doubt that the answer
to the question, as posed, is &ldquo;La Manche.&rdquo;  The answer to the
intended question (&ldquo;What is the English name of the stretch of
water which the French call La Manche?&rdquo;) is given on the
back of the card— &ldquo;The English Channel.&rdquo;

The surrealistic quality of &ldquo;What's the only mammal that
can't fly that can fly?&rdquo; is, no doubt, partially intended.  Its
grammatical and linguistic horror can only be appreciated
when one tries to render it into decent English.  (I was almost
tempted there to say the &ldquo;decent obscurity of a learned
tongue&rdquo;—which is what standard English has become.)  The
answer, incidentally, is &ldquo;Man&rdquo;—ho, ho, ho!  Still in the Carrollian
twilight zone of language, we find &ldquo;What water is it better
to steam or boil lobsters in?&rdquo;  Let us leap lightly over the
question &ldquo;better than what?&rdquo; and consider the possible
answers.  Boiling water?  Steam?  Heavy water?  Perrier water?
None of the preceding; the answer is &ldquo;sea water,&rdquo; an answer
which is, I suppose, as good as any other.  As the philosopher A.
Hall would say, la-di-da.  Then there are &ldquo;What do Las Vegas
blackjack dealers stand on?&rdquo; and the grotesque &ldquo;What bird's
feathers does superstition say should never be in a house as
decoration?&rdquo;  (Parse *that*, grand-dad.)  Those with a philosophico-mathematical
tendency will love &ldquo;How many zeros are
there in a billion?&rdquo;  The true answer is either &ldquo;an infinity&rdquo; or
&ldquo;none&rdquo; depending on one's taste.  The answer given—&ldquo;nine&rdquo;—
clearly relates to the question &ldquo;How many zeros are there in
the mathematical expression for an American billion?&rdquo;  However,
that was not the question posed.  I do hope the fanatical
liking for Trivial Pursuit does not lead to litigation, because, in
that event, lawyers will have a field day with such ambiguity of
expression.

I will desist now, lest I be accused of breaking a butterfly
on a wheel.  Sadly, though, it is true that Trivial Pursuit is
regarded as the thinking person's alternative to television—the
sport, if not of kings, of yuppies and yumpies.  The slovenliness
of expression that it contains and the slovenliness of thought
which it encourages compare unfavorably with such earlier
parlor diversions as contract bridge and cryptic crosswords.
The former encouraged clear thought, albeit at a low level, and
the latter increased vocabulary and sensitivity to the language.
Perhaps a Slighty-Less-Trivial Pursuit with more intelligent
questions posed grammatically would not sweep the world, but
it might be worth attempting.  Meanwhile, let us brood upon
&ldquo;What two colors is a magpie?&rdquo; and wonder what the hell has
happened to our language.

## &ldquo; Good Grief, Maude! It's an Oxymoron! &rdquo;
*Timothy D. Hayes, Phoenix, Arizona*

Announce, as I do at the start of some speeches, that you
are &ldquo;a collector of oxymorons.&rdquo;  You'll face a sea of
bemused faces, with here and there an island reflecting a
knowing smile.  Offer a handful of samples, as I shall do in just
a paragraph or two, and an interesting phenomenon develops
over the following several days.  The mail brings you additions
to the growing list you've fashioned.  Some meet the mark; the
majority sadly miss.  After the audience's initial reaction, I
present a definition of the term: &ldquo;An oxymoron is a two-word
phrase containing contradictory elements.&rdquo;  Mostly, more
bemusement.  Then, an example:

>&ldquo;Jumbo shrimp.&rdquo;  It takes a few seconds, then a wave of
understanding begins to flow through the room.
>
>&ldquo;Negative growth.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Airline food.&rdquo;  (They're not all literal, after all.)
>
>&ldquo;Congressional leadership.&rdquo;  (In conservative quarters, that
one can generate applause.)
>
>&ldquo;Military intelligence.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Postal service.&rdquo;  (Cruel, perhaps, but universally
accepted.)  The understanding has widened, the anticipation
grown.
>
>&ldquo;From a golfing friend,&rdquo; I tell them, &ldquo;metal woods.&rdquo;
>
>From a banker who attends a lot of wine-tasting parties:
&ldquo;Plastic glasses.&rdquo;
>
>From the president of a seniors' club: &ldquo;Social Security.&rdquo;
>
>Oxymorons have lately risen from academic obscurity
thanks in large measure to a pair of contemporary nonfiction
writers.  But they may not have the sources I've developed.
>
>It's really fun to open the mail generated by one of my
frequent speeches as Vice President for Community Relations
for a Phoenix television station.  Everyone, clear about the
concept or not, wants to contribute.
>
>&ldquo;Unemployment benefits&rdquo; is in this week's mail.
>
>&ldquo;Recorded live&rdquo; comes from a broadcast associate.  (Television
creates another, more subtle oxymoron: &ldquo;New season.&rdquo;)
>
>&ldquo;Limited warranty.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Juvenile justice&rdquo; reflects a more serious contradiction.
>
>An Arizona rancher, fed up with dudes, offers &ldquo;Fashion
jeans.&rdquo;  A waitress in one of the hotel dining rooms where I
made a speech sends me &ldquo;Non-dairy creamer.&rdquo;  (The hyphen
saves it from violating the two-word-only rule, which most of
my contributors do break.)
>
>There are others I've come across unaided.  At the risk of
offending someone, somewhere, I propose that &ldquo;Divorced
Catholic&rdquo; constitutes an oxymoron.
>
>&ldquo;Numb feeling.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Living end.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Black light.&rdquo;
>
>Sometimes a proper name qualifies: &ldquo;Cheryl Ladd.&rdquo; (*Say*
it, don't *read* it!)
>
>The world of business produces oxymorons, too, along
with its widgets: &ldquo;Original copy.&rdquo;
>
>From politics: &ldquo;Republican feminist.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Conservative Democrat.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Political science.&rdquo;
>
>From government itself: &ldquo;Federal Reserve.&rdquo;  (Think about
it....) &ldquo;Federal aid.&rdquo;

Some are highly localized: Arizona maps locate a site with
an oxymoronic name—&ldquo;Dome Valley.&rdquo;  And in this desert
community of mine, where little or no provision is made for
carrying away heavy rainwater, we have a recurring problem:
melted winter snow sometimes fills the ordinarily empty Salt
River bed with raging flood waters, wiping out many river
crossings.  So &ldquo;Phoenix bridges&rdquo; will be instantly accepted by a
local audience as a valid example of the genre.

It has reached a point now where I &ldquo;vamp&rdquo; a little before
starting a speech—surreptitiously scanning the audience before
deciding whether it is &ldquo;fresh&rdquo; enough to try my list.  Even if I
spot a few faces I know have been in earlier groups, I still offer
a selective sprinkling, just to generate that flow of mail I know
will follow.

I just cannot pass up the chance of collecting a great new
oxymoron.  Whenever I suggest abandoning my speech-opener,
my wife says to me, using what I consider to be the quintessential
oxymoron: &ldquo;Good grief!&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {John S. Hogg}

Referring to Eric Partridge's discovery of *dover* as a
waiter's slang for a reheated dish, and Mr. Partridge's admittedly
somewhat strained guess at its origin, it seems unlikely
that the answer can be derived from even more strained
Chaucerian scholarship.  I would suppose that &ldquo;warmed over,&rdquo;
in English as in American, is a commoner and more colloquial
term for *rechauff&eacute;* than either &ldquo;reheated&rdquo; or &ldquo;done over.&rdquo;

It hardly boggles the linguistic imagination to conceive of
the possibility that a waiter, somewhat unlettered and possibly
either unacquainted with English or far from introspective,
might well hear this term as &ldquo;warm dover.&rdquo;  Since its warmth is
self-evident, what more natural than that the dish should come
to be characterized as merely &ldquo;dover&rdquo;?

*[John S. Hogg, Hamilton, New York]*

## Double Trouble
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

Hearing a discussion on the radio recently on the topic of
applications for college, I heard one panel member speak
of the &ldquo;prudent student.&rdquo;  Whether intentional or not, the
expression would qualify for membership in a category called
by me *Double Trouble*, or less euphonically designated as
*Stinky Pinky*, not to mention still more unsavory terms.  At any
rate, the modest rhyme pair set off a chain reaction in my
echoing skull, producing about seventy disgraceful specimens,
which I present here.  In the first list are given the &ldquo;definitions,&rdquo;
in the second list are the &ldquo;solutions&rdquo;; following the
&ldquo;solutions&rdquo; are the number combinations that reflect the
correct matchings.

| DOUBLE TROUBLE DEFINITIONS                        | DOUBLE TROUBLE                               |
| ------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------- |
| 1.  Unreliable dill.                              | 1.  Ablution dilution.                       |
| 2.  Jesuit in fighting mood.                      | 2.  Ancillary cassowary.                     |
| 3.  Fit of Pharaoh's cat.                         | 3.  Asp grasp.                               |
| 4.  Flaw in Flanders.                             | 4.  Benign divine.                           |
| 5.  Stolen sailboat.                              | 5.  Bloc rock.                               |
| 6.  Reference to bruise.                          | 6.  Church lurch.                            |
| 7.  Grip of Cleo's snake.                         | 7.  Computer disputer.                       |
| 8.  Relentless porridge.                          | 8.  Constellation altercation.               |
| 9.  Grits for the tragic muse.                    | 9.  Contingent astringent.                   |
| 10.  Attorney's pooch.                            | 10.  Contusion allusion.                     |
| 11.  Leaner horn.                                 | 11.  Craven maven.                           |
| 12.  Kindly dominie.                              | 12.  Cruel gruel.                            |
| 13.  Dagger job.                                  | 13.  Culture vulture.                        |
| 14.  Spire folk.                                  | 14.  Deadly medley.                          |
| 15.  Start of *Love Boat* affair.                 | 15.  Dirk work.                              |
| 16.  Titled world traveler.                       | 16.  Diversion aversion.                     |
| 17.  Fear of mistakes.                            | 17.  Effervescent convalescent.              |
| 18.  Skinny bird.                                 | 18.  Egyptian conniption.                    |
| 19.  High headgear for city.                      | 19.  Equatorial editorial.                   |
| 20.  Bubbling patient.                            | 20.  Error terror.                           |
| 21.  Star war.                                    | 21.  Extra-mighty arbor vitae.               |
| 22.  Recall the fall.                             | 22.  Facile hassle.                          |
| 23.  Herder of spotted cats.                      | 23.  Fickle pickle.                          |
| 24.  Healthfood frenzy.                           | 24.  Flemish blemish.                        |
| 25.  Weakening of ritual water.                   | 25.  Foreign warren.                         |
| 26.  Latin opponent.                              | 26.  Fragrant vagrant.                       |
| 27.  Greedy odist.                                | 27.  Frugal bugle.                           |
| 28.  Undemocratic national bird.                  | 28.  German sermon.                          |
| 29.  Shack spade.                                 | 29.  Global noble.                           |
| 30.  Hatred of Amusement.                         | 30.  Heart dart.                             |
| 31.  Lye-by.                                      | 31.  Hot yacht.                              |
| 32.  Monk's credit card.                          | 32.  Hovel shovel.                           |
| 33.  Smaller baggage carrier.                     | 33.  Imperfection collection.                |
| 34.  Rowboat salesman, gentle, too.               | 34.  Lazy daisy.                             |
| 35.  Cupid's arrow.                               | 35.  Legal beagle.                           |
| 36.  Beating a beating.                           | 36.  Leopard shepherd                        |
| 37.  Slow-growing cousin of Susan.                | 37.  Liquor bicker.                          |
| 38.  Soundness of cetacean mind.                  | 38.  Litter sitter.                          |
| 39.  Uninspired tile pattern.                     | 39.  Maize craze.                            |
| 40.  Bag of errors.                               | 40.  Manatee sanity.                         |
| 41.  Poor-spirited expert.                        | 41.  Melpomene hominy.                       |
| 42.  Mind-set on fake kingdom.                    | 42.  Monastic plastic.                       |
| 43.  Fastener of pages of bull.                   | 43.  Narrow sparrow.                         |
| 44.  Corny fad.                                   | 44.  Nile guile.                             |
| 45.  Condiment toter.                             | 45.  Norse horse.                            |
| 46.  Intrigue at Khartoum.                        | 46.  Ocean emotion.                          |
| 47.  Deafening chant.                             | 47.  Octogenarian antidisestablishmentarian. |
| 48.  Celtic seer craft.                           | 48.  Oracle coracle.                         |
| 49.  More direct critic.                          | 49.  Organic panic.                          |
| 50.  Thief of polish.                             | 50.  Papal staple.                           |
| 51.  Father Time's twist?                         | 51.  Pepper shlepper.                        |
| 52.  Tedious group of songs.                      | 52.  Porpoise corpus.                        |
| 53.  Tender of garbage or of puppies.             | 53.  Prosaic mosaic.                         |
| 54.  Alcohol wrangle.                             | 54.  Pugnacious Ignatius.                    |
| 55.  Contester of software.                       | 55.  Rapacious Horatius.                     |
| 56.  Chapel shift in earthquake.                  | 56.  Regal eagle.                            |
| 57.  Super conifer, outsize evergreen.            | 57.  Remember November.                      |
| 58.  Sounds of Eastern group.                     | 58.  Reversal dispersal.                     |
| 59.  Lead article in Quito.                       | 59.  Roman foeman.                           |
| 60.  Luther's preaching.                          | 60.  Ruritania mania.                        |
| 61.  Easy fight.                                  | 61.  Scythe writhe.                          |
| 62.  Text of a Delphinid.                         | 62.  Shorter porter.                         |
| 63.  On the second team of ratites.               | 63.  Steeple people.                         |
| 64.  Odorous tramp.                               | 64.  Stentorian Gregorian.                   |
| 65.  Alien rabbit quarters.                       | 65.  Straighter berater.                     |
| 66.  Viking steed.                                | 66.  Tender vendor.                          |
| 67.  Change of sorceress.                         | 67.  Urban turban.                           |
| 68.  Old gaffer against secularization of Church. | 68.  VERBATIM seriatim.                      |
| 69.  Quarterly in sequence.                       | 69.  Witch switch.                           |

*ANSWERS TO DOUBLE TROUBLE*

1-23  
2-54  
3-18   
4-24   
5-31  
6-10  
7-3     
8-12    
9-41  
10-35   
11-27   
12-4    
13-15   
14-63   
15-46   
16-29   
17-20   
18-43   
19-67   
20-17   
21-8    
22-57   
23-36   
24-49   
25-1    
26-59   
27-55   
28-56   
29-32   
30-16   
31-9    
32-42   
33-62   
34-66   
35-30   
36-58   
37-34   
38-40   
39-53     
40-33   
41-11   
42-60   
43-50   
44-39   
45-51   
46-44   
47-64   
48-48   
49-65   
50-13   
51-61   
52-14   
53-38   
54-37   
55-7    
56-6    
57-21   
58-5  
59-19  
60-28  
61-22  
62-52  
63-2  
64-26  
65-25  
66-45  
67-69  
68-47  
69-68
  


### CORRIGENDA

The wee beasties have been at work again:

1\.  In Virginia Howard's article, &ldquo;The Pearl of Hex&rdquo; [XI,3],
there somehow appeared a sentence that was not written by
the author and has no business there: &ldquo;Was it a new dish
concocted from the British Erector Set, Leggo?&rdquo;

2\.  The notice of the VERBATIM Competition Prize ($250) that
accompanied the article &ldquo;Cannibalism, Caves, and Amulets:
Lexicography in the Scottish Highlands and Islands,&rdquo; by Philip
Riley, was in the wrong place: it should have appeared with the
article, &ldquo;The Viking Linguistic Legacy,&rdquo; by S.B. Godinez.  Our
apologies to Messrs. Riley and Godinez.

## Try It Again, Please
*Lillian Mermin Feinsilver, Easton, Pennsylvania*

What does Ronald Reagan have in common with Clare
Boothe Luce?  Not just a political affiliation.  The use of a
Greek or Latin plural with a singular verb has shown up in the
speech of each.  The President remarked at a press conference
on Nov. 5, 1983:

>Sara, I have to say that there is only one
criteria...;

and the author-playwright, former U.S. Representative and
former Ambassador to Italy, commented in an earlier interview
with Dick Cavett (PBS-TV, rerun July 20, 1981):

>The media being what it is,...

To be sure, *agenda* in the singular has achieved universal
acceptance.  But not even singular *data* has yet been accorded
the same status.  *Criteria* with a singular verb is still beyond the
pale.  Witness the warnings in the *Oxford American Dictionary*
(1980): &ldquo;Do not use *criteria* as a singular noun&rdquo; and the
*American Heritage Dictionary* (2d College Ed., 1982): &ldquo;*Criteria*
is a plural form only.  It should not be substituted for the
singular *criterion*.&rdquo;  And *media* as a singular is viewed no more
tolerantly.  Indeed, a sample sentence submitted to the Harper
usage panel (William and Mary Morris, *Harper Dictionary of
Contemporary Usage*, 1975)—&ldquo;The news media is to be commended&rdquo;—elicited
emotional responses ranging from &ldquo;Awful!&rdquo;
and &ldquo;...infuriates me&rdquo; to &ldquo;Never Never Never Never Never!&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Good God!&rdquo; (the last from two critics, one of whom used
two exclamation points).  At the time, the American public had
already been exposed to President Lyndon B. Johnson's singular
*criteria*:

>...to act independently ... with only one
criteria, ... (*Harper Dictionary*, p. 160)

and was about to become familiar with President Richard M.
Nixon's singular *media*:

>The media has abdicated its fact-gathering... (*Chicago
Sun-Times*, Nov. 18, 1975).

Certainly if the disparaged forms march on, they will abet the
plurals *criterias* and *medias*, parallels to Bernard Meltzer's
*phenomenas* (&ldquo;...one of the strange phenomenas of life...&rdquo;
[*What's Your Problem?,* WOR Radio, N.Y., July 11, 1982]).
Ironically, a converse confusion comes from innocent efforts at
correctness, which are creating such oddities as a plural
*alumna* (&ldquo;...two *Annie* alumna...&rdquo; [Martin Charnin, director
and song writer, on Jack O'Brian's *The Critic's Circle*, WOR,
Sept. 27, 1979]) and a plural *antenna* (&ldquo;...two radio antenna
were reported stolen...&rdquo; [*The Express*, Dec. 8, 1980, p. 16]).

Mr. Reagan shares other kinds of syntactical freedom with
figures in national government.  &ldquo;We would have liked to have
had this whole thing move faster,&rdquo; he told a news conference
on Jan. 5, 1982, stimulating memories of the First Lady who
had been prone to the redundant perfect infinitive:

>I doubt if it would have been possible to have
had Mr. Woolcott as one's guest very long in
any ordinary household... (Eleanor Roosevelt,
*This I Remember*, 1949, p. 250).

Indeed, Mr. Johnson showed even greater inaccuracy of
tense (accompanied by a superfluous *that*) in

>I am sure that if there had been any laws
violated that the matter will be presented
to the proper authorities.  (Associated Press,
Oct. 26, 1964).

On Dec. 20, 1983, President Reagan used the indicative in a
contrary-to-fact clause, for which the subjunctive is still generally
recommended

>...what life would be like if the multinational
force was [were] not there.

Similar rhetoric was produced by various predecessors:

>How I wish I *wasn't* a reformer, oh, Senator!
But I suppose I must... (Theodore Roosevelt,
to Chauncey Depew, in Richard Hofstadter, *The
American Political Tradition*, 1948, p. 203);
I'd be a pretty pathetic nominee if I wasn't
able to get rid of Strauss as national chairman.  (Jimmy
Carter, *New York*, July 5, 1976).

In his inauguration on Jan. 20, 1981, Mr. Reagan gave
impetus to an inexact form of address for the clergy when he
turned to the officiating minister and said, &ldquo;Reverend
Moomaw,...&rdquo;  He further used that form on Jan. 4, 1983, in
commenting on the action of another churchman

>Reverend Jackson's mission was a personal
mission of mercy...

Similar usage appeared in a statement of former Vice President
Walter Mondale on April 13, 1984:

>They should be repudiated by myself,
Gary Hart, and Reverend Jackson.

Although the clerical title with surname goes back to the 17th
century, most of the dictionaries and etiquette manuals declare
that for speaking to a clergyman, the model is *Mr.* (or *Dr.,* if
applicable) *Doe*, and that for referring to a clergyman, the
standard is *Mr. Doe* or the *Reverend Mr. Doe*.  For introducing
him, we are told to use the full name with article and title: *the
Reverend John Doe* or *the Reverend Mr. Doe*.  Never, they
admonish, should we say *Reverend Doe* or even *the Reverend
Doe*.  Interestingly enough, the last form occurred in the
Reagan inauguration when Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon
introduced the minister as &ldquo;the Reverend Moomaw.&rdquo;  And it
has been used for general reference, interchangeably with the
style of the President, by Senator Gary Hart of Colorado:

>This was a humanitarian action of
the Reverend Jackson.  (Jan. 3, 1983);
>
>Reverend Jackson and I disagree on the
defense budget (March 28, 1984).

Mr. Reagan has also added force to the trend toward a
plural pronoun after an antecedent singular pronoun; for
example, *someone* followed by *they*, as in:

>And all that we were asking was that the Constitution
be interpreted, as I believe it really reads,
to say that if someone wants to have prayer in
school, they can have prayer in school.  (Interview
in *Family Weekly*, June 10, 1984, p. 4.)

One recalls with a start the statement of President John F.
Kennedy:

>If somebody is going to kill me, they are going
to kill me.  (Quoted in *New Leader*, Nov. 6, 1978.)

Such grammatical construction has been classified as &ldquo;Adolescent
*they*&rdquo; by an otherwise liberal observer, because &ldquo;This
misuse reflects an immature style.&rdquo;  (Roy H. Copperud, *American
Usage and Style; the Consensus*, 1980, p. 9.)

An even more striking illustration of this rhetorical failing
was a statement by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in which
*a person* was followed by changing number in both pronouns
and verbs:

>I really believe if a person turns their mind to
something else and quits pitying themselves about
it, they won't find it nearly as hard to quit
smoking as they think it is.&rdquo;  (*Time*, Aug. 12,
1957, p. 17.)

Eisenhower was also capable of using *me* as subject:

>...if I were caught in one falsehood, and what
I stand for in people's eyes got tarnished,
then not just me but the whole Republican gang
would be finished.  (Emmet John Hughes, *The Ordeal
of Power*, 1963, pp. 194-195.)

Kennedy as presidential candidate used the same pronoun after
*than*, treating the latter as a preposition rather than a
conjunction:

>There may be thousands of Americans more qualified
to be president than me... (1960).

Oddly, the less-educated Harry S. Truman expressed more
precisely a somewhat similar observation in reviewing his
record of service:

>There are probably a million people who could have
done the job better than I did it,... (*Time*,
April 28, 1952, p. 19.),

though Truman uttered some unruly lines too:

>...these fellows who are always saying wha
oughta been done... (*Time*, Sept. 22, 1961, p. 20.)

More recently, Senator Daniel Ken Inouye of Hawaii
employed *them* in place of *they* in a manner similar to that of
Kennedy's use of *me* for *I*:

>We had to demonstrate to our fellow Americans
that we were just as good as them.  (*Real People*,
NBC-TV, rerun July 22, 1981.)

And again some converse confusion: Senator Lowell Weicker of
Connecticut used *I* after a preposition, in a 1983 fund-raising
letter in behalf of Senator Rudy Boschwitz of Minnesota:

>Now it is time for you and I to
remember Rudy—

which brought to mind John Simon's offering of an inevitable
paraphrase of John Donne's advice about the one for whom the
bell tolls: &ldquo;It rings for you and I.&rdquo;  (*Paradigms Lost*, 1980, p.
214.)

It was Senator Ernest Fritz Hollings of South Carolina,
early aspirant for the 1984 Democratic nomination for the
presidency, who remarked on *The Larry King Show* (WCBS
Radio Network, Dec. 10, 1982):

>If we did in local government, and if we
did in state government like we do in
Washington,...;

and I silently concluded: We might, like, not know any better.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Much of Smokenders' business comes from corporate accounts
with an interest in getting as many of their employees as
possible to quit.&rdquo;  [From *The Citizen*, San Dieguito, California.
Submitted by Lynn Garland.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The infiltration of the wretched croissant (among other things)
is largely to blame for the rapid deterioration in our moral
behaviour.&rdquo;  [From a letter to the editor of *The Sunday
Telegraph*, London, England, 21 October 1984.  Submitted by
Reginald Dunstan, New Mexico.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It's a perfect gift for someone who loves to entertain (and
who doesn't).&rdquo;  [From a grocery advertisement, Finast stores, 2
December 1984.]

## The Violent English Language
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

Everyone deplores violence these days.  Many articles and
books, radio and television programs, and self-help and
encounter groups are designed to help us curb our tempers.
And, with the specter of nuclear warfare haunting our horizons,
it may be that the future of the human race depends
upon our ability to channel our violent impulses and to
discover solutions based on cooperation rather than aggression.

When we *tackle, wrestle*, and *grapple* with the problem of
violence, we are bound to be *struck* by an idea.  If our view of
reality is shaped and defined by the words and phrases we use,
then violence lies deep in our thoughts, frozen in the clich&eacute;s
and expressions of everyday life.

&ldquo;I'll be *hanged*,&rdquo; we are likely to mumble as this insight
*hits* us with a vengeance.

Let's take a *stab* at the issue of violence in our language
with a *crash* course on the metaphors we use to describe
disagreements.  First, we *rack* our brains assembling our *arsenal*
of arguments.  Then we attempt to *demolish* the opposition's
points with a *barrage* of criticism, *attack* their positions by
*nailing* them *dead* to rights, let them have it with *both barrels*
by *shooting* down their contentions, *break* their concentration
by *puncturing* their assumptions, *shake* their confidence by
*hammering* away at their weaknesses, *torpedo* their efforts with
*barbed* criticism, and—when *push comes to shove*—assault their
integrity with character *assassination*.  If all else fails, we try to
*twist their arms* and *kill* them with kindness.

Now we can understand the full meaning of the expression
to *have a violent disagreement*.

The world of business is a veritable *jungle* of *cutthroat*
competition, a school of hard *knocks*, and a *dog-eat-dog* world
of *backbiting, backstabbing*, and *hatchet* jobs.  Some companies
*spearhead* a trend of price *gouging*.  Other firms *beat* the
competition to the *punch* and gain a *stranglehold* on the
market by *fighting tooth* and *nail* to *slash* prices in a *knock-down,
dragout, no-holds-barred* price *war*.

Still other companies *put the squeeze* on their competitors
with *raids, takeovers*, and *shakeups*.  Then the other side gets
*up in arms* and *screams bloody murder* about such a *low blow*.

No wonder that business executives are often recruited by
*headhunters*.  No wonder that *bleeding hearts* who can't *fight*
their own *battles* are likely to get *axed, fired, discharged,
booted, kicked out, sacked*, or *canned*.

One would hope that sports would provide an escape from
life's daily *grind*.  But once again we find mayhem and havoc
embedded in the adversarial expressions of athletics.

These days we may not be able to get within *striking*
distance of a sporting *contest* without *running into* or *bumping
into* some ticket *scalper*, who is out to *rip* us off and *get away
with murder*.  Once inside the stadium, we witness two teams
trying to *battle, beat, clobber, crush, dominate, maul, pulverize,
rout, slaughter, steamroll, thrash, throttle, whip, make mincemeat
of, wreak havoc on*, and *stick it to* each other with *suicide
squeezes*, grand *slams, blitzes*, aerial *bombs*, and *punishing*
ground *attacks*.  Naturally, both sides hope that they won't
*choke* in *sudden death* overtime.

## Caveat Viator
*David L. Miles, Charlevoix, Michigan*

Traveler beware.  When on the Grand Tour of Europe,
forget what over-enthusiastic travel mavens have told you
of the comparative ease with which you can expect to cope
with the languages you'll encounter.  Certain words long cooking
in the linguistic awareness pot will be assimilated with ease,
of course, but many that look like English or another tongue
can turn on you with embarrassing results.  Jet lag is easily
corrected.  Language lag might never be resolved.  Go from
France to Spain to Italy to France, or vice versa, and even to
Germany from any of the three, and find that your mind may
stay one country behind, if not at home.  Carrying a little
learning can be a dangerous thing, for hauling linguistic
baggage over borders results in encounters with customs not of
the bureaucratic kind.  Many a *Doppelganger* haunts the major
European tongues.  Diacritics trigger the hunch that not all is as
it appears to be (*b&eacute;e, cr&acirc;ne, go&ucirc;t, ha&iuml;r, h&acirc;te, r&acirc;pe, so&ucirc;l, th&eacute;*—to
name a few in French).  But best expunge all preconceptions,
and travel with an open mind and a closed mouth if your
language skills progressed little beyond *amo, amas, amat*.
Menus, signs, schedules, and the news will contain gibberish if
too hastily scanned and accepted as they stand.  Turn your
thoughts around for a moment to filter meaning through
another sensibility.  A Frenchman seeing &ldquo;... as Mets fade&rdquo;
will not think of a baseball team's drop in the standings, but
will puzzle over 'ace food tasteless.'  &ldquo;Marines seize protester&rdquo;
will become 'Navies sixteen to protest.'  &ldquo;Supplier pays bribes&rdquo;
equals 'to supplicate country scraps' for him.  In France, 'mine'
can be *mien* and 'mien' is *mine*; a coin is a 'corner' and corner
means 'to toot a trumpet.'  Homographs do not homophones do
not homonyms do not heteronyms make.  Speak and, especially,
write your ideas, needs, and wishes with caution.

Ask for *burro* in Italy, and your waiter will serve you
butter; but ask for it in Spain and he may bring you a jackass.
Ask for *baba* in Italy and France, and savor a rich cake; but
demand *baba* in Spain, and receive a plate of spittle.  Request
*cane* in France and you will be served duck; but in Italy you
might be forced to eat dog.  Request *pie* and you will get a
French magpie, but someone's foot in Spain.  Do not expect to
find *loin* or *capon* on a French menu; together they mean
'distant coward.'  You may find *prunes* or *raisin*, however: order
the first and get plums; do not hesitate to order only one raisin,
for it is not a desiccated grape but a bunch of juicy ones.  Also
tell your French waiter you love *pain*; he will not think you a
raving masochist, only a lover of good bread.  Ask &ldquo;How's the
*sole* today?&rdquo;  in France and be told the fish is delicious; inquire
in Italy and be informed the sun has been shining since dawn.
But forget *Sole* in Germany, unless you like brine.  Hungry in
Germany but on a tight budget?  Ask for the nearest *automat*,
and be steered to the closest robot.  And no German will
comprehend how you can enjoy *Tang* for breakfast: seaweed is
best left underwater.  Tell a Spanish waiter you'd like more
*sauce*: he'll cut down a willow tree for you, should one be
handy.  Ask for a *tuna* sandwich in Spain, and receive one filled
with prickly pear.  Go to a Spanish cocktail party, compliment
your hostess on her delectable *canap&eacute;s*, and she'll think you've
been nibbling on her sofas.  Bite into an Italian *pera*, a 'pear';
risk rabies with a *perra*, a 'bitch dog,' in Spain.

Never declare to a Frenchman you are a *pet* lover.  He will
think you quite kinky, since a *pet* is, no other word for it, a
'fart.'  Get to know a Frenchman a little, ask if he would like to
have a *chat*, and he might be put off at your immediate offer of
a feline whose fur he might be deathly allergic to.  Put on airs
in France and expect to be called *fat*, not overweight, but
'conceited.'  Beware of asking a betrothed Frenchman what he
sees in his *future*, for you will be questioning his judgment in
selecting his intended wife.  After he's wed, under no circumstances
inquire how he's adjusting to life with his *bride*.  That's
a 'bridle.'

If you're in the money, never ask your Italian hotel desk to
obtain a *limo* for your touring pleasure:  why on earth would
you want to obtain some mud?  At an Italian beach, if you
think all that exposed skin is really cute, say so.  All Italian skin
is *cute*.  It really is.  Ambitious and desire recognition?  Don't go
to Italy should you hunger for fame, because *fame* is 'hunger'
there.  Should you be the he-man type, or regard yourself as
such, never tell an Italian you're a one hundred per cent red-blooded
American *male*: he will recoil in horror at your
admission of your own evil.  Be pestered by an Italian demanding
to sell or mooch something, but never, ever, answer with a
knowing, exasperated &ldquo;Ah, no!&rdquo;  He might interpret it to mean
you are dubbing him an *ano*, an 'anus,' and the reaction could
be swift.  Likewise avoid using *After* in Germany—it signifies
the same part of the anatomy.  (Forget you ever heard of
*aftershave*.)

Don't try to find *sable* in France or Spain; neither has
devised the means of making coats of 'sand' or 'sabers,'
respectively.  A Spanish *saber* means only 'to know.'  Ask a
sporting Frenchman for a game of *catch*, and he will think you
want to wrestle.  Tell a winning Frenchman he's a real *champ*;
he will wonder why you're calling him a 'field.'  Eye some
desired objects in a French emporium; ask for *four* of them,
and get an 'oven.'  Or say you need a *pin* to hold a tear
temporarily, and get a 'pine tree.'  A *gaze* is not a look of
wonder in France or Germany, merely 'gauze.'  Write down for
a French doctor that you have swollen *glands*: he will reply
that acorns don't do that.  Complain of a twitch in your *groin*,
and he will tell you he's not a veterinarian who could treat a
'hog's snout.'  Or your *legs* are *lame* (your 'legacy' is a 'blade'?).
Or you think you have *lice* on your head (a 'mongrel bitch'?).
Agree with a French official your government ought to put a
*rein* on interest rates, and he will wonder how a 'kidney' can
affect the economy.  Try to insult an obnoxiously loquacious
Frenchman with the epithet &ldquo;jackass,&rdquo; but he will only agree
that he truly is a *jacasse*, a 'chatterer.'

Tell a German you enjoyed the *plage*, the 'beach,' in
France, and he'll know you're a hopeless hypochondriac for
liking the 'plague.'  Learn *Auge* is 'eye' in Germany, but don't
expect a Spaniard to comprehend it: to him the word means a
'boom' or 'boost in prices.'  An Italian regards it as a 'summit.'
*Elle*, so common in France for 'she,' crooks into the Italian
letter L, then flattens out to the measure of a yard in Germany.
French *dur* is 'hard,' but 'musical major' to a German; a
gangster's *Moll* can be hard, too, but is German 'musical
minor.'  Germans sing a *Sang*, but that's 'blood' to a Frenchman.
Both agree about *smoking*, however—not the health
aspect, but as a 'dinner jacket.'  *No smoking* to them means
'informal dress is acceptable.'  Feisty kids consider baths to be
bad news; to German kids a 'bath' is always *Bad*.

Lost your traveler's checks?  Tell a German you're in a
*Funk*; he'll wonder why you're insisting you're inside a radio.
Tell him you don't want to make a *Fuss*, but... How would
you go about making a 'foot,' anyhow?  Always look a German
*Gift* horse in the mouth.  It might contain 'poison.'  Some *Gift*.
On a health kick?  Tell a German you want to find a *Gymnasium*.
He will wonder what you're expecting to find in a
'grammar school' at your age.  Mention of the New York Knicks
will make him think less of basketball than a Big Apple 'curtsy.'
Compliment him on the beautiful *Mantel* over his fireplace.
What 'overcoat'?  You may agree with a German film buff that
in some old B-westerns the *Posse* really is a 'farce.'  Ask him if
he'd like to invest in a piece of the *Rock*, and he'll be damned
if he can figure out what's so lucrative about a 'section of a
coat.'  Tell him he makes no *Sense*; he will agree he's never
made a 'scythe' in his life.  A German bank might give you a
*Teller* as a bonus for a substantial deposit, never let one handle
your money, for how could a 'plate' cash a check?  And the
German *links* has nothing to do with chains, cuffs, or a golf
course; just keep to your 'left.'

A Spaniard will consider you daft if you ask about the
influence of the *media* in his country.  The only influence a
'stocking' has there is to make wearing a shoe more comfortable.
An Italian will wonder why you consider something
'average' to have any influence at all.  Put on saintly airs in
Spain, say you always try to do *unto* others, etc., and your
incredulous audience will ponder a Golden Rule that advises
pouring 'grease' on your fellow man.  Meditate, but never go
into a *trance* in Spain; that's a 'dangerous situation.'  Say there
that you want something done only *once*; expect it to be
repeated 'eleven' times.  Ask for more *caldo* in Spain, and get
more 'broth'; ask in Italy, they'll turn up the 'heat'.  Croon *cara*
to an Italian female, she might think you're very 'dear' also;
croon *cara* to a *se&ntilde;ora*, she'll wonder why you insist on
mentioning only her 'face.'  Find wildlife in a Spanish *estero*, a
'salt marsh;' tell what you discovered to an Italian, and he'll
know you're acquainted with 'swingers' in foreign countries.  Be
not frightened of *rape* in Spain.  It's a very fine 'fish.'  *Nudo* is
'naked' in Italy, only a Spanish 'knot.'  Never use Italian *loro*,
'they,' in Spain: you'll only be talking of a 'parrot.'  Should you
see the word *polittico* in an Italian museum, look not for a
portrait of a Machiavellian ward heeler, merely a 'polyptych
panel.'  An Italian musician can blow a mean *tromba*, a
'trumpet,' but his Spanish counterpart could never get his lips
on a 'waterspout.'

So it goes.  Scores of puzzlers abound.  Stick to English, and
be thrown by *Abort, Angel, Art, Bake, bald, Beet, blank, Boot,
Brief, Dose, fast, fatal, First, fix, Fund, Hang, Happen, Hose,
Hut, Kind, kitten, Lack, Lake, List, Lunge, mitten, nun,
Plunder, Quote, Rat, Regress, rings, rot, Same, Span, stark, Tag,
Trunk, Wade, Wand* in Germany; by Spanish *ajar, can, flux,
fray, liar, lid, mar, meter, mote, pan, quite, red, ruin, taller, tan,
tender*; by *ail, an, bail, bond, but, cap, case, chair, choir, chose,
dam, dot, fin, fine, fond, fret, gale, infect, laid, lie, lit, main,
mare, miser, or, ours, pour, probe, rapt, rate, rave, regain, relent,
report, ride, rogue, sale, short, singe, son, stance, store, tape, ton*
in France; and by Italian *abate, acre, ago, alone, ape, brace,
camera, china, dare, data, dice, dote, dove, due, estate, fare,
fate, lasso, lode, mare, mite, pace, pane, pure, reduce, regale,
rise, rose, sale, sparse, stare, state, tale, terse, and truce*.  None,
but none, of these words will do you one bit of good should
you try to apply them as you know them.  Cast a skeptical eye
on all you see; take extra care with those you speak; think
twice about what you hear; carry an eraser.  Take nothing at
face value, or you stand to lose face.  That's not Italian for
'torch.'  *Caveat viator*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The round, black cylinder that the type hits (on a typewriter)
needs to be replaced.  It's called the platinum... can cost
$50.&rdquo;  [From Antique Answers, *The Sunday Boston Herald*,
November 4, 1984.  Submitted by Mary Louise Gilman, Hanover,
Massachusetts.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Kind Words: A Thesaurus of Euphemisms*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/KIND-WORDS-Thesaurus-Euphemisms-Neaman-Judith/14317914857/bd)
Judith S. Neaman and Carole G. Silver, (Facts on File, 1984), xii + 320pp. + a 51-page index unnumbered.

This book is divided into nine parts with titles like &ldquo;Parts
of the Body: Forbidden Territory,&rdquo; &ldquo;Parts of the Body: Neutral
Territory,&rdquo; &ldquo;Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears: Secretions, Excretions &
Bathrooms,&rdquo; &ldquo;Sex: Amateur &amp; Professional,&rdquo; and so forth.
Within each are a number of sections, each given a heading of
a euphemism; the text discusses not only the headword or
phrase but several related terms.  Judging from the index,
almost 6000 terms are treated, some quite fully, some cursorily.
The writing is good and it is interesting; there is little original
scholarship here, for the authors, rather than succumb to the
temptations of speculation, are usually satisfied to report the
assumptions and speculations of others.  Thus, *loo* is traced to
*bourdalon*, a portable chamberpot, &ldquo;concealed in a ladies' muff
[sic!],&rdquo; according to Honour and Fleming's *Dictionary of
Decorative Arts; bourdalon* was named after an 18th-century
French preacher who so captivated his audiences that they
&ldquo;assembled hours in advance.&rdquo;  The (traditional) origin, here
ascribed to the *OED*, is the cry *Gardyloo*!, shouted (I trust with
sufficient energy) to warn passers-by that a chamberpot or slops
basin was about to be emptied into the street from an upstairs
window.  (Those were sad days, indeed, for the hard of
hearing.)

The book is fun to read.  In the section &ldquo;Crime and
Punishment&rdquo; descriptions of the drug subculture are revealing
and interesting, but although *Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds*
(=LSD) is described as having been made famous by Lennon
and McCartney's 1967 song, no mention of Sammy Davis, Jr.'s
*Candy Man* hit is made under that entry.  (That just about
exhausts my knowledge of drug slang.)

Though an amateur, I nonetheless offer some comments
on &ldquo;Sex: Amateur &amp; Professional.&rdquo;  The authors refer to *service*
'copulate with' as a &ldquo;more cynical American expression,&rdquo; which
it may well be.  But it is the customary euphemism employed
on the farm, where its meaning is closer to 'impregnate,' since
it is assumed that animals do not engage in copulation for fun.
The transference of the term to people is certainly cynical, but
the authors, perhaps for the sake of brevity, do not explain it
that way.  Many of the expressions are colorful: *boondocking,
PDS (public display of affection), the town bike, get off at
Redfern*, etc.

I find euphemisms as a class difficult to assess.  Those that
become familiar enough to be clich&eacute;s are not only dull but have
lost whatever euphemistic qualities they might once have had.
Thus, the &ldquo;euphemisms&rdquo; *knockers, boobs*, and *tits* are scarcely
that for *breasts*.  Is *pussy* a euphemism?  If so, then we need
euphemisms for euphemisms.  It is only the unfamiliar ones that
seem to hold any interest, possibly because some are humorous
and others mysterious.  To take a popular category in which
euphemisms abound, *die*, some are obvious (in context) to
anyone encountering them for the first time: *gone to a better
place, go to one's last reward, take the big jump, be present at
the last roll call*, and so on.  Others, when heard for the first
time, strike one as facetious (if cynical) metaphors: *cash in
one's chips, buy the farm, push up daisies*, and so on.  In
another few years, *join the majority* will be meaningless (it is
already somewhat old-fashioned), for there will be more people
alive on this planet than ever died.  Others are mysterious: *kick
the bucket, go for one's tea, rider on a pale horse*, and *go west*.
The first is, pure and simple, an idiom; proof that *bucket* comes
from *bouchet*, some sort of a crossbar from which hogs were
suspended before slaughter (which they kicked in their death
agonies) is lacking.  The second, though British, is unknown to
me and, at any rate, seems harmless enough.  To understand the
third, one would have to be familiar with Revelation 6:8.  And
the fourth is usually described as a metaphoric reference to the
setting of the sun, the end of one's day on earth.

Euphemisms are so much a part of our language that they
are often very difficult to identify, and I am not entirely sure
that it is correct to call every metaphor for something unpleasant
a euphemism.  Moreover, as the euphemisms acquire a life
of their own, it is hard to see anything &ldquo;eu-&rdquo; about *croak* for
*die* and *pull the plug* for *mercy killing*: they seem to me more
like cynical, vulgar paraphrases.  The authors discuss this problem,
albeit briefly, in About This Book, and conclude with a
classification, &ldquo;vulgar euphemism,&rdquo; which they call &ldquo;a contradiction
in terms of logic, but not of social usage,&rdquo; a conundrum
I have been unable to solve.

Two years ago [IX,2], two books dealing with the same
subject, *A Dictionary of Euphemisms &amp; Other Doubletalk*, by
Hugh Rawson, and *Slang and Euphemism*, by Richard A.
Spears, were reviewed by Dr. Reinhold Aman, better known as
an authority on dysphemisms, being the editor/publisher of
*Maledicta*.  He saw much that he liked in those books; I see
much that I like in this one.  The authors relate how Rawson's
book appeared when they were halfway through their compilation
of *Kind Words*.  They must have been sorely disappointed
at seeing it, and I sympathize with them.  Putting on as brave a
face as possible, they are satisfied to regard themselves as &ldquo;part
of a new lexicographical tradition in the making.&rdquo;  That is
something like giving the name &ldquo;annual&rdquo; to the first occurrence
of an event only *planned* as yearly (as in, &ldquo;The First Annual
Darktown Strutters' Ball&rdquo;).  After all, who knows what may
happen?

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Oxford Guide to Word Games*](https://www.amazon.com/Oxford-Guide-Word-Games/dp/0192141449)
Tony Augarde, (Oxford University Press, 1984), 240pp.

Here is advice from a verse of mine called *Diet for Word
Players*:

>When out of afflatus, the way you recoup
Is, *order a bowl of hot Alphabet Soup*.
Just stir the SOUP briskly; you'll spoon down your throat
As tasty an OPUS as poet e'er wrote.

But I have come to realize that my analogy, anagram included,
is unfair to words; their kinship is more with deity than with
soup.  &ldquo;In the beginning,&rdquo; said the Apostle, &ldquo;was the Word...
and the Word was God.&rdquo;  This being so, we are required to
worship words.  The difference between us players of word
games and you more serious writers is simply that we laugh as
we worship.

What we have lacked so far is a good Book of Common
Prayer, a set of rituals for our particular Church.  That is what
Tony Augarde has set out to supply in *The Oxford Guide to
Word Games*.  It describes games to suit every taste—26
categories and innumerable subcategories, each with a history
and prime examples.  The main categories are, in order of
appearance:

&bull;*Riddles*, as old as ancient Babylon.  (Who becomes
pregnant without conceiving, who becomes fat without eating?
*A rain cloud*.)

&bull; *Enigmas*—riddles in rhyme.

&bull; *Acrostics*—hidden letter patterns in verse that convey a
message.

&bull; *Word squares*—sets of words of equal length, one word
under the other, generally reading the same down as across.

&bull; *Crosswords*—a 1913 invention which no more needs
explaining than does

&bull; *Scrabble*, scarcely half a century old.  For insight into
the soul of this game, Mr. Augarde turns to Clement Wood's
mournfully impish *Death of a Scrabble Master*:

>This was the greatest of the game's great players:
If you played BRAS, he'd make it HUDIBRASTIC.
He ruled a world 15 by 15 squares,
Peopled by 100 letters, wood or plastic...

&bull; *Anagrams*, words formed by rearranging the letters of
other words.  (Sweetheart = *there we sat*.)

&bull; *Rebuses*, which draw indiscriminately on pictures, symbols,
numbers, and letters to tell you a secret.  Myles na
Gopaleen uses only two symbols and the regular alphabet here:

>My grasp of what he wrote and meant
Was only five or six %.
The rest was only words and sound
My reference is to Ezra &pound;.

&bull; *Chronograms* scatter Roman numerals through words to
register a date.  The numerals in &ldquo;LorD HaVe MerCIe Vpon
Vs,&rdquo; says Mr. Augarde, memorialize 1666, the year of the great
London fire; I am too uncertain of my Roman arithmetic to
confirm this.

&bull; *Palindromes*, which read the same backward as forward.
(Live not on evil.)

&bull; *Pangrams*, which crowd all 26 letters of the alphabet
into a cryptic remark; the perfect palindrome would be only 26
letters long.  The nearest approach cited here is a 27-letter
marvel that repeats only the *i: Brick quiz whangs jumpy veldt
fox*.

&bull; *Lipograms*—compositions that pretend one letter of the
alphabet does not exist.  A 50,000-word novel was written
without e.

&bull; *Univocalics*, which make do with but one of the five
vowels: *Persevere, ye perfect men*.

&bull; *Letter games*.  These sometimes change one word to
another by adding or subtracting the first or last letter (*rough,
trough; caress, cares*,) or by adding or subtracting one letter at
a time and juggling the others (*spread, praised, Paradise*.)  Or
words may hide in sentences: *The lamb is one of my pets yields
bison*.

&bull; *Alphabet games*.  Perhaps the most familiar of these are
Alphabet Verse, which begins its first line with A, its second
with B, and so on, and the English Comic Alphabet, which
puns on its opening letters (A for 'orses = *hay for horses*; B for
mutton = *beef or mutton*; C for yourself = *see for yourself*,
etc.)

&bull; *Poetry play*.  In Bouts Rim&eacute;s, the player builds a poem
around a given set of rhymes, or creates a new, frivolous line to
rhyme with a familiar one.  (*I think that I shall never see / My
contact lens fell in my tea*.)  In Centos, lines from famous
poems are joined in a new verse.  Chain and Echo verses repeat
the last sound of each line in the first sound of the next.
Equivoques reverse their sense if the order of the lines is
altered.  Macaronics mix foreign and English words: *In tempus
old a hero lived / Qui loved puella deux...*
.le

Besides subcategories of the foregoing, the book provides
*Lapsus Linguae, Twenty Questions, Hangman, Puns*, and *The
Longest Word (hippopotomonstrosesquipedalian* is an oddity
that might be thrown in here), not to mention *Lewis Carroll's*
*Word Games*.  All in all, it seems fair to predict that *The Oxford
Guide to Word Games* will be rated as the most comprehensive
and useful work yet in its field.

This word player, for one, would like to see Mr. Augarde
some day examine a still neglected extension of word play—
rhetoric.  The author mentions that puns and metaphors are
often at the core of the games he lists, but not that most other
rhetorical devices are equally playful.  Tmesis splits a word in
two and tucks another in between; synecdoche turns a sail into
a ship, a foot into a foot soldier, a stomach into the fleshly
appetites; paradox contradicts itself without lying; ellipsis tells
without saying.

Indeed, the same imperative need to play applies to all
verbal communication.  Mr. Augarde reminds us that the 26
letters of the alphabet can be combined in 403,290,-000,000,000,000,000,000,000
ways.  Long before humankind has
mastered all these, I suspect that we shall have evolved into
translucent glimmers inhabiting galaxies still unborn.  In the
intervening billennia, players of word games will likely offer up
many a fervent prayer to the Word in accordance with the
rituals laid down by St. Augarde in *The Oxford Guide*.

*Willard R. Espy*

## Reflections on Indian Words, Among Others
*Norman Ward, University of Saskatchewan*

Robert Devereux's admirable &ldquo;More Than Just Manitou,&rdquo;
[X,3] a critical commentary on my &ldquo;Indian File&rdquo; [VII,4],
not only arouses no argument at this end but encourages me to
add comment on the different premises from which two
persons, both writing in English and on the same subject but
from two separate countries, can start when considering words.
Mr. Devereux, to cite one difference, refers several times to
*Webster's Third New International Dictionary*; I did not refer
to it once, and indeed in my main profession, teaching and
writing about Canadian politics and government, I find *Webster*
less helpful than other works.

Fundamental to Canadian English is the fact that it is only
one of two languages that have official sanction in the country.
When Canada was created in 1867 the relevant document
(now called The Constitution Act) specified areas where English
or French may or must be used, and after 1867 these areas
were extended in directions which still cause rowdy controversy.
The constitution now decrees that &ldquo;English and French
are the official languages of Canada and have equality of
status...&rdquo;

The use of two languages has meant that, quite apart from
the fascinations of meaning and etymology, words have taken
on other roles in which, to quote a well-known historian,
&ldquo;language is power.&rdquo;  When one considers, for example, that
large numbers of English-speaking Canadians are Protestants
while their French-speaking compatriots are Roman Catholic;
that Protestants and Catholics have differing views of what
constitutes a proper educational system; that any school has to
use some language as a medium of instruction; and that schools
generally come under governmental jurisdiction; some of the
problems attached to using two official languages instead of one
may be at once apparent.  (That preceding sentence, admittedly
complicated, suggests a greatly simplified outline of the reality.)

Another major role for words in Canada is created by the
use of two languages: if two, why not three or four or more?
None of the relevant legal provisions about English and French
says anything about the genetic origins of those using them, an
observation that may seem nonsensical until one adds that The
Constitution Act assigns to the national Parliament jurisdiction
over &ldquo;Indians, and Lands reserved for Indians.&rdquo;  It also assigns
what is generally meant by &ldquo;education&rdquo; to the separate
provinces.  The questions raised by such requirements are
legion, and a sample will indicate their scope: Are Indians to
be governed in English or French, and if so what of those who
speak neither?  Which level of government, national or provincial,
is to educate Indians, and in what language?  If Indian
tongues are to be used, which ones?  Are Inuit, who were not
named in the original Constitution Act, to be counted as
Indians?  What of people who are half or less of Indian blood?

Questions like the samples do receive answers, and Canadian
history is marked by the conflicting answers often given to
the same question.  Some of the by-products have unusual
implications for words:  I, for example, am a native of Canada,
but there are situations where the assertion &ldquo;I am a native&rdquo;
would lead listeners to conclude that I was an Indian (or
possibly a liar).  That I may not look like an Indian is not proof
of anything: an Indian can be a person who qualifies as an
Indian under certain legislation; but a full-blooded &ldquo;native&rdquo;
may not qualify.  The constitution currently guarantees &ldquo;the
existing aboriginal and treaty rights of the aboriginal peoples,&rdquo;
and declares that &ldquo;aboriginal peoples&rdquo; includes &ldquo;the Indian,
Inuit and M&eacute;tis peoples&rdquo;; but none of the key words is defined.

These reflections on Indian and other words have urgent
political implications in Canada today because &ldquo;natives&rdquo; are
with increasing persuasiveness asserting claims to ancestral
lands or compensation therefor and most recently have been
arguing for more native self-government.  One cannot listen to
or read about the discussions accompanying these developments
without being struck by the disadvantages under which
native spokesmen suffer when they have to make their cases,
about which they feel deeply, in two European languages
which are not their mother tongues.  Self-government, responsible
government (a term with a peculiarly Canadian meaning),
constitution, and elections, all refer to real institutions, but they
also denote abstract ideas.  Improbable though it may seem to a
reader of &ldquo;Indian File&rdquo; and Mr. Devereux's stimulating
response, it was wondering about the shortage of native words
in common English usage and speculating about the possible
reasons for it, that started all this.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 16

(a). C for condom?  (16,32) French Letter.  
(b). Imitation of weeping Bohemian.  (38,12) Mimi Cry.  
(c). Here, Pussy!  Boo!  Hiss!  (8,7) Cat Call.  
(d). See the horologist.  (53,37) Watch Man.  
(e). Vain addict from Paoli.  (36,34) Main Liner.  
(f). Sturdy hooligan known for his persistence.  (20,22) Hardy Hood.  
(g). Elfin loans are sacrilegious.  (25,24) Imp I.O.U.s.  
(h). Nasty argument in Hyde Park bridle path.  (48,49) Rotten Row.  
(i). Strange chap is fifth wheel.  (40,14) Odd Felloe.  
(j). Legends of pixies beg the question.  (25,35) Imp Lore.  
(k). Lech Walesa is the cynosure.  (44,51) Pole Star.  
(l). Explosive sticker.  (15,43) Firing Pin.  
(m). Pawnee takes it all back.  (27,17) Indian Giver.  
(n). Crafty shoeshine boy.  (50,6) Sly Boots.  
(o). Quixotic illumination.  (30,33) Knight Light.  
(p). Has it rung for Esau's brother?  (28,31) Jacob's Ladder.  
(q). Henry IV and VIII furious in London street.  (29,11) Kings Cross.  
(r). Not wearing even a teddy in the railway station. (41,4) Paddington Bare.  
(s). Plan to accelerate disasters.  (9,45) Crash Program.  
(t). Results of sex expos&eacute;.  (46,47) Public Relations.  
(u). Collyrium for my ablutions?  (23,52) I Wash.  
(v). Where we once owned a pier, there is now a fish! (18,13) Had Dock.  
(w). He inherits the smog.  (21,3) Heir Apparent.  
(x). Operating the thumbscrew has her in stitches.  (10,54) Crewel Work.  
(y). Confirm how old she is (just to be mean).  (2,1) Aver Age.  
(z). A titter ran up to the squaw.  (39,19) Mini Haha.  
(zz). Gymnasts work out side-by-side in saloons.  (42,5) Parallel Bars.  

The correct answer is (27) Iron.  The solutions are given below.
The winner of No. 16 was Jean C. Thomas, Morris Township,
New Jersey.  The winner of No. 15 was Rita Stein, New York,
New York.

## Paring Pairs No. 17

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Crying nun who writes a sentimental human-interest column.  
(b). What a union marriage broker effects.  
(c). No one talks on the radio about the deceased inheritor.  
(d). Someone who makes pointed punches is okay.  
(e). Prop for Keystone Kop?  
(f). Unnecessary if you roll up your sleeves.  
(g). Confined at home for Sudanese repose.  
(h). Sudden recoil of the cat.  
(i). Does the mitey hunter return to his sordid hotel with this?  
(j). Dance for church bigshots on the express train?  
(k). Good grief!  Are they the houris in Hades?  
(l). Two cheers for No. 2 — most unusual!  
(m). Sad seraph is in a nightclub with a Navy flyboy?  
(n). Ennuy&eacute; alongside car in the marathon?  
(o). Descend low enough to spank.  
(p). English dental work, now in Arizona.  
(q). An unjustified spanking.  
(r). A horse that follows a scorched-earth policy.  
(s). An incidental method for purchasing milk serum.  
(t). He who irritates Gautama is strictly from Hungary.  
(u). It takes 13 tricks, a 4 (loaded) base hit, or...  
(v). Italian with the knowledge and good scents.  
(w). Moldy ass is overrepresented in Parliament.  
(x). What the owner needs to support his corporation.  
(y). Where to keep the ribbed fabric?  
(z). What to expect from an honest greens grocer.

(1). Angel.  
(2). Arch.  
(3). Arms.  
(4). Avis.  
(5). Awl.  
(6). Back.  
(7). Bag.  
(8). Ball.  
(9). Basket.  
(10). Bear.  
(11). Belles.  
(12). Blue.  
(13). Bored.  
(14). Bottom.  
(15). Bridge.  
(16). Buddha.  
(17). Bum.  
(18). Burner.  
(19). Burro.  
(20). Buy.  
(21). Cannon.  
(22). Contract.  
(23). Dead.  
(24). Drawer.  
(25). Faille.  
(26). Fair.  
(27). Flea.  
(28). Grand.  
(29). Hausa.  
(30). Hay.  
(31). Heir.  
(32). Hell's.  
(33). Hit.  
(34). Lash.  
(35). London.  
(36). Nose.  
(37). Pest.  
(38). Rah!  Rah!  
(39). Rap.  
(40). Rest.  
(41). Roman.  
(42). Rotten.  
(43). Running.  
(44). Sister.  
(45). Slam.  
(46). Sob.  
(47). Support.  
(48). Sweetheart.  
(49). Waist.  
(50). Weigh.  
(51). Whey.  
(52). Whipping.  
(53). Wright.


### OBITER DICTA: *Our Own Malaprop Dictionary*

*analgesic,* pain that was spared the Dead End Kids.

*caitiff,* head of a Muslim country.

*canon,* a bigshot in the church.

*columbarium,* a pigeon-cote.

*crematory,* a Roman dairy.

*defalcation,* a bowel movement.

*desuetude,* the state of being not fat.

*embracery,* affection (and its display)

*euthanasia,* Mongolian adolescents.

*expertise,* an experienced coquette.

*frambesia,* a tropical plant with a huge pink flower.

*hardware,* a stiff corset. Cf. *software.*

*macaroon,* *Taboo*. a black Irish baby.

*malfeasance,* exorbitant charges for professional services.

*misprision,* false arrest.

*Mongolism*, political beliefs of the people in Siberia.

*niggard,* *Taboo*. a black person.

*nosography, 1.* the art of writing using a pen or pencil
stuck up one's nose.  *2.* the writing done by a nasograph.

*orogenous zone,* area of sexual sensitivity, somewhere near
the San Andreas fault.

*peculator,* a rou&eacute;.

*penology,* study of male sexuality.

*picaroon,* *Taboo*. *1.*  a black baby.  *2.* a select macaroon.

*phylactery,* a condom.

*pismire,* a urine-filled bog.

*poacher,* a short-order cook in an omelet restaurant.

*poltroon,* a wealthy landowner of Dutch descent who settled
in the lower Hudson river valley.

*programmer,* a person who, though in favor of the structure
of a language, is usually incapable of doing anything
about it.

*prophylactic,* a person who favors birth control.

*racketeer,* a tennis pro.

*software,* a body stocking.  Cf. *hardware.*

*titlist,* a sportsman who keeps a register of large-breasted
women.


### OBITER DICTA: *Sociologists Spot &ldquo;The Woozle&rdquo;*
*Richard Bauerle, Ohio Wesleyan University*

Readers of VERBATIM with fond memories of Winnie-the-Pooh,
Christopher Robin, and their gentle friends will be
surprised (or perhaps saddened) to learn that A.A. Milne's
elusive beast, &ldquo;the Woozle,&rdquo; has been located in a new habitat,
recent publications of sociologists.  Just as Pooh and Piglet
created the imaginary Woozle by failing to notice that the paw
prints in the snow were actually their own and not the tracks
of a strange beast, so several sociologists are finding that their
fellows are creating &ldquo;Woozles&rdquo; by failing to record accurately
and fully materials they borrow and use in their own publications.
Hence the term *woozle effect*.

Sociology's first *woozle* seems to have appeared in 1979 in
a lecture by Beverly Houghton before the American Society of
Criminology.  The term was then borrowed (with acknowledgment)
for an article on the family by R.J. Gelles in 1980, and
it then became part of the title for an article by Walter
Schumm and others in 1982 (*Journal of Family Issues*, Sept.,
pp. 319-40).  Schumm warns that the *woozle effect* with its
oversimplified interpretations of previous research may silently
creep in and actually &ldquo;set policy in the prevention and
treatment of family violence&rdquo; (p. 335).

Perhaps Pooh was too harsh on himself when, on discovering
his error, he declared he was &ldquo;a bear of no brain at all.&rdquo;  He
was simply looking for &ldquo;the Woozle&rdquo; in the wrong part of the
forest.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I knew what my goal was when I saw Lauren Bacall
touring in a play in Buffalo.  To be an actress like that—well, to
me that was the penultimate!&rdquo;  [Actress Christine Baranski
(Tony Award winner) interviewed by Jack O'Brian on Critic's
Circle, WOR, May 29, 1984.  Submitted by Alma Denny, New
York City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Carney says goodbye to two employees.  Edith Clark,
delinquent account clerk of fiscal services who has served
Carney for 16 years...&rdquo;  [From the house organ of Carney
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.  Submitted by Adam G.N.
Moore, M.D., Squantum, Massachusetts.]

## Paring Pairs Prize Information

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in the
VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Two winners will be drawn from among the correct
answers, one from those received in Aylesbury, the other from
those received in Essex.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the
Middle East, or North Africa should send their answers to
VERBATIM, Box 199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 1TQ, England;
all others should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box 668,
Essex, CT, 06426, U.S.A.  *You need send only the correct
solution, not the answers to all of the clues.  Please use a
postcard.*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Derided doctor swallows Coke concoction (6)  
4\. TV tuna Charlie—or Pisces (8)  
10\. Does such a team shine best in night games?  (3-4)  
11\. Goes back on one's word, for example, in a twisted sneer.  (7)  
12\. Wodin's will interpretation leaves part of house (10)  
13\. Nothing, Darling (4)  
15\. Knots and ties?  Rather! (7)  
17\. Get &ldquo;Enraged&rdquo; perfume (7)  
19\. Campus soldiers return after Lee upset '84 college member (7)  
21\. Hanger-on that is after combo (7)  
23\. Mineral springs back in drains (4)  
24\. Let down in post-paid mixup (10)  
27\. Ornament could make you a ringer (7)  
28\. City fashionable in the past (7)  
29\. Introduction for one obliged to go back in car (8)  
30\. Poor speller left out, drives off (6)

**Down**

1\. Main wheel rolls during this time (9)  
4\. UC linesmen for Roman time (7)  
3\. Outgoing ones have fitful rest under whirling vortex (10)  
5\. Throbbing, has a thing about Brook (9)  
6\. Torn by turning tern (4)  
7\. In tavern, produce painful toenail type (7)  
8\. Proverbial wastemaker is chaster at heart (5)  
9\. Rich earths produce hybrid rose (4)  
14\. Partner in crime account has cops confused about mob leader (10)  
16\. The German lookalike has a small arm (9)  
18\. Efforts incorporate sex, not ire (9)  
20\. Caesar is in Rome, per arrangement (7)  
22\. Personal chatter about &ldquo;The Sign of the Four&rdquo; (7)  
23\. The girl left field for a plank (5)  
25\. Cunning architectural feature!(4)  
26\. We rise after six to watch (4)


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Stop when flashing.&rdquo;  [A sign at 14th and Castro Streets in San
Francisco.  Submitted by Hildegarde Braun, San Francisco.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Characters.  
6\. Cur-l.  
10\. An Anglo-American.  
11\. GUTHRIE.  
12\. (s)Lashed.  
14\. L-OSER.  
16\. Last issue.  
18\. Seascapes.  
21\. Stand(rews Place).  
22\. Gallic.  
24\. INTEGER.  
27\. Crossword Puzzle.  
28\. IcELANd.  
29\. Good sports/Goods ports.

**Down**

1\. Changeless.  
2\. ANAST-asia.  
3\. ANGER.  
4\. (Not wisely, but) Too well.  
5\. Rumbles.  
7\. Uncle(ar).  
8\. L-one.  
9\. Brassie(re)s.  
13\. TENDERNESS.  
15\. (w)reckless.  
17\. STARGAZER.  
19\. Piccolo.  
20\. Ski-dd-ed.  
23\. A-Roma.  
25\. T-hump.  
26\. SierrA CREsts.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v11n4_Spring_1985)