--- 
title: "VOL XI, No 2 [Autumn, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Lost Metaphors of Land and Sea
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

James Greenough and George Kittredge point out in *Words
and Their Ways in English Speech,* &ldquo;Language is fossil
poetry which is constantly being worked over for the uses of
speech.  Our commonest words are worn-out metaphors.&rdquo;  These
fossils lie so deep in the mine of our language that we are
hardly aware that they are figures of speech at all.  Let's do
some digging to uncover the rich metaphoric ore that is
embedded in our speech and our writing, our thoughts and our
dreaming.

America used to be a nation of farmers, but by the turn of
this century most of us had moved to towns and cities, and we
began to lose touch with our agricultural roots.  In &ldquo;God's
Grandeur&rdquo; (1877), Gerard Manley Hopkins lamented the
effects of the Industrial Age on our feeling for the land:

>And all is seared with trade; bleared, smeared with toil,
>
>And wears man's smudge and shares man's smell;
the soil
>
>Is bare now, nor can foot feel, being shod.

We may be vaguely aware of the agricultural comparisons
in expressions like *cream of the crop, to crop up, to feel one's
oats, to sow one's wild oats, a tough row to hoe, to farm out, a
farm team, to weed out, to plow into, vintage year, easy
pickings, to nip it in the bud, gone to seed, seedy, to reap the
benefits, to mow down, a needle in a haystack, neither grass
nor hay,* and *to make hay while the sun shines*.  But because
our shod feet no longer touch the soil, most of us remain
unconscious of the earthy metaphors embedded in the following
words and expressions:

>*a cultivated person*  Like well-fanned land, the mind
of the cultivated person is carefully tended and yields
a rich harvest.
>
>*a furrowed brow*  The lines in a worried forehead
resemble the furrows (grooves) in the earth made by
a plow.
>
>*delirium* and *delirious*  These words, signifying a
state of frenzied emotional excitement, are subtly
rooted in the Latin *de*- 'from' and *lira* 'furrow.' Thus,
*delirium* and *delirious* metaphorically compare behavior
that deviates from a course that we think of as
straight to the action of &ldquo;straying away from the
straight course in plowing.&rdquo;
>
>*a harrowing experience*  A harrow is a cultivating
implement set with spikes, spring teeth, or disks that
pulverizes the earth by violently flipping over the
topsoil.  Knowing this etymology helps us to see how
a terrifying experience truly harrows us.
>
>*a windfall*  As a term for an unexpected stroke of
good fortune, *windfall* refers to fruits or branches
blown down from trees by strong winds.  Such gratuitous
food and fuel requires no effort on the part of
the lucky recipient.
>
>*aftermath*  In bygone days, *math* meant 'mowing'
and *aftermath* meant 'second mowing.'  As the compound
gradually lost its metaphoric force, it came to
signify results, effects, or consequences.'
>
>*to cut a swath*  When a pompous swaggerer shows
off, he or she &ldquo;cuts a (big or wide) swath.&rdquo;  This
expression figuratively extends the Middle English
meaning of *swath;* 'a row of cut grain or grass left
by a scythe.'
>
>*to go haywire*  Anyone who has ever tried to use
haywire to bind bales or to make repairs knows how
inefficient and omery the stuff is.  Attempts to manipulate
haywire often go haywire.

In &ldquo;Sea Fever,&rdquo; the poet laureate sang:

>I must down to the seas again,  
To the lonely sea and sky,  
And all I ask is a tall ship  
And a star to steer her by.
>
>—John Masefield, &ldquo;Sea Fever&rdquo;

Relatively few of us go down to the seas any more, and
even fewer get to steer a tall ship.  And, having lost contact
with the sea and with sailing, most of us no longer taste the
salty flavor of the nautical metaphors that ebb and flow
through our language.

Consider our use of the word *ship*.  We continue to ship
goods, even when that &ldquo;shipping&rdquo; is by truck, train, or plane.
We compliment someone on *running a tight ship*, even when
that &ldquo;ship&rdquo; is an office or a classroom.  And many things besides
ships can be *shipshape*.  Consider, too, our use of the compound
word *bailout*.  When we talk about a Chrysler or a Seabrook
bailout, we are unknowingly comparing a financial strategy to
the act of removing water from a sinking craft.

To help you learn the ropes and get your bearings, I'll see
if the coast is clear by sounding out the lay of the land.  Then,
without going overboard, I'll barge ahead, come hell or high
water.  If you feel yourself going off the deep end, all washed
up, on the rocks, and sinking fast in a wave of confusion, try to
stay on an even keel.  Relax, I won't lower the boom and leave
you high and dry.  Now that you get my drift, consider how the
following idioms of sailing and the sea sprinkle salt on our
tongues: *shape up or ship out, to take the wind out of his sails,
the tide turns, a sea of faces, down the hatch, hit the deck,
anchorman, to steer clear, don't rock the boat, to harbor a
grudge, and to give a wide berth to*.

Most of us landlubbers are unaware of how liberally we
have borrowed everyday expressions from sailors.  I wish you
smooth sailing in fathoming lost seafaring metaphors like:

>*to fathom an idea*  When we try to fathom a concept,
we are making poetic use of an old word that
originally meant the span between two outstretched
arms.  Nowadays a fathom is a unit of six feet used
for measuring the depth of water.  By poetic extension
the verb to *fathom* has come to mean 'to get to
the bottom of.'
>
>*to take one down a peg*  Ships' colors used to be
raised and lowered a peg at a time.  The higher the
colors, the greater the honor.  Thus, to take someone
down a peg means to diminish his or her self-esteem.
>
>*by and large*  For ancient mariners, *by and large*
was a command that meant 'to sail slightly off the
wind'—in contrast to *full and by*.  When we say *by
and large* today, we mean 'in general' because we do
not wish to sail directly into the topic.
>
>*taken aback*  This expression probably conjures up in
your mind an image of a person caught off guard
and staggering backwards.  But the origin of the
phrase is nautical.  Sailing *by and large* left an inexperienced
helmsman in less danger of being *taken
aback*, which means to catch the wind suddenly on
the wrong side of the sails, which can lead to a serious
situation, especially in a square-rigger.
>
>*in the doldrums*  Figuratively, when we're *in the
doldrums*, we are 'stuck in a condition of boredom or
depression.' Literally, the doldrums are 'those parts of
the ocean near the Equator that are noted for calms
and neutralizing trade winds.' Recently, one of my
students malapropistically misspelled the word as *dull-drums*.
Clever lad.
>
>*landmark decision*  *Landmark* is a sailing term denoting
a 'mark on the shore by which to steer or lay a
course.' Landmark decisions act as points of reference
for future legal navigation.
>
>*to take a different tack*  A sailing ship tacks by turning
its bow to the wind and shifting sails in order to
change direction.
>
>*hand over fist*  Like &ldquo;left and right,&rdquo; &ldquo;a mile a minute,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;hellbent for election,&rdquo; *hand over fist*
describes a rapid, extended action, especially the act
of making money.  In England, the original expression
was *hand over hand*, a literal description of climbing
up or down a rope or hauling in or letting out a sail.
The phrase acquired the figurative sense of advancing
rapidly, and, in America in the early nineteenth century,
it became *hand over fist*.
>
>*between the devil and the deep blue sea*  This
phrase, like *between a rock and a hard place,* means
caught between equally perilous alternatives.'  *Devil*
in this context is not the evil one but, rather, a nautical
term for the seam between two planks in the
hull of a ship, on or below the waterline.  Anyone
who had to caulk or fill such a devil with pitch was
placed in the most precarious of predicaments.
>
>*three sheets in/to the wind*  In this common metaphor
for an unsteady state of drunkenness, *sheet*
refers to the line attached to the lower corner of a
sail, used to control its set and position.  When all
three sheets of a sail on an old square-rigger were
allowed to run free, they were said to be &ldquo;in the
wind,&rdquo; and the ship would lurch and stagger like a
person inebriated.

Like phrases and idioms, individual words also spray forth
from the ocean.  One of the most ancient of single-word
nautical metaphors is *governor,* which harkens back to the
Greek word *kybemao,* meaning 'steer a ship.'  The Romans
changed the form to *gubemo*, and eventually it crossed the
channel to England and became *governor*.  Thus, when we
speak of &ldquo;the ship of state,&rdquo; we are more accurate than we
know.

*Leeway* descends from *lee*, the side of a ship that is
sheltered from the wind, and *fluctuate, undulate*, and *redundant*
from *fluctus* and *undo*, both Latin for 'wave.'

*Nave*, the long, narrow central hall of a cruciform church,
is a figurative extension of navis, the Latin word for 'ship,'
because the church is conceived as an ark for its congregants.
Many naves do indeed resemble upside-down ships, for ships
are often built bottoms up.  The Greek word for 'ship' is *naus*,
and the Greeks took their word *nausia*, which we now spell
*nausea*, straight from the vehicle that produced seasickness.

On sailing ships of yesteryear, *butt* was the popular term
for the large, lidded casks that held drinking water.  These butts
were equipped with *scuttles*—openings through which sailors
ladled out the water.  Just as today's office workers gather about
the water cooler to exchange chitchat and rumor, crewmen
stood around the *scuttled butts* to trade *scuttlebutt*, which is
how the word came to mean 'gossip.'

If you've followed this article so far, you've read right up
to the bitter end.  You guessed it: *the bitter end* is also a nautical
phrase.  Mariners called that part of the cable that is to the rear
of the windlass *bitts*, and the *bitter* is the turn of a cable
around the bitts.  When a ship rides out a gale, the cable is let
out to *the bitter end*, or as far as it will go.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Movie: 'Lifeboat' Tallulah Bankhead.  The commander of
a German U-boat joins the survivors of a freighter he sunk in
their lifeboat.&rdquo;  [From TV Week, *San Francisco Chronicle*, June
24-30, 1984.  Submitted by Susan Avry, Palo Alto, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;When the birds were hauled up close to the stern, the
boy hit them five or six times with a short gaffe....  He said he
also saw the boy clubbing two seagulls to death with a long
gaffe...&rdquo; [From the *Monterey Peninsula Herald,* December 7,
1983, p. 5. Submitted by Hugh Bayless, Carmel, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;[Mr. Bob Calvert] wore an oxygen mask during the 90-minute
flight.  He and his machine weighed a total of 30 kg.&rdquo;
[From *The Times (London)*, March 9, 1984, p. 2: That's
microlight!]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionaries: The Art and Craft of Lexicography*](https://www.cambridge.org/tn/academic/subjects/languages-linguistics/semantics-and-pragmatics/dictionaries-art-and-craft-lexicography-2nd-edition?format=PB&isbn=9780521785129)
Sidney I. Landau, (Charles Scribner's Sons, 1984), xiii + 370pp. 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

Sidney Landau has been involved with dictionaries for
more than 20 years, having started in the converted stable on
East 24th Street, in Manhattan, where the Funk &amp; Wagnalls
dictionary department was situated and where, a decade
earlier, I had labored over the pronunciations and the mathematics
and linguistics definitions for the *Funk &amp; Wagnalls
Standard Dictionary, International Edition*, a dictionary &ldquo;inherited&rdquo;
by Landau.  He has edited *The Doubleday Dictionary* and
the *Doubleday Roget's Thesaurus*.  At present, he is editor in
chief of the &ldquo;International Dictionary of Medicine and Biology,&rdquo;
to be published in 1985 by John Wiley &amp; Sons.

*Dictionaries* is not a book for the casual reader, for it must
be delved into carefully, analytically, and thoughtfully.  As a
professional lexicographer, I found much valuable material,
never before gathered in one place.  But I also found much to
disagree with, both in the arguments advanced in certain areas
and in the description of events and processes.  The latter
appear to have been researched almost entirely from written
sources; interviews with some of the people about whom
Landau has written, even if conducted by correspondence,
would have revealed a number of useful facts, which, though
not necessarily essential, could have added measurably to the
documentation in this volume.

For instance:

1.  I suggested (and proposed doing) a revision of the *English
Duden* to Bibliographisches Institut in the early 1970s.

2.  The *Longman Dictionary of English Idioms*, edited by
Thomas Hill Long, was produced by Laurence Urdang Associates,
Ltd., Aylesbury, England.

3.  *The Random House Dictionary of the English Language-Unabridged
Edition* was prepared mainly by me: I hired and
directed the staff, made all of the major editorial decisions,
read every word of the book *six times* (at various stages of
preparation), and did all of the systems designs for the
computerization of the work.  The *RHD*, begun in 1959, was, as
far as I know, the first dictionary of any kind to be compiled
using computers.

4.  The *Collins English Dictionary*, of which Patrick Hanks was
the editor, was prepared under my direction at Laurence
Urdang Dictionaries, Ltd., in Aylesbury, England.

5.  In all, more than 110 dictionaries and other reference books
have been researched, compiled, written, edited, and, in most
cases, typographically designed and composed by me or under
my supervision, in England and America.  Landau mentions me
only in connection with the *Random House College Dictionary*
and the *Collins English Dictionary* and quotes something from
a paper published in a 1966 journal, *Word*.

I could go on.  But my purpose is not to list my activities;
rather it is to suggest that the documentation of others'
accomplishments is likely to be as sparse.  Just to cite another,
Allen Walker Read, Emeritus Professor of English, Columbia
University, is by far the most prolific (and imaginative and
lucid) writer on the English language, particularly on aspects of
lexicography, yet only a minute fraction of his contributions is
cited, and there isn't so much as a suggestion of the extent of
Read's scholarly work in the field of lexicography.

My other major criticism is that the index is—what shall I
call it?—niggardly (or has that become a taboo word?).  It is a
meagre twelve pages long and lists major topics, people, and
dictionaries mentioned in the text.  It does not list the words
discussed nor does it cover the footnotes, which are annoyingly
bunched together at the back of the volume.  I am not a
footnote aficionado to begin with, and when I have to read a
book with my index finger tucked in the back (or at the end of
a chapter, as some books place them), I am especially annoyed.
Modern (automatic) typesetting procedures allow for making
up pages with the footnotes at the foot (Isn't that where
*footnotes* belong?), and there is no excuse for making it
inconvenient for the reader to find them.  Landau's footnotes
contain much of interest, and their inaccessibility is irritating.

As to content, Landau does an excellent job of revealing to
the reader many aspects of dictionaries and of dictionarymaking
that will be of interest to those who are unfamiliar with
the art and craft of lexicography.  His style, while not exactly
conversational, is informal and readable, and he is good not
only at describing what is in a dictionary but also how it gets
there.  In his discussion of *streaking* (&ldquo;Deciding What to Put in
the Dictionary,&rdquo; pp. 161-3), he writes about the &ldquo;four basic
considerations in evaluating whether the citations justify the
inclusion of a word... their number; the period of time
covered; their geographic distribution; and the diversity of
sources.&rdquo;  He goes on to justify entering *streaking* because it
meets all of the criteria except the second.  I suggest that there
is a fifth criterion, not considered by Landau, namely, Is the
word worthy of documentation?  In other words, is there some
historical justification for including it?  &ldquo;College-sized&rdquo; dictionaries
offer very little space for such indulgences, and I take
Landau's remarks to be focused chiefly on these 160,000-170,000-entry
books, so one cannot be too critical of omissions.

Also, Landau does not, in his treatment of citation files
and their uses, mention the inclusion of citations from other
dictionaries—that is, the use as citations of definitions published
in other dictionaries.  There are many *OED* citations that
consist of definitions from other dictionaries, and, because of
the widespread use of (certain) dictionaries, such citations have
a validity all their own.

Landau's defense of the inclusion of names (pp. 167-170)
is excellent, especially in (apparent) conflict with Randolph
Quirk's position.  But the telling argument in favor of the
inclusion of, say, *Cleveland* (the city in Ohio or Grover,
himself), is that it is not really different from *phoenix* (the bird,
not the city) or *roc*, or *Medusa* (not the animal), all of which
can be found in dictionaries.  Surely, the criterion of capitalization
is trivial, and, frankly, *Grover Cleveland* is of much less
interest to me than *phoenix*; yet his name appears as a word
in the language, a *denotatum*, if you want to get technical
about it, and there is no justification for omitting his name
(unless citations fail to meet the four—or five—criteria cited
above).  As for frequency, *Coca-Cola, Wendy's*, and *AT &amp; T* are
far more common in the language than *glyceraldehyde, placage*,
and *skyphos*; yet the latter can be found in dictionaries
usurping the space properly belonging to the former, which
fulfill Landau's criteria of number, distribution in time and
geography, and diversity of source.  As can be seen, these
problems are knotty ones for the lexicographer, and their
solutions are often arrived at somewhat arbitrarily.

Landau treats the policy of Webster's *Unabridged* toward
&ldquo;broadening its definition of *standard* [usage]&rdquo; as proper (p.
209).  I have no quarrel with Merriam's inclusion of such
matter, of course; but I believe that if the lexicographer's task
is to describe the words of the language accurately, then it is
likewise his responsibility to describe how its speakers view
those words, and, at bottom, the real objection to the labels
(and lack of them) in the *Unabridged* is that they are inaccurate.
Landau points out, citing Labov (p. 208), that &ldquo;nonstandard
usage occurs in *every social class*&rdquo; [his emphasis].  What
he does not say is that the worse-educated, lower social classes
of a community are quite well aware of what standard usage is
(even though they may not be able to reproduce it), which I
believe to be the case.  In other words, any speaker of a
language is able to recognize, albeit with varying degrees of
refinement, several levels of usage.  Affected uses of words like
*ain't* and constructions like *he don't* in the speech of educated
users do not constitute valid evidence for the editors of the
*Unabridged* to say about *ain't* that it &ldquo;occurs in the speech of
educated users,&rdquo; any more than they would be justified in
including a word like *pioner* because Olivier said it when
performing in *Hamlet*: both are acting.

All this is set forth here to emphasize the fact that there is
a great deal to be said about language in its myriad aspects.  I
am persuaded that more revealing and accurate analysis of
language has appeared in the last 50 years or so than in the
accumulated centuries preceding 1930.  But that doesn't mean
that valid solutions have been arrived at or are even at hand.
The beat goes on, and there are many drummers.  Many, alas,
publish their findings, couched in uninterpretable, recondite
language, fortunately in obscure journals.  Lexicographers,
unlike those who theorize only abstractly, must commit the
results of their theories and attitudes and analyses to print,
where their successes and failures lie exposed to the scrutiny of
many, laymen and scholars alike.  Sidney Landau has lucidly
and articulately set down an excellent presentation of some of
the tangled questions faced by those who work with dictionaries.
Inevitably, there are things to quarrel with in his book (just
as one might find disputable treatment of various kinds of
information in the dictionaries he—or anyone else—has edited).
Regarded as a thoroughgoing exposition of those questions and
as one lexicographer's &ldquo;confessions,&rdquo; *Dictionaries* is the most
informative and useful book on the subject that has come to
my attention.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Style Manuals of the English-Speaking World*](https://www.amazon.com/Style-Manuals-English-Speaking-World-Guide/dp/0897740890)
John Bruce Howell, (Index, Oryx Press, 1983), xiii + 138pp. 

This is a well-conceived, well-organized, well-written
descriptive bibliography listing 231 style manuals.  The front
matter covers the Scope and Arrangement of the book and
adds a useful historical note and an interesting paragraph,
Standardization of Bibliography, General Manuals and Subject
Manuals, the former further divided into Commercial Publishers,
Government printing, Term papers and theses, and University
press; the latter lists works in 25 specialized fields, from
Agriculture to Zoology.  There are two brief appendices, one
listing two style books for writers of materials for Disabled
People, the other three works on Nonsexist Language.

Under Criteria for Inclusion, the author specifies that the
style manual must be at least 5 pages in length.  Thus, the
American Psychological Association's, &ldquo;Guidelines for nonsexist
language in APA journals,&rdquo; which is 8 pages long, and *Preparation
of zoological papers with special reference to taxonomy*, a
mere 5 pages in length, published by the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (Melbourne)—
and an adjunct to that organization's 22-page *CS/RO style
guide*— merit inclusion.

The descriptions are quite succinct, but nonetheless useful
for that.  Howell has obviously studied the books carefully and
his comments, notwithstanding their brevity, are a model for
works of this kind: in addition to describing the work at hand,
he has provided comparative information with other manuals
and cross references to the other entries in the book, which are
numbered consecutively for convenience.  The book is well
bound (Smyth-sewn), in hardcovers.

This is not exactly your basic bedside reading.  But its
importance, not only for libraries but also for publishers and
institutions and for writers, editors, and proofreaders who must
process a broad variety of materials, cannot be overstated.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Henrik M. C. Luykx}

Although I do not have the article by Harry Cohen [X,2]
at hand, I imagine Eric Winters [X,4] may welcome a clarification
of how the Dutch term *blindedarmontsteking* (there
appears to be an adventitious y in the word as printed in X,4)
translates into *appendicitis* in two steps.  *Blindedarm* is the
Dutch word for the anatomical appendix.  The Dutch and the
English terms each derive from their own morphological
concepts.  In Dutch, *blind(e)* means 'blind,' *darm* means 'gut'
or 'bowel.'  The 'blind gut' is indeed a &ldquo;blind alley&rdquo; leading
from the large intestine in that it has no outlet.  In English the
appendix is so named because it is an appendage hanging from
the cecum (also called the *blind gut*), a section of the large
intestine.  The Dutch *ontsteking* means 'inflammation.'  In English
medical terminology virtually any body part is designated
as inflamed by simply adding the suffix -*itis*.  Running these
Dutch words together (*blinde, darm, ontsteking*) follows the
German practice of combining a noun with its modifiers into
one word.  In normal everyday Dutch, that is not the usual
custom, but it invariably is in German.  Dutch sentence structure
more often parallels the English rather than the German,
thus avoiding many of the jawbreakers so common in German.

*[Henrik M. C. Luykx, Frederic, Maryland]*


### OBITER DICTA: *...for the birds*

Arthur H. Baum, of Stamford, Connecticut, submits that
the phrase ... *for the birds* originated back in the days when
horse-drawn vehicles were in abundance and the birds were
seen to be picking out undigested grain from the horse
droppings.  It was an easy semantic transition from the sense of
'something of trifling value to be gained only by resorting to
extreme measures' to the modern sense of 'something unworthy
of consideration; something to be scorned as contemptible.'


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;—Who wrote, 'Edipus Rex?&rdquo;'  [From Gettysburg (Pa.)
*Times*, January 28, 1984 (in an article entitled 'Search for
Knowledge...').  Submitted by Donald Marritz, Biglerville,
Pennsylvania.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;And whereas Atget's work became known to the world at
large a few years after his death in 1928 (due mainly to the
efforts of Berenice Abbott)...&rdquo; [From *Popular Photography*,
May 1984, page 35.  Submitted by John Stanley, Merced,
California.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Garden of Eloquence: A Rhetorical Bestiary, Including Portions of the First Garden of Eloquence*](https://www.amazon.com/Garden-Eloquence-Rhetorical-Bestiary/dp/0061812560)
Pub. 1577 by Henry Peacham and Willard R. Espy, (Harper &amp; Row, 1983), 221 pp.

Emerson, that source of so many pithy aphorisms, gets
credit for this fairly sound bit of advice: &ldquo;Never read a book
that is not a year old.&rdquo;  To update Mr. Emerson a bit: Now's
the time to relish Willard Espy's *The Garden of Eloquence: A
Rhetorical Bestiary*.

For a reader who enjoys Mr. Espy's droll self-indulgences,
his cuddliness, his good humor, this book will be a pleasure,
one containing a treat-within-a-treat.  Mr. Espy has carefully
revived passages from another book whose title included
&ldquo;Garden of Eloquence&rdquo; and whose pages contained a bestiary.
That 1577 work, by the Reverend Henry Peacham, has been
rightly called &ldquo;one of the most important English rhetorical
treatises.&rdquo;  Mr. Espy deserves credit for trying to popularize
Rev. Peacham's decidedly dated study.  For specialists, of
course, the Elizabethan original has been reproduced in a
facsimile published in 1954 by Scholars' Facsimiles &amp; Reprints,
of Gainesville, Florida.  That book is based on the second (1593)
edition of *The Garden*, thereby incorporating a number of
valuable emendations to the original edition on which Mr. Espy
is drawing here.  Indeed, Professor Crane's introduction to the
facsimile edition bears quoting, quickly, here:

>Yet we can hardly appreciate what Lyly, Spenser,
Sidney, Greene, Shakespeare, and others of the time
were trying to do unless we know something of the
more than two hundred figures which on occasion they
employed in their writings....  Figures also played an
important part in the books on letter-writing which
appeared in Latin and English in the sixteenth century.

(In acknowledging this scholar's contribution, a correction is
also necessary.  When the fictional commentator &ldquo;E.K.&rdquo; pointed
out Spenser's use of various rhetorical figures, such as
*cacozelon*, he did so in &ldquo;The Shepheardes Calender&rdquo; and not in
*The Faerie Queene*.)

Mr. Espy's own Introduction contains this eloquent, persuasive
example of *antithesis*, a figure he doesn't even mention
for another 41 pages:

>Granted that the eloquence of a Jesus Christ set for
mankind a goal of goodness and love to which we still
aspire; yet it must be granted also that the eloquence
of an Adolf Hitler led a great nation into madness, and
forced a great civilization to the edge of destruction.

Sometimes Mr. Espy provides examples, sometimes comments,
as in &ldquo;If we all had to label our excuses 'dicaeologia' we
might not make so many of them.  It is a hard word to
pronounce.&rdquo;  That aside is vintage Espy, vintage cute—in the
old sense of acute, as W. R. E. reminds us in discussing
aphaeresis, the &ldquo;loss of an initial letter or syllable.&rdquo;  That latter
term is of course itself yet another example of *diaeresis*, the
&ldquo;pronunciation of two adjoining vowels in a word as separate
sounds.&rdquo;  (Speaking of pronunciation: Mr. Espy graciously gives
credit to Steele Commager for help in showing the way many
of these Greek terms would sound if anyone were to pronounce
them.)

As do most thought-provoking books, this one occasionally
raises the question, &ldquo;Is this example, that illustration, appropriate?&rdquo;
(More on the illustrations in a moment.) One example
that does seem unfortunate comes from Shakespeare: Hamlet's
debating with himself about taking up arms against a sea of
troubles.  Mr. Espy calls the passage an example of *catachresis*,
a form of inappropriate metaphor-making.  But, as the fine
American poet Donald Hall points out in an anthology introducing
college freshmen to literature (and vice versa), Shakespeare's
metaphor is especially fitting.  Noble Hamlet, torn, is
picturing &ldquo;tak[ing up] arms,&rdquo; literally, and is picturing the
futility of any such resistance.

By way of further second-guessing Mr. Espy's usually
apropos use of examples, is he being ironic in claiming that
these earnest, over-quoted lines from Tennyson illustrate
*sarcasmus*?

>Tis better to have loved and lost
>
>Than never to have loved at all.

As do most of Mr. Espy's books about playing with words,
this one also occasionally reminds a reader of other examples,
of the ones that seemingly got away.  After all, what more
fertile source of aposeopesis than the &ldquo;Eumaeus&rdquo; episode of
James Joyce's *Ulysses?*  That chapter's pompous, off-putting
narrator indulges several times in such &ldquo;lead[ing] up to a key
word until his listeners have it clearly in mind, but then
stop[ping].&rdquo;  Here he's rattling on about Stephen Dedalus and
Leopold Bloom, and here he's trailing off into *aposeopesis*: &ldquo;You
just took the words out of my mouth, he said.  A hocus-pocus of
conflicting evidence that candidly you couldn't remotely...
[.]&rdquo; If Mr. Espy needed more examples more recent than Rev.
Peachman's, he might do well to continue browsing further
through &ldquo;Eumaeus.&rdquo;  As Professor Barbara Stevens Heusel
points out, the episode contains numerous instances of *tmesis*
(&ldquo;division of a compound word by the insertion of one or more
words between its parts&rdquo;) and especially of *pleonasmus* (&ldquo;using
words to state what is clear without them&rdquo;).

Almost in closing, here's a note on the drawings by one
Teresa Peekema Allen.  Some do capture Mr. Espy's descriptions
very pointedly, recreating ruffles and flourishes on the
various odd beasties.  But midway through the book they do
start to cloy, to look too much alike, to favor Sir Joshua
Reynolds' 1777 &ldquo;Strawberry Girl.&rdquo;  You've seen her, on all those
damnable big-eyed-little-waif posters.

In closing, the book's most pleasing illustrations flow from
Mr. Espy's pen, not the cartoonist's.  Carefully showing the way
metaphora works, Mr. E. says that the exercise of rhetoric
&ldquo;calls into service the whole network of muscles that articulate
the body of language...&rdquo; That *articulate* is an especially
effective touch, the kind that keeps Espians coming back for
more, year after year.

*[Dennis Moore, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our nachos are the tostada town.&rdquo;  [From a reader-board
outside a restaurant in Albuquerque.  Submitted by Veronica
Egan, Tesuque, New Mexico.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Signs mark the growth—from bustling neighborhood
'botanicas' selling cult supplies to headless chickens left in
church pews.&rdquo;  [From *The Houston Post*, June 9, 1984, p. 11G.
Submitted by Betty Dillingham, Houston, Texas.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This work [*Automobile Liability Insurance—The Law in
Georgia,* by Frank E. Jenkins III] was originally written to help
fill the gap in the lack of material available in Georgia on
Automobile Liability Insurance.  It is still filling that need.&rdquo;
[From a flyer promoting the book, published by The Harrison
Company, Norcross, Georgia.  Submitted by Philip R. Oordes, Decatur, Georgia.]


### OBITER DICTA: *Postpositive Modifiers in English*
*Frank R. Abate*

Very early in any formal study of English we are taught
that the grammaticaf heritage of the language is Germanic.
This is demonstrated by certain fundamental characteristics of
English, such as (a) the essential meaning of sentences is
dependent upon patterns of word order; (b) auxiliary verbs are
used to denote tense, mood, and aspect; (c) two basic classes of
verbs, &ldquo;strong&rdquo; and &ldquo;weak,&rdquo; are present; and (d) there is
unmistakable evidence of regular sound changes similar to
those in other Germanic tongues.  Despite all of this, the loss of
most inflectional endings and the many thousands of non-Germanic
vocabulary borrowings by English have done much
to mask the inherent nature of the language.  Indeed, there is a
popular fallacy, still in circulation, asserting that Latin is the
ultimate ancestor of English.  Notwithstanding the overwhelming
influence of Latin on the English lexicon, which gave rise
to this fallacy, it is safe to say that English is unquestionably
Germanic in its grammatical core.

It does not necessarily follow, however, that English
grammar has remained totally unaffected by Romance influence.
The Norman aristocracy may have been unable to
supplant the language of the native English, but their social
and intellectual influence was vast, and the effect of this, long
recognized in our vocabulary, can also be seen in English
syntax.

Linguists distinguish between Germanic and Romance
languages by noting that the former regularly place an adjectival
modifier before the noun, while the latter have the
modifier following (albeit with certain special exceptions).
Thus, English speaks of *green beans, open window*, and a
*private room*, while the equivalents in French are *haricots
verts, fen&ecirc;tre ouverte*, and *salon priv&eacute;*, all showing the reverse
of the English pattern of adjective-noun.

But then, what of phrases such as *court martial, attorney
general, heir apparent*, and the like, which violate the English
rule?  These three are not all, viz.:

>*abbot general*  
*accounts payable*  
*accounts receivable*  
*annuity certain*            
*bend sinister* (and other terms in heraldry)      
*body politic*  
*fee simple*                   
*fee tail*                     
*knight errant*              
*Knights Templar*  
*malice aforethought*        
*mother superior*  
*postmaster general*         
*president-elect*  
*retort discourteous*  
*secretary general*           
*sum total*
                   

These can be viewed merely as relics that have become
fixed in the language by tradition.  Norman influence was
particularly strong in the areas of law, government, church
Hierarchy, heraldry, and the manners of the court.  Norman
terms used in these fields were doubtless borrowed verbatim
into English, so that now these phrases seem quite natural to
native speakers of English.  Other examples of Romance combinations
used in English can be found in literary and other
formal phraseology; these, too, may be borrowings, or loan
translations:

>*devil incarnate*  
*God Almighty*        
*poet laureate*       
*rhyme royal*  
*third person plural*, etc.  
*time immemorial*     
*Vanity Fair*

Other literary examples could be added, but we have
intentionally tried to avoid listing phrases that may reflect
rhetorical use of the figure *anastrophe*.

Even without the poetic combinations, we have a goodly
list of Romance combinations, several of them of considerable
frequency in the language.  Is it too far-fetched to suggest that
these phrases, owing to their vitality and venerability, have
contributed a non-Germanic pattern of word order to English?
Certain examples, some of them certainly of recent vintage,
give evidence that this pattern may be not only a syntactic
possibility, but a productive part of the language:

>*ace high*                        
*Boston proper*, etc.  
*Agent Orange penny dreadful*  
*body beautiful* (cf. *The prizes galore* (cf. *Pussy* *Galore*, femme fatale in one of Fleming's James Bond stories)  
*Body Principal*, a fitness book by TV personality Victoria Principal)       
                       
Readers are invited to supplement these lists and to
submit their observations of other grammatical influences that
non-Germanic languages have had on English.


#### EPISTOLA {Arthur G.  Read}

I should like to nit-pick a bone with Mr. Harry Cohen over
his concern that simple words should be used so that &ldquo;any
layman can understand them.&rdquo;  I refer to his article, &ldquo;Down to
Earth in a Low Country&rdquo; [X, 2], in which Mr. Cohen cited a
number of usages in the Dutch language that, one might say,
were, very much &ldquo;down to earth,&rdquo; rendering them quite
understandable to the layman.  However, he did not follow
those examples when writing in the English language.

In the spirit of better understanding of English by the use
of simple words, why did Mr. Cohen write, &ldquo;Numerous
medical terms are equally *unesoteric* in Dutch,&rdquo; when he might
have written, &ldquo;equally clear in Dutch&rdquo;?  Again, Mr. Cohen
wrote, &ldquo;A high frequency of *vocables* of Romance root is
therefore unsurprising.&rdquo;  Wouldn't it have been more easily
understood had he said, &ldquo;A high frequency of *words* derived
from Latin roots is therefore not surprising&rdquo;?  Another excerpt:
&ldquo;Whereas a considerable proportion of English scientific terminology
is *compounded* from *recondite* elements (usually of
Latin or Greek origin) and hence *abstruse*.&rdquo;

Why didn't he say, *made up from*, rather than *compounded
from*?  And why the redundant use of *recondite* and
*abstruse* when both words have essentially the same meaning,
i.e., 'concealed or hidden'?  Then he uses the word *components*,
rather than the simple word, *parts*.  And why use the word
*memorization* rather than *remembering*?  Then we find *mnemonic
aid*, which is somewhat of a redundancy inasmuch as
the word *mnemonic* alone is defined as &ldquo;assisting, or aiding
memory.' It is doubtful that many 'laymen' use, or understand,
the word, and why should they?

*Analogous* is another example.  Why not simply use *similar*
or *alike*?

*Unambiguous* could be expressed by simple words such as
*clear, definite*, or *certain*.

Excerpt: &ldquo;Dutch scientists seem to be more often in a
position to use such a demotic term than their English-speaking
colleagues.&rdquo;  Wouldn't it have been clearer to the layman if the
word *popular* had been used rather than *demotic*?

*Calques:* a word ten laymen out of ten—and probably nine
out of ten students of English—have never even heard of!
Couldn't Mr. Cohen have used the simple word, *copies*, rather
than *calques*?

*Agglutinations* is another.  The layman would have more
clearly understood had it been stated that two or more words
had been *united* or *glued together* to form one word, such as
*beefsteak, grapevine*, or *inasmuch*.

One wonders if Mr. Cohen was more intent on displaying
his knowledge of the Dutch language, and his own undoubted
erudition, than to writing in language that &ldquo;any layman can
understand.&rdquo;

*[Arthur G.  Read, Charlottesville, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Selma G&ouml;ksel}

In Daniel Dorff's article, &ldquo;The Meaning of Personal
Names&rdquo; [X, 3], reference is made to the name *Jesus* as being
taboo in cultures other than the Hispanic and irrelevant outside
of Christianity.  The fact is that *Isa*, Turkish via Arabic for
*Jesus*, is a fairly common name in Turkey, a country whose
population is approximately 99% Muslim, as are many other
Biblical names.

The reason for this seeming anomaly is that the founders
of the two monotheistic religions preceding Muhammad,
namely Moses and Jesus, are recognized and revered as
prophets by the Muslims.  Actually there are many stories from
the Old Testament in the Koran, with the names of the persons
involved given in their Arabic equivalents.  Having thus been
given Koranic approval, it is no wonder that they are considered
good Muslim names, even including *Mesih* ('Messiah').

It may interest VERBATIM readers to examine the list of
Biblical names and their Turkish equivalents given below.  The
asterisks indicate those most commonly used in Turkey.

>Aaron     *Harun*   
Abraham                   
Adam      *Adem*     
David     *Davut*    
Elias                 
Ezra      *Uzeyir*    
Isaac     *Ishak*     
Ishmael                         
Jacob                         
Jesus                          
Job  
Jonah  *Yunus*  
Joseph  *Yunus*  
Messiah  *Mesih*    
Moses  
John    
Mary  
Noah  *Nuh*  
Solomon  
Zacharias  *Zekeriya*

One of my acquaintances has three sons named Musa, Isa,
and Mehmet (Turkish form of Muhammad), peace be within
their walls!

*[Selma G&ouml;ksel, Ankara]*


#### EPISTOLA {Michael Javoronok}

Robert Devereux [IX,4] comments on Garland Cannon's
&ldquo;698 Japanese Loanwords in English&rdquo; and questions the origin
of the trademark *Taka-Diastase*.

Taka-Diastase is the name of a proprietary (Parke-Davis)
from of diastase that is produced not from malt but by the
growth of a certain species of Aspergillus upon rice hulls or
bran.  This ferment, discovered by Dr. Jokichi Takamine, is
capable under proper circumstances of converting one hundred
times its weight of starch into glucose in ten minutes.

*[Michael Javoronok, Worcester, Massachusetts]*


### OBITER DICTA

Sir Brian Young has been discovering &ldquo;the delights of
pedantry&rdquo; for his Radio 3 column, &ldquo;Standing Matters.&rdquo;  One of
his targets was &ldquo;that notorious trap, the use of the word
'literally' just to be emphatic.&rdquo;  He quoted a letter from a vicar
who, on his retirement, had been described by the parish
magazine as &ldquo;literally a father to every child in the parish.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Still the practice goes on,&rdquo; Sir Brian said.  &ldquo;When Mrs
Thatcher appeared on French television, a reporter said admiringly,
'There on the screen was the Prime Minister, literally
seducing her interviewer.'

&ldquo;There's another, rather subtler, group of confused sayings
where the words contain the seeds of their own destruction.
Hollywood is a rich source of these sayings, most of them
credited to Sam Goldwyn.  My favourite here is the mogul who
told a young actor, 'Sincerity is the key thing: if you can fake
that, you've got it made.' Maybe it's a type of snarl-up to
which Americans are specially prone: certainly I saw a notice
in the middle of Lake George which proclaimed, 'This is
Pleasure Island: no landing, no camping, no picnicking.'

&ldquo;Our clergy are not immune from these self-contradictions
either: Bishop Ullathome, when asked to recommend a book on
humility, answered without hesitation, 'Best book on humility?
I wrote it myself.' But I think it was Huw Wheldon who
collected the most attractive remark in this class: two women
were overheard on the top of a bus, and one was comforting
the other with these words, 'Be philosophical, dear; and don't
give it another thought.' &rdquo;

—Reprinted from *The Listener*, 3 November
1983, with permission from Sir Brian Young.


#### EPISTOLA {G. A. Coulson}

I think your correspondent Norman Shapiro [X,3] will
have to retrieve his hat from the ring.  His argument seems to
hang on the pronunciation of the word *aye* meaning 'yes.'
Even in Scotland it rhymes with &ldquo;I&rdquo;—indeed it is so spelled in
the two earliest references given in the *OED* (1576 and 1594).
As for *och aye* being a common phrase, it may be heard about
as often as *oo la la* is to be heard in France—in fact not often
at all if you will believe a Scot with a more than nodding
acquaintance with France over some fifty years.

*[G. A. Coulson, Diss, Norfolk]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Hospital Disaster Planning Seminar in Room.&rdquo;  [Sign in
the lobby of the Baltimore Hilton, December 7, 1982.  Submitted
by Jeannes S. Wells, Glendora, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Flaws Outweigh Faults of Modest Pamphlet.&rdquo;  [From
*Chess Life magazine*, August 1983.  Submitted by Drew Downey, Washington, D.C.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Does your child need help with their education?&rdquo;  [From
an ad in the *Cincinnati Enquirer* September 26, 1983.  Submitted
by Eleanor S. Leigh, Dearborn, Michigan.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A Rapist Is Sought For 12 Brooklyn Attacks.&rdquo;  [From a
headline in *The New York Times*, May 16, 1984.  Submitted by
George S. Welsh, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

## Is It [mIS] or [mIZ]?
*Dennis E. Baron, University of Illinois*

The present-day status of the feminine marriage-neutral title
*Ms*. is not clear.  Its use is widespread, particularly in the
business world, but it is also controversial.  None of the popular
usage guides, even the ones dedicated to nonsexist writing,
recommend it.  Most advise their readers to employ the title—
whether *Miss, Mrs.*, or *Ms.*—that is preferred by the addressee.
When preference is unknown, they suggest that no title at all
be used.  Claims are made by some authorities that *Ms.* is
spreading, while others insist that it is on the wane.  Unfortunately,
no accurate usage survey has been made to determine
the true status of the title.  More puzzling however, to the
language historian, is not the present status but the source of
*Ms*.

Although its origins and early history are cloudy, we can
determine that *Ms*. is at least forty years old.  It appears to have
originated in the 1940s, though it may have been coined even
earlier than that.  The controversy surrounding its use is much
more recent: it does not surface until the 1970s.  *Ms*. does not,
however, go as far back as 1767, as some have suggested.  The
*Ms* carved on the tombstone of Sarah Spooner, who died in
that year and was buried in Plymouth, Massachusetts, is not an
example of colonial feminism or a slip of the chisel, but an
abbreviation for *Mistress*.  Neither is *Ms*. the first proposal for
revising the *Mr., Miss., Mrs.* paradigm.  As early as 1911
Ambrose Bierce, who opposed the use of all titles, suggests
*Mush*, abbreviated *Mh*., as a title for a single man; *Mr.* would
then serve to indicate a married one (*The Devil's Dictionary,
s.v. Miss*).  In 1941 American Speech reports proposals for *Mk*.
(short for *Mark*), and either *Br.* or *Bch.* (for *Bachelor*), to
designate available males, as well as *Wd*. and *Wr*. for *widow*
and *widower*, respectively (16:229-30).  All of these suggestions
for the revision of the masculine title to bring them into line
with the feminine ones are made in jest.  *Ms.* is the only serious
twentieth-century addition to the system of titles, and the only
one that has made some headway.

The earliest cite so far uncovered for marriage-neutral *Ms*.
occurs in Mario Pei's *The Story of Language* (Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 1949).  Pei attributes its creation to the women's
rights movement:

>Feminists, who object to the distinction between Mrs.
and Miss and its concomitant revelatory features, have
often proposed that the two present-day titles be
merged into a single one, &ldquo;Miss&rdquo; (to be written &ldquo;Ms.&rdquo;),
with a plural &ldquo;Misses&rdquo; (written &ldquo;Mss.&rdquo;), even at the
cost of confusion with the abbreviation for &ldquo;manuscripts.&rdquo;
[p. 79]

It is evident from Pei's tone that *Ms*. had been around for
at least a short while, and that it had achieved enough currency
or notoriety to merit inclusion in his discussion of titles, though
the comments on *Ms*. are silently dropped from later editions
of the book.  The pronunciation indicated by Pei suggests that
the term may have been at first nothing more radical than a
new abbreviation for the marriage-neutral, generalized sense of
*Miss*, a sense which was common through the seventeenth
century; which continued, though it was not considered standard,
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; and which
has never entirely disappeared.  In 1914, the feminist Fola La
Follette urged the formal extension of *Miss* to serve as the
general feminine title both before and after marriage.  By the
mid twentieth century, usage books acknowledged *Miss* as an
appropriate title for a married woman to retain in business or
public life.  In addition, twentieth-century secretarial and etiquette
handbooks often suggest that *Miss* could function
exactly like *Mr*., that it could be used as a safe generic title in
addressing a letter to a woman whose marital status was
unknown.

The history of the current pronunciation of the title, [miz],
is not clear, though it suggests that *Ms*. is not simply an
abbreviation of *Miss,* but a blend of *Miss* and *Mrs*.  This is the
derivation of the word suggested by *Webster's Ninth New
Collegiate Dictionary* (1983).  *6,000 Words*, published in 1976 as
a supplement to *Webster's Third New International Dictionary*
gives both pronunciations: &ldquo;miz, sometimes mis,&rdquo; though the
eighth edition of *Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary* (1974)
lists only the more common pronunciation, *miz*, as does the
recent ninth edition (1983).  Neither the *American Heritage
Dictionary* nor *Webster's New World Dictionary* gives the
pronunciation [mis], though both give [miz] and the spelling
pronunciation, [&#92;?&#92;&epsilon;m &#92;?&#92;&epsilon;s], which does not seem common, and
which is occasionally heard in jest, though the dictionaries do
not note this fact.

The new term *Ms.* appears in the paradigm of personal
titles included in the seventh edition of Lois Irene Hutchinson's
*Standard Handbook for Secretaries* (N.Y.: McGraw-Hill,
1956).  Hutchinson advises her readers, &ldquo;Always use 'Mr.,'
'Mrs.,' 'Miss,' or 'Ms.' before a personal name, unless another
title is applicable, as 'Dr.'... If in doubt about 'Miss' or 'Mrs.,'
use 'Miss' or 'Ms.' (meaning either 'Miss' or 'Mrs.').&rdquo;  Hutchinson
does not indicate a pronunciation for *Ms.*, but unlike Pei
she apparently treats it as separate from, though an alternative
to, generalized *Miss.*  No feminist she, Hutchinson also counsels
the use of a generic masculine in the most troublesome of
cases: &ldquo;If unable to tell whether the addressee is a man or
woman, use 'Mr.' &rdquo; (310).

If Pei's information about *Ms.* is correct, it is distinctly
possible that the title originated as an abbreviation for the
generalized title *Miss.*  And if by a process of folk etymology
the title later came to be reinterpreted as a blend of *Miss* and
*Mrs*., the terms that it was seen to replace, [miz] could be
accounted for as a subsequent pronunciation which was motivated
by the need to distinguish *Ms.* from *Miss.*  Such an
explanation is attractive in that it provides *Ms.* with a history it
does not at present have, connecting the title both to the
women's movement of the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, and showing it to be an integral and logical part of
the development of the feminine title paradigm of *Miss, Mrs.*,
and *Mistress* from Middle English to the present.  Unfortunately,
we cannot know much more until earlier cites for *Ms*.
are found.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Kevin Wade (Playwright) considers his acting career to
have begun as an alter boy in Chappaqua, New York, where he
grew up.&rdquo; [From *Stagebill*, August 1983, for Key Exchange.
Submitted by John T. Metcalf, Lake Forest, Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The condition of J. P. Lovette, the world's youngest heart
transplant patient, was upgraded from stable to satisfactory,
and the 4-year-old Colorado boy munched cornflakes and
peddled a stationary tricycle.&rdquo;  [From *The Houston Post,* June
14, 1984.  Submitted by Graciela S. Daichman, Houston, Texas.
*Somebody has to pay for the operation.*]

## Light Refractions
*Thomas H. Middleton*

Regional dialects are disappearing—too slowly, I suspect, for
those of us who long for conformity and too swiftly for
those who cherish differences.  I was born in Charleston, South
Carolina, and if you know the Charleston accent, you'll
understand why a Charlestonian hates to see our accents
become homogenized—even a Charlestonian like me, who
moved to New York at the age of two and no longer bears the
slightest trace of Charleston in his speech.  The Charleston
accent is unique and, to many ears, including mine, beautiful.
It is not in any respect a typical &ldquo;southern accent.&rdquo;  My father,
who was both born and reared in Charleston, retained his
accent in almost full force all his life, and many people, on
hearing his Charlestonian pronunciations and cadences, asked
him if he was Irish.  There are similarities, and anyone not well
tuned to the nuances of dialect might confuse the two.  I think
it is probably impossible to render the Charleston accent
accurately in writing, but perhaps a few words and phrases can
convey some of the feeling.  The long &ldquo;a&rdquo; is usually pronounced
approximately as a short &ldquo;e,&rdquo; but then that short &ldquo;e&rdquo; is given
an extra half beat; thus, *gate* is pronounced &ldquo;get,&rdquo; except that
the &ldquo;e&rdquo; is pleasantly prolonged and briefly savored.  Charlestonians
used to stick a little *y*-shaped hook in certain words.  A
*car* became a *kyaw* and a *garden* a *gyawden*.  In Charleston,
one &ldquo;pled kyawds,&rdquo; but that &ldquo;pled&rdquo; lasts longer than a simple
&ldquo;pled.&rdquo;  Maybe &ldquo;plehhd&rdquo; will give you the idea.  Using that
double-h as an indication that the &ldquo;e&rdquo; is to be held for a
moment, try &ldquo;a lehht dehht at ehht by the gyawden gehht&rdquo; as
a rendering of *a late date at eight by the garden gate*.

I said they used to stick that *y*-shaped hook in there.
About ten years ago my wife, Jeannie, and I went to Charleston,
and I told Jeannie she'd fall in love with the accent.  I told
her specifically to listen to the way they said &ldquo;kyaw,&rdquo;
&ldquo;gyawden,&rdquo; &ldquo;kyawd,&rdquo; and so on.  I'll be damned if they hadn't
stopped doing it.  We were at a party one night at the home of
one of my cousins, and I mentioned that I hadn't heard anyone
say &ldquo;kyaw&rdquo; or &ldquo;gyawden.&rdquo;  My several aunts and cousins and
sundry friends considered this for a few moments and then
agreed with some astonishment, &ldquo;My Law-w-d, that's saw!  We
used to sehh 'kyaw,' but I dawn't suppaws we do enni maw!&rdquo;
(That's not bad, as difficult renderings of unusual speech into
writing go).  The loss of that strange little y in those words
saddened me just a little, as any loss of something familiar and
endearing will do.

My father once told me that there were four words in the
English language, spelled four different ways, meaning four
different things, but all pronounced the same.  He said a teacher
had pointed them out to him when he was in grade school.  The
words are &ldquo;heyuh,&rdquo; as in the &ldquo;heyuh on yaw head&rdquo;; &ldquo;heyuh,&rdquo;
as in the rabbity creature; &ldquo;heyuh,&rdquo; as in &ldquo;I can't heyuh you&rdquo;;
and &ldquo;heyuh,&rdquo; as in &ldquo;Come awva heyuh.&rdquo;

The Charleston accent is said to have been greatly
influenced by Gullah, that fascinating patois of the Gullah
Negroes of the South Carolina Sea Islands and the Middle
Atlantic states.  Gullah evidently has its origins partly in the
African cultures from which the slaves were taken and partly
in the dialects of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century working-class
England and Scotland, whence came most of the early
overseers, who taught their own brand of English to the blacks.

A story my niece Elizabeth told me a few months ago was
the inspiration for this article.  Elizabeth lives in Nova Scotia,
and she was visiting some of our relatives in Charleston some
years back.  In conversation with two of our several very dear
and somewhat daft aunts, Elizabeth asked one of the aunts if
she'd had pets when she was a young girl.  &ldquo;Well, yehhs,&rdquo; she
said, reminiscing about the long, long ago, &ldquo;I rememba I had a
terrapin.&rdquo;  Elizabeth, who had never heard of a terrapin, asked,
&ldquo;A what?&rdquo;

&ldquo;A terrapin.&rdquo;

&ldquo;What's a terrapin?&rdquo; asked Elizabeth.

&ldquo;Why, Elizabeth, a terrapin is a cooter.&rdquo;  (*Cooter* is
generally pronounced the same as &ldquo;Could'a',&rdquo; as in &ldquo;I could'a'
had a cooter,&rdquo; *could'a'* and *cooter* being indistinguishable as
spoken terms.)

&ldquo;What's a cooter?&rdquo; asked Elizabeth.

&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said our dear old aunt, seeing herself in a hopeless
conversational *cul-de-sac*, &ldquo;Elizabeth, if you dawn't knaw
what a terrapin or a cooter is, I just dawn't knaw how I can
explehhn it.&rdquo;

Luckily, another of our dear old aunts was present to say,
&ldquo;It's a damn turtle.&rdquo;

My father had mentioned cooters when I was young.  It
was to him a term of endearment in addition to being a damn
turtle.  After Elizabeth told me her story, I decided to look it
up.  I went to *The Random House Dictionary*.  It doesn't come
completely naturally to look up what sounds like &ldquo;coulda&rdquo;
under &ldquo;cooter,&rdquo; but I found it after a brief search.  *Random
House* implies that *cooter* rhymes with *hooter;* it might, outside
of Charleston, but in Charleston, it doesn't.  What interested
me particularly was the proposed etymology, &ldquo;Perh. of Afr.
Orig.; cf. Mandingo *kuta*, turtle.&rdquo;

Gullah is said to be the language of *Porgy*, and, in turn, of
*Porgy* and *Bess*, and, to a degree, it is.  If *Porgy* and *Bess* were
actually pure Gullah, most audiences wouldn't understand
much of it.  However, the Gullah expression, &ldquo;a woman is a
sometoim t'ing&rdquo;—obviously equivalent to the Italian &ldquo;La Donna
e Mobile&rdquo;—is clearly the basis for the song of approximately
the same name from *Porgy* and *Bess*.

You might have noticed that &ldquo;sometoim&rdquo; for *sometime*.
That isn't precise, but it's close enough.  It's certainly a lot
closer to Charleston and Gullah than the standard southern
&ldquo;sometam&rdquo; or &ldquo;sometom.&rdquo;  And &ldquo;sometoim&rdquo; might indicate
why people asked my father if he was Irish.

Many years ago, I was told of a Gullah conversation—as
brief a conversation as can be imagined, containing two
syllables in *toto*—that can have a great many different
meanings:

>&ldquo;Shum?&rdquo;
>
&ldquo;Shum!&rdquo;

That can mean

>'Do you see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>'Does he see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>or 'Does she see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>'Yes, I see (him, her, or it)!'
>
>'Yes, he sees (him, her or it)!'
>
>or 'Yes, she sees (him, her, or it)!'
>
>or 'Did you see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>'Did he see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>or 'Did she see (him, her, or it)?'
>
>'Yes, I saw (him, her, or it)!'
>
>'Yes, he saw (him, her, or it)!'
>
>or 'Yes, she saw (him, her, or it)!'

When I first heard this, I was given about a dozen other
tenses, voices, and moods in translation of &ldquo;Shum?&rdquo; &ldquo;Shum!&rdquo;
but my feeling is that they get a bit hifalutin for such a simple
exchange.

It seems only reasonable that in time all these lovely
dialects will vanish.  When my father was a child, he heard
practically no English spoken that was not either white
Charlestonian or Gullah.  Today, it is almost certain that every
child in the United States has heard a vast array of accents,
from the precious tones of Maurice Evans to the super-plebeian
bleats of Carroll O'Connor as Archie Bunker.  First phonograph
records, then radio, then the talkies, and finally television have
changed the world in so many ways, not the least of which is
the enormous range of speech patterns we're all exposed to.

It would be interesting to see what accent obtains when
we all speak in approximately the same way, but that day is
still a few generations in the future, and, to tell you the truth,
I'm just as glad I won't make it that far.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Devil's New Dictionary*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/the-devils-new-dictionary_richard-iannelli/1561414/#edition=39826124&idiq=48172707)
Richard lannelli, (Citadel Press, 1984), 324pp. 

Here is another book that, for want of a better system of
presentation—there must be one *somewhere*—is in alphabetic
order.  If you are familiar with Ambrose Bierce's *Devil's
Dictionary*, you will know what this book is about, but I
suppose one should note that the title is not &ldquo;The New Devil's
Dictionary.&rdquo;

Humor, the nature of which I have no intention of
discussing, is peculiar: things that some people find funny,
others view as macabre, tragic, nasty, or just unfunny; as we all
know, it works the other way, too.  It is impossible to be funny
or even amusing for 324 pages, so lannelli tries, *pari passu*, to
be sardonic, sarcastic, bitter, paronomastic, poetic, and various
other things.  His success, as might be expected, is mixed.  It
ranges from

>*Plymouth Rock*  A kind of popular music originating
in south of England.

which I could have done without, to

>*masochist*  A person who is fit to be tied.
>
>*beard*  The hair on the face of a man who is
extremely careful, and who therefore does not
experience many close shaves.

and from

>*acrophobia*  Morbid fear resulting from the ancient
superstition that falling to the ground from a great
height brings bad luck.

to

>*actor*  Someone whose job frequently alternates
between memorizing lines at the theatre and standing
in lines at the unemployment office.

As can be seen, some are corny, some are cute, some are
neither.  Occasionally there is a poignant entry:

>*deer*  An animal which is too beautiful for words,
and so it is shot.

The problem with such books, as I have pointed out on
many occasions, is that alphabetic order, which is a useful
retrieval system if you know what you are looking for, is not
particularly well suited for browsing or reading.  Perhaps this
book would work better were the entries arranged thematically.
As it is, one has to read through it to find the good stuff, which
is not a thrilling prospect, notwithstanding the fact that much
worthwhile material is here, though one should take it in small
quantities:

>*mithridatism*  The act of taking poison in increasing
doses as a means of building an immunity to it, as in
the case of people who start out with talk shows and
gradually work their way up to situation comedies.

*Laurence Urdang*

## DANGER!  Letter Loose!
*Alma Denny, New York, New York*

&ldquo;Anger is only one letter away from danger,&rdquo; reminds
my philosopher-friend in the homily he mails to me
each month.

Only one letter, but what havoc it can cause when
omitted, added, misplaced, changed!  Wars may have been
averted, marriages saved, jobs preserved simply because of
conscientious proofreaders who rescued *marital* from *martial,
uniformed* from *uninformed*, and *singers* from *sinners*, in the
nick.

But one-letter-mayhem still abounds, whether fresh from
the typist or the typesetter, and everyone has lists of examples
which amuse, shock, amaze, and shake, at the power of that
small one twenty-sixth of the alphabet.  For example, it can
turn:

>Friend into Fiend
>
>Lots of talent into Loss of talent
>
>Hire into Fire
>
>Million into Billion
>
>Engaged girl into Enraged girl
>
>United into Untied
>
>Nuclear into Unclear
>
>Comely into Homely
>
>Wool business into Woo business
>
>Married into Marred
>
>Milestone into Millstone
>
>Inducting a judge into Indicting a judge
>
>Deifying into Defying
>
>Venial into Venal
>
>Moral into Amoral
>
>Brother into Bother
>
>Recital into Rectal

Years ago, while a senator, Hubert H. Humphrey was
quoted in print as having called the then Vice-President,
Richard M. Nixon, a &ldquo;slocker,&rdquo; and was forced to insist that
the term he used was &ldquo;slicker,&rdquo; a form of palatable rhubarb
during Presidential campaigns.  But just that one letter could
have conceivably promoted a libel suit or, in Aaron Burr's time,
even a duel.

Sometimes, the one-letter gremlin forces a double-take as
we encounter him in context, as

>When the fire broke out, 20-year-old Russell was alone
in the house with his baby sitter.
>
>For several reasons, Clarinda LaRue has played leading
r&ocirc;les.

For the victims of slips such as these there may be some
comfort in the knowledge that most people don't read very
critically, just scan lines of print to &ldquo;get the drift,&rdquo; and may not
notice that what is said may, thanks to one errant letter, be not
at all what is meant.  The absolutely hapless victim, however, is
the one caught up in a headline—big bold print that's inescapable.
What could John Doe do when his picture appeared
on the Financial Page of his local newspaper under this banner:

>*John Doe Chosen to Ruin Machine Works Corp.*

The only person we know who didn't object to an error in
a headline was Harry S. Truman when an early edition of a
newspaper declared Thomas E. Dewey the winner in the 1948
Presidential election.  Copies of that error are preserved under
glass and treasured.

As for the one-letter mischief afoot, let us rejoice that
there are only 26 possible culprits.  The Polish alphabet has 45
letters,—but censors, rather than proofreaders, keep them all in
place.

## Comparatively Speaking
*Shelley Saltzman, New York, New York*

Having met disaster when preparing my first apple pie, I
took exception to the saying &ldquo;easy as pie.&rdquo; &ldquo;Says who?&rdquo; I
countered.

&ldquo;Says I,&rdquo; said my husband who finds me cute as a button
when I'm angry.

&ldquo;You're high as a kite,&rdquo; I accused.

&ldquo;Not I, I'm as good as gold.&rdquo;  In anguish, I shouted &ldquo;You're
driving me nuts.  In moments I'll be crazy as a loon.&rdquo;

&ldquo;What the hell is a loon, anyhow?&rdquo;

&ldquo;I don't know, it's just an American saying.&rdquo;

&ldquo;As American as apple pie?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes, and often right as rain.&rdquo;

&ldquo;But not always, dear.  Remember what your brother Tony
said about my cousin Dolores when we tried to set them up in
order to keep the prune business in the family?&rdquo;

&ldquo;How could I forget?  He said that she was big as a house,
flat as a board, and tough as nails.&rdquo;

&ldquo;He's so unfair, she has quite a few nice qualities.  For
instance, her voice is as smooth as silk, she's quiet as a mouse,
and as gentle as a lamb.  She always kept her room neat as a
pin.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Dear, she's also mad as a hatter.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well, let's not discuss it.  Could you get me a drink of
prune juice?  My throat's as dry as a bone.&rdquo;

&ldquo;You always keep me busy as a bee.&rdquo;  I said, and handing
him his drink, I added, &ldquo;I guess it's an understandable opinion
coming from your brother who is handsome as a prince, and fit
as a fiddle, but whose outpourings of affection are as phony as
a three-dollar bill.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Queer as a three-dollar bill,&rdquo; said my husband.

Tony?  Gay?

&ldquo;Sure as shootin',&rdquo; said my mate.

&ldquo;I always thought he was straight as an arrow and as pure
as the driven snow.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well, your idea of him is clear as mud and your mores as
old as the hills.  The fact that he's homosexual is as plain as the
nose on your face.&rdquo;

Since I always knew my husband didn't like my nose, I
became as silent as a corpse.  The only sound heard was that of
my canary, proud as a peacock, singing away in his gilded
cage.  I knew he was as happy as a lark, although I realized he
was not as free as a bird.

I was not to be consoled.  I phoned Tony: &ldquo;Come over, I
want to talk to you.&rdquo;

&ldquo;I'll be there quick as a wink.&rdquo;

&ldquo;You will?  But you're always slow as molasses.  Are you
going to drive quick as a bunny?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Of course I am.  I own a Rabbit, don't I?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Oh Tony, you're quick as a whip.&rdquo;

As I hung up the phone, I informed my husband that
there was no more static on the line and that I could hear Tony
clear as a bell.  With that, the doorbell rang.  Opening the door,
my husband responded, &ldquo;And I see him clear as day.  Come in,
Tony.&rdquo;

&ldquo;How are you, Tony?&rdquo;  I asked.

&ldquo;Cool as a moose, but twice as loose,&rdquo; he replied.  &ldquo;And
you?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Oh, I'm loose as a goose and Herb is as cool as a
cucumber.&rdquo;

&ldquo;You know, it's hot as hell out there,&rdquo; he said.  &ldquo;But it's
cold as ice in here,&rdquo; replied Herb, lowering the thermostat on
the air conditioner.

&ldquo;What's up?&rdquo; asked Tony.

&ldquo;I want to discuss Dolores with you.&rdquo;  He blushed red as a
beet.  &ldquo;What's to discuss?  She's ugly as sin.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Not true, Tony.  She's pretty as a picture,&rdquo; I stated.

&ldquo;She's fat as a cow.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Come on, she's skinny as a rail.&rdquo;

&ldquo;And light as a feather,&rdquo; Herb added.

&ldquo;No!  She's heavy as lead and dull as dishwater.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Oh!  She's sharp as a tack.&rdquo;

&ldquo;And rich as Croesus,&rdquo; I added.

&ldquo;What?  She's poor as a church mouse.&rdquo;

&ldquo;She's a good woman and good women are as rare as hens'
teeth.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Women like that are as common as dirt.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Now, now, with her you'll be as happy as a clam,&rdquo; piped
Herb.

Our arguing lasted late into the evening.  Outside it was as
black as coal.  Inside it was as dark as night.  Herb and I were
worn out.  He was as white as a sheet and I was as pale as a
ghost.  &ldquo;Come on, Sweetie, let's go to bed.  Tomorrow we'll be
good as new, and convincing Tony will be as easy as one, two,
three.&rdquo;  As if he were counting sheep, I fell immediately to
sleep.  It had been a comparatively long day.

## A Special Gift of Words
*Maurice Sagoff, Acton, Massachusetts*

The poet Paul Val&eacute;ry gave it a name: *vers donn&eacute;*—a poetic
expression that comes wafting in like a gift out of the
blue, presenting the writer with a perfect opening line for a
lyric.  I have received such a gift once or twice in my life.  I can
also attest to the phenomenon of a *rime donn&eacute;*—a single word
that is not only the perfect rhyme to finish a couplet, but is in
fact the only word in the entire language which could serve
this purpose.  This does not refer to &ldquo;made up&rdquo; rhymes which
some poets have resorted to when the gift of the Muses failed
to arrive.  Thus, Poe in *Ulalume*:

>The skies they were ashen and sober;  
The leaves they were crisped and sere...  
It was night in the lonesome October  
Of my most immemorial year;  
It was hard by the dim lake of Auber...

Poe, it appears, found a *rime donn&eacute;* in &ldquo;sober&rdquo; to rhyme with
&ldquo;October&rdquo;; but he needed one more rhyme-word to round out
the image, and since it did not come wafting in over his study
door he created a fictitious &ldquo;dim lake of Auber.&rdquo;  Not the real
thing, but it worked.  Robert Browning also did not wait for the
gift but concocted his own outrageous rhymes: *Congo/let's on
go; capsule/perhaps you'll*; and dozens more.  These are not, I
think, what Val&eacute;ry had in mind.

To cite some legitimate examples: a 19th-century poet
whose name I cannot recall evoked a peaceful evening mood
with these beginning lines:

>The sun sinks 'neath the ridge  
And the usual evening midge  
Is settled on the bridge  
Of my nose...

Note that the three rhyming words are virtually the only
&ldquo;-idge&rdquo; trio that one could possibly adduce.  A triple gift!

Again, in the light-verse category, I might give an example
of my own.  I was writing a few clerihews—those four-liners
that start with a famous name and go on to say something
insightful about the person named—just at the time when
da Vinci's *Mona Lisa* was being exhibited at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in New York (on loan from the Louvre).  It was
well guarded by security agents and was stared at by thousands
of viewers daily.  I started my clerihew

>Mona Lisa—
>
>then came to a dead stop.

I could think of no exact rhyme.  &ldquo;Teaser,&rdquo; &ldquo;pleaser,&rdquo; etc., are
not true rhymes.  I was about to give up when the *rime donn&eacute;*
flashed on my mind as if out of a conjuror's box.

>Mona Lisa,
Here on a special visa—

The rest followed easily:

>Guarded by FBI and S&ucirc;ret&eacute; agents all the while,
Still managed a little smile.

Another instance: while &ldquo;shrinking&rdquo; seventy classics of
literature and transmuting them into verse for a paperback
called *Shrinklits*, I tackled *Walden* by Thoreau.  The exercise
called for drastic verbal economy while preserving the sense of
the original.  Here is the beginning of the &ldquo;shrinklit&rdquo;:

>Beyond mere goods  
The pond, the woods;  
Live there as I  
And simplify...

(it runs on for several more lines).
Knowing Thoreau's aversion to commercialism and his reasons
for going to the Walden area, I was obliged at the outset to find
a rhyme for &ldquo;woods.&rdquo;  As you observe, the gift-word arrived in
the first line.

This phenomenon makes no class distinctions.  It may be
found in the lowliest ditty, as one song-writer discovered while
composing lyrics for &ldquo;The Bearded Lady,&rdquo; a barber-shop
melody some readers may recall.  It begins

>I love the bearded lady 'cause her whiskers tickle so,
Her whiskers make me prickle from my head down to
my toe,

Now the lyricist wanted to employ the word &ldquo;passionate&rdquo; but
that appeared impossible to rhyme, except for the inspiration
of the *donn&eacute;*:

>The kiss with the mustache in it!  
No wonder I'm so passionate ... etc.

Ogden Nash must have been on excellent terms with the
Muse in this particular.  A striking example is his brief but
pungent observation, entitled (I quote from memory) &ldquo;Lines to
a Baby's Bottom&rdquo;:

>A little talcum  
Is always walcum.

It may be questioned whether Val&eacute;ry would have admitted
the last two specimens as qualifiers.  I leave the judgment up to
the reader.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Poles salute underground.&rdquo;  [From a headline in the
*Chicago Tribune*, December 5, 1983, Sec. 1, p. 14.  Submitted
by Roseanna Mueller, La Grange, Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Visitors in Burlington's City Hall may be in for a surprise
when they want to go to the public bathrooms on the first floor.
The bathrooms have been closed to the public during the day
because of repeated abuse of them by a small group of vandals.
... The bathrooms will be open for public meetings, such as
the aldermen, Planning Commission and Finance Board.&rdquo;
[From the *Burlington (Vermont) Free Press*, March, 1984.
Submitted by Alain Guilloton, New York City.]

## In Honor of the Occasion
*Clifton Brock, Chapel Hill, North Carolina*

In east-central North Carolina, heading in a southwesterly
direction out of Chapel Hill, yon can drive over back-country
roads through an area which has remained surprisingly
rural.  The terrain is that slowly rolling kind found along the
fringes of the Piedmont plateau, with plenty of hills, but which
only a sailor would call mountainous.  In areas where the soil
was more hospitable, this kind of country can be bountiful.  But
around here the advancing icecaps slowed and dumped too
much rock.  Centuries of erosion carried off most of the topsoil,
and now the pines and hardwoods struggle on almost equal
terms, with neither doing well.  The land was never much for
farming, and by the 1950s, depressions, wars, and the pull of
the city had drained it of population.  The Piedmont rivers,
which had attracted 19th-century textile mills with their water
power, are too far away, and those man-made rivers of
concrete, the Interstate highways, also have by-passed it.  Today
the area consists mostly of deserted farms, with only an
occasional mobile home or brick ranch house to indicate the
flight back to the land of furniture and textile workers from the
surrounding but distant towns of Asheboro, Pittsboro, and
Greensboro.

The region did enjoy a brief prosperity in the late 1800s.
Some early geological accident deposited there the precise mix
of clay and minerals needed for pottery making, and around
the turn of the century—before liquor became commercialized
and bottled—it was a center for producing and exporting
whiskey jugs.  A few potters still survive and in recent years
have enjoyed a modest revival, based on the carriage trade
from Chapel Hill, Raleigh, and other urban areas, plus the
occasional Yankee tourist who has read about the potters and
goes out of his way to find them.  They have not adjusted well
to this new market.  Most stubbornly persist in making useful
objects, don't much care if you buy or not, and—if they come
to trust you—not only will sell you a jug but will arrange to
have it filled for you.

Other than the potters, there is not much there.  You can
drive through the area undisturbed except for the occasional
teenager testing his engine and skills.  Today the principal
export is first-class stock-car racers.

We have come to know and love that country, but several
years ago my wife and I were making our first exploration
there.  We were partly trying to search out the potters, but
mostly we were celebrating a day away from work and kids,
just driving around leisurely and aimlessly, keeping cool with a
nice wine.  Somewhere south of Asheboro we came upon a
small place, not even a crossroads, with just a house, a country
church, and a gas station.  I slowed down to accommodate a
passing dog, looked up and saw a highway sign reading
&ldquo;Whynot.&rdquo;  After all the &ldquo;boros,&rdquo; each dutifully and dully
named for long-forgotten generals and statesmen, at least this
was something different.  We laughed and puzzled a bit about it
as I drove on, turned right, and headed down an even smaller
country road.  Shortly we came to another place, this time a
crossroads with a stop sign, a store, and a farmhouse off in the
distance.  Eunice, already a little loose and giggly from the
wine, let out a whoop and pointed up to another sign, which
read &ldquo;Erect.&rdquo;  We sat there awhile, laughing and speculating
over the naivete of the locals.  I turned left, and as we headed
north we began passing other crossroads, with signs pointing
back down the road and reading &ldquo;Erect 2,&rdquo; &ldquo;Erect 5,&rdquo; &ldquo;Erect
7,&rdquo; etc.  Eunice was holding both hands out, slowly spreading
them apart as we passed the signs, letting her eyes go wider
and wider, and making ribald comments.  Somewhere along
there she gave me a meaningful look and grin, shrugged, and
asked &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo;

When we returned to the car and continued on down the
road, we came shortly to another crossroads, this one a little
larger, with two stores, a small branch bank, and several
houses.

Its name was &ldquo;Climax.&rdquo;

After several more trips down that way I became curious
about the names.  And I can tell you that no one knows how
those names arose.  Neither the most learned historians of the
state university, nor its most diligent librarians, nor the region's
sharpest journalists have been able to discover their true
origins.

The major newspapers of the state periodically run stories
on the odd and sometimes suggestive place-names which dot
the map of North Carolina—*Ad Valorem, Vengeance, Bear
Wallow Ball, Shoofly, Loafers' Glory, Charlie's Bunion, Hearts-ease,
Huggin's Hell, Bottom, Hasty, French Broad,* etc.  They
almost always include Whynot but seldom mention *Erect* and
*Climax*, much less indicate that they are all located within a
few miles of each other.  The state gazetteer, which must strive
for completeness and is used in the public schools, has some
explanations which you may believe if you wish.  We are told
there that *Whynot* got its name when the people around there
were required to name their settlement for postal purposes, got
together one day, but could not reach agreement.  Everyone
kept saying &ldquo;Why not name it this,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Why not name it
that,&rdquo; and so they named it *Whynot*.  The name of *Erect*, so the
book says, &ldquo;was suggested to the post office department in the
1870s by C. M. Tyson, local merchant, to compliment the
posture of his neighbor, Tom Bray.&rdquo;  *Climax* was so named &ldquo;for
its location on high ground.&rdquo;

There are no early records regarding *Whynot*.  It is said
that this version of its origin was passed along over generations
as part of the local folklore, and it makes a quaint story.  In his
*Names on the Land; a historical account of place-naming in
the United States*, however, George R. Stewart notes that &ldquo;the
same type of story turns up in various regions&rdquo; and that &ldquo;there
once was a *Whynot* in North Carolina, and there is still a
*Whynot* in Nebraska.&rdquo;  The one in North Carolina is still there,
too, though it no longer has a post office, and postal names
formed the basis for Stewart's book.  Stewart does not mention
*Erect* or *Climax*, but there are some manuscript records in the
University of North Carolina Library that conflict somewhat
with the official version.  From those, it appears that the
merchant Tyson was the local wit, and something of a disreputable
fellow, but that the name itself originated well before the
1870s and that he probably just passed it along to the postal
authorities when they designated his store as the post office and
required him to name it.  As for *Climax*, you can stand there,
look both north and west, and see range after range of hills, all
higher than *Climax*, climbing up to the Blue Ridge Mountains,
which are visible on a clear day.

I have a hunch about those names.  Perhaps it is fanciful,
but you be the judge.

It is known that this area of North Carolina was settled in
the mid 18th century by Scotsmen moving down the Great
Wagon Road from Pennsylvania.  They were a devout people
whose church at that time was in a militant phase, eager to
proselytize and keep the Church of England from spreading
inland from the coast.  They brought with them fire-breathing
preachers, famed for their fundamentalist rhetoric, but some of
whom nevertheless were not immune to at least one of the
homeland's weaknesses and were known to drink what the
Indians called &ldquo;firewater.&rdquo;  There are records that prove all this.
The records also show that during this early time it was
clergymen, not politicians or real-estate developers, who were
called upon to christen places as well as babies.  The place-names
frequently reflected the hopes of their people, and that
is why you see so many &ldquo;New Hopes&rdquo; and &ldquo;Lebanons&rdquo; and
&ldquo;Salems&rdquo; scattered over the Southern countryside.

I like to think that it was some magnificent old joker of a
Calvinist circuit-rider who started out on his rounds one
summer morning, picked up a pretty and willing passenger,
dallied along the way, and named those places in honor of the
occasion.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Two Santa Barbara divers were trapped underwater
when they got stuck in a crack while repairing the submerged
face of Exchequer Dam in Mariposa County....  A third diver,
Jack Fonner, tied another rope around Rogers, and he was
freed by several men pulling on it.  A wench on a barge then
had to be used to extract Thompson, who was submerged for
three hours.&rdquo;  [From the Porterville, Cal., *Recorder*, May 19,
1984, p. 11.  Submitted by Ruth E. Smith, Porterville,
California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;No Hop Pickers, Travellers or People With Adverse
Hairstyles.&rdquo;  [Sign on the door of an inn in Alton, Hampshire.
Submitted by Thomas L. Bernard, Springfield, Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Once or twice she had ridden the steamboat with Papa
to Baltimore and walked among those glittering and swirling
crowds holding Papa's hand and gaping at the wonder of it.&rdquo;
[From *Growing Up*, by Russell Baker.  Submitted by Joe
Owens, New Paltz, New York, who comments, &ldquo;It must've
been some hand.&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'A Tale of Two Cities,' 8 p.m., Ch. 7.  Chris Sarandon
stars in TV version of Victor Hugo's classic French Revolution
romantic adventure.&rdquo;  [From TV Week in *The Boston Globe*,
June 10-16, 1984.  Submitted by Robert Sinnott, Norwell,
Massachusetts.]

## Rose Moles
*Lawrence Dugan, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania*

&ldquo;Rose Moles&rdquo; is a metaphor from the poem &ldquo;Pied
Beauty&rdquo; by Gerard Manley Hopkins, and is the name
that I give to memorable poetry—couplets, phrases, a word or
two—that I first came across outside of the original poem.  For
instance, &ldquo;... For rose-moles in all stipple upon trout that
swim&rdquo;; is Hopkins' line, but I first heard the words &ldquo;rose-moles&rdquo;
quoted by themselves.  A professor at Temple University
used them as an example of a beautiful metaphor, never giving
the rest of the line.  He probably never gave the title of the
poem, because it was several years before I found the words
again, in &ldquo;Pied Beauty.&rdquo;

In his biography, *Adolf Hitler*, John Toland groups several
chapters about Hitler's diplomacy in the 1930s under the
heading &ldquo;War In Masquerade,&rdquo; and opens with these lines
from John Dryden.

>...  
At least such subtle covenants shall be made  
Till peace itself is war in Masquerade.

They are from Dryden's &ldquo;The Second Part of Absalom And
Achitophel,&rdquo; a long poem in heroic couplets using the Biblical
story of Absalom's revolt against his father, King David, as an
allegory for the shaky state of political affairs in Restoration
England.  The lines refer, of course, to the use of diplomacy for
warlike ends.  Toland doesn't cite the poem's title, just the
author, and it was three years before I read the complete
poem.  This is the usual form of the rose mole, a dramatic
phrase, perhaps the author's name, rarely a title, and never line
numbers.

James T. Farrell quotes A. E. Housman at the opening of
his novel *A World I Never Made*.

>I, a stranger and afraid  
In a world I never made.

I was a high-school student when I read these lines and didn't
know about the battery of reference books like *Bartlett's* and
*Granger's Index To Poetry* that can be useful in placing
quotations.  So every couple of months I'd look up Farrell's
novel in the library, usually late in the afternoon, and reread
Housman.  I must have picked up *A Shropshire Lad* a hundred
times, but never found the couplet until my sophomore year at
Temple University, when Professor Richard Llwellyn, of the
English department, told me that it came from &ldquo;The Laws Of
God, The Laws Of Man&rdquo; in *Last Poems*.

For obvious reasons the couplet is the form most likely to
take a hold on us.  The second line somehow strengthens the
first, and if the thought moves us, we hold on to the rhythm
even if we only remember a few words.

The indirect rose mole can be the trickiest.  I saw the film
version of *The Horse's Mouth*, with Alec Guinness as Gulley
Jimson, before I read Joyce Gary's novel.  At the end of the
movie as he floats down the Thames on a houseboat, Guinness
shouts:

>...  
For there is good news yet to hear and fine things
to be seen  
Before we go to Paradise by way of Kensal Green.

When I read the novel the lines weren't there.  Eventually I
found them, not in Blake, as I thought I would—he is quoted
throughout the book—but as the last lines in Chesterton's &ldquo;The
Rolling English Road,&rdquo; one of GKC's best poems.  When I saw
the film again I checked the credits and noticed that Guinness,
along with playing Jimson, was listed as screenwriter.  Chesterton's
optimism is a deeper, more complex impulse than we
often realize; Guinness understood that, and the lines fit
perfectly the personality of a hard-working, slightly crazy,
elderly English painter who, having been a success as a young
painter, is now a flop as an older one.

I still find it strange to think that I first read two of my
favorite lines in American poetry in John Updike's *Bech: A
Book*.

>...  
As the marsh-hen secretly builds on the watery sod,  
Behold I will build me a nest on the greatness of God.

I don't know when I finally located them in Sidney Lanier's
beautiful ode about the South Carolina seashore, &ldquo;The Marshes
Of Glynn,&rdquo; but I doubt that I've ever forgotten a word of
them, and I owe a great debt to Updike's funny book.

The best-placed rose mole I've come across is at the top of
Frank O'Connor's short story, &ldquo;The Long Road To Ummera.&rdquo;

>Stay for me there.  I will not fail  
to meet thee in that hollow vale.

The lines are from Henry King's 17th-century elegy, &ldquo;The
Exequy.&rdquo;  Here again I don't know how I finally found the
original poem, for O'Connor makes no attribution, not even the
author.  Somehow those lines seem to just float over his
melancholy story about the death and burial of an old Irish
woman.

I have emphasized the couplet, but Keats used only one
line on the dedication page of &ldquo;Endymion,&rdquo; his long poem
&ldquo;inscribed to the memory of Thomas Chatterton:&rdquo;

>The stretched meter of an antique song.

The thought of the early deaths of Keats and Chatterton, the
unfinished quality of &ldquo;Endymion,&rdquo; and the bitter attacks of the
Scottish critics on Keats gave the line such a haunting,
complete meaning—a sort of finished fragment—that I almost
wished not to know the author.  I eventually saw the words
attributed to Shakespeare in a critical piece on Keats.  They are
from Sonnet 17, and Keats substituted &ldquo;the&rdquo; at the beginning
of the line for Shakespeare's &ldquo;and.&rdquo;

Poe insisted that poetry is a lyrical medium, that even
great long poems like *Paradise Lost* are uneven, their beauty
lying in wait between stretches of prosaic flatness.  I suspect
that most poetry readers would not agree with Poe's theory,
but in practice many of us push it farther: even within short
poems we fix on a couple of lines that sum up a truth so easily
that all modern philosophy seems the long road to a nearby
place.

>Now can anybody help me with these lines?
>
>...
>If I could say a thing or two,
>The Dutch have mighty things in view.

I saw them a few months ago as a chapter heading in Sir
Walter Scott's *St. Ronan's Well*.  I not only cannot place them,
but I have forgotten over which chapter in the novel they
appear, so I might have misquoted them.  They don't contain
the concentrated feeling that you want on or just after the title
page of your autobiography, but I can't shake them loose.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;... Mr. Millhouse will bear the brunt of the failure.  In
1979, he bought majority control of the company's stock, along
with his mother.&rdquo;  [*The Wall Street Journal*, October 11, 1983.
Submitted by Pamela Kay Stone, Beaverton, Oregon.]

## Primults or Protohysts
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

If we take the initial letter of an English word (which
sometimes represents the initial sound, but not always) and
place it at the end, we often get a different word having, of
course, very little to do with the original.  Sometimes the results
are amusing to those of us sufficiently stunted intellectually to
enjoy such nonsense.  It may not be abundantly clear why
anyone should indulge in this sort of tomfoolery, but in the
days when Pig Latin flourished, the first step in forming the
alloporc was, while essentially phonetic, a process similar to the
aberration being indulged in here.  A swinified *dice*, e.g., would
be something like *ice-day*.  One hesitates to write Pig Latin, for
it never achieved a kosher orthography.  People *ont-day itewray
ig-pay atin-lay*.  Unlike words in *Latina porcina*, primults
do not add an element; they merely put the first (*prim*-)
element last (-*ult*).  Protohyst is merely a Greek synonym.  They
are no respecters of phonetic shapes; the new orthographic
form—the spelling—is everything.  Thus the primult of *dice* is
*iced*, which preserves quite a lot of the phonetic content, while
the primult of *heart is earth*, which does violence to practically
everything but the r (assuming it is present in one's speech).
Some other primults of moderate interest include:

>drake: raked   
ebon: bone     
ether: there       
ewe: wee           
flea: leaf     
gelatin: elating   
height: eighth     
kin: ink       
low: owl           
malar: alarm       
mite: item  
plum: lump  
rave: aver       
ruse: user      
saddle: addles  
sharp: harps  
spew: pews      
tar: art       
thin: hint  
tough: ought  
trap: rapt  
wane: anew

The cheapest primults are those derived from words with
initial s, because that letter is so frequent, both initially and
finally, in English that we can find dozens of primults of such
words almost without effort, for example:

>scream: creams                    
screw: crews                      
scud: cuds                        
sewer: edges                      
sewer: ewers                      
shade: Hades (with obviously no respect for the integrity of *sh = s*)                sink: inks             
share: hares                      
sherd: herds           
ship: hips                        
shoe: hoes             
shook: hooks                      
shorn: horns           
shovel: hovels         
shunt: hunts           
skid: kids             
skill: kills           
slake: lakes           
slaughter: laughters   
slumber: lumbers       
smother: mothers       
spawn: pawn  
spill: pills  
spoke: pokes  
spun: puns  
sputter: putters  
stale: tales  
start: tarts  
stinker: tinkers  
strumpet: trumpets  
swaddle: waddles  
swallow: wallows  
sword: words

We could add to the list, but it is almost shamefully easy,
despite some titillating overtones.

Sometimes we can imagine a semantic link between a
word and its primultimate twist, but the connection is usually
far-fetched.  We may try to *cope* with *Opec*, and one may tire of
*stale tales*.  It would be pandering to *start tarts*.  The pub rarely
has a *sale* on *ales*.  Yet *evil* is not too different from *vile*, and
*scat* is a word for some *cats*.  A swallowed *plum* may produce a
*lump*.  Along the *Isar* I sometimes have seen a *sari*.  A *ramble*
may well be enjoyed by an *ambler*.  My hair resembles *sedge*
around the *edges*; on *top* I must *opt* for a smoother simile.  A
classical *shade* is assigned a spot in *Hades*, and by its *side*,
perhaps, is that of one slain on the *Ides*.  Cattle may be *shorn* of
their *horns*.  Don't *shoot* everything that *hoots*; a *low owl* may
be the victim.  There is *sparse* likelihood of a class that *parses*
these days.  A *smart* shopper could look for *marts* in *small*
malls.  It takes *spunk* to stand up to *punks*.  A *stumble* should be
avoided by one who *tumbles*.  Much wounding can be done by
the *sword* of *words*.

Stingy primults can be formed from petty words like *has,
(ash), the (het), hug (ugh!), sit (its), yam (Amy), two (wot)*, and
the like.  In rare cases a second primult can be formed, yielding
a sequence of three barely or boringly connected words:

>eon: one: neo      
Ida: Dai: aid      
Levi: evil: vile   
rave: aver: Vera   
sera (pl. of *serum*): eras: rase  
side: Ides: Desi  
spa: pas: asp       
stern: terns: Ernst (?)  
tea: eat: ate      
                                      
But in these there is considerable cheating with names, etc.  A
sequence of four was not found.

The first shall be last.  Perhaps only a *stinker tinkers* like
this with our sacred words.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*When Words Lose Their Meaning: Constitutions and Reconstitutions of Language, Character and Community*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780226895024/When-Words-Lose-Meaning-Constitutions-0226895025/plp)
James Boyd White, (The University of Chicago Press, 1984).

James Boyd White holds three positions at the University
of Michigan—professor of law and English as well as adjunct
professor of classical studies—and he combines all three disciplines
in this extremely interesting, if somewhat esoteric,
volume.  What he characterizes as &ldquo;a book of readings&rdquo; is
designed to be &ldquo;a way of reading, a set of conceptions and
questions and attitudes—a language of criticism, if you will—
that the reader can learn, if he [she] chooses, and put to work
in his [her] own life.&rdquo;  (Material in brackets supplied by this
enlightened reviewer.)  In other words, an eclectic how-to work
that will appeal to all those who, like myself, daily deal in
language as our primary substantive tool.

It was Thucydides who, during the chaos created among
Greek city states by the wearing Peloponnesian War, complained
bitterly that, because of the conflict, words themselves
had lost their meaning.  White, building on this ancient observation,
promises early on that he intends to demonstrate &ldquo;the
ways in which words came to have their meanings and to hold
or lose them and how they acquire new meanings, both in the
individual mind and in the world.&rdquo;  This is just another way of
saying that language is so inherently flexible that the same
words or phrases in different mouths can convey intended
meanings that are diametrically opposed to each other, very
much like Mark Twain's sectional preachers during the Civil
War who called upon the same God to grace their respective
armies with swift and glorious victory.

To demonstrate his bedrock premise of the essential
untrustworthiness of language, the author, by a painstaking
but, by no means, uninteresting, point by point analysis, takes
apart the poetry of the *Iliad*, Thucydides' History, Plato's
*Gorgias*, Swift's *Tale of a Tub*, Johnson's *Rambler Essays*, Jane
Austen's *Emma*, Burke's *Reflections on the Revolution in
France*, the American Declaration of Independence and Constitution,
and Chief Justice John Marshall's remarkable opinion in
*McCulloch v. Maryland*, the celebrated 1819 national bank
case.  The purpose behind the utilization of these widely
variegated resources is, putting it somewhat more earthbound
than does White, to illustrate that, in relying on language, we
are pinning our hopes and reasonable expectations on sand so
shifting that it will not support our collective weight.

However, *When Words Lose Their Meaning* raises infinitely
more questions than it answers, a fact that its author
freely acknowledges.  As he states in his *Afterword*, &ldquo;I express
the hope that this book has offered the reader a set of
experiences that can serve as the material of allusion and
reference, a ground on which to stand in looking at other texts,
including those of his and her [he has finally conceded that
females can read and write] own production.&rdquo;  But the rather
pedantic close encounters he enjoys with the selected texts of
his literary examples will hardly furnish the general reader with
any practical guide to the uncertainties, perversions, and
outright deceptions promoted by those who employ language to
reach a particular result or convey a desired impression.

Since, like White, I am a lawyer, I was most interested in
his last chapter, *Constituting a Culture of Argument*, which is
overoptimistically subtitled, *The Possibilities of American Law*.
In it, employing the same techniques applied to his earlier
analyses of the particular works of Homer, Swift, Austen,
Burke, &amp; Co., he picks apart the Declaration of Independence
with a minuteness and a fervor which, if there is indeed an
afterlife, will certainly have Thomas Jefferson whirling like a
dervish in his Virginia grave.  It will surprise many readers that
this document, which most of us have always regarded as a
heated call to arms, runs, according to White, by the tone of
much of its language, &ldquo;a temperature ... of ... nearly ...
zero.&rdquo;

Whenever Jefferson and his collaborators managed to
surmount their mildness and gentility and hinted that there lay
ahead text that would ring the tocsins and saddle the horses,
the good professor declares, they immediately drew back with
a phrase intended to mollify those who eschewed slogans that
made the heart beat and the blood flow faster.  For example, in
the Declaration's first sentence, the one beginning with the all
too familiar phrase, &ldquo;When in the course of human events,&rdquo; the
flamboyant reference to &ldquo;the separate and equal station to
which the Laws of Nature and Nature's God&rdquo; now entitled the
rebellious colonials is quickly followed by the temporizing
explanatory phrase, &ldquo;a decent respect to the opinions of
mankind requires that they should declare the causes which
impel them to the separation.&rdquo;  In Professor White's analysis,
this opening sentence &ldquo;simply 'declares' that certain 'causes'
have produced certain effects, and it does so with no more
passionate motive than 'a decent respect to the opinions of
mankind.' &rdquo;

While I found this type of verbal dissection fascinating to
read as well as to ponder, I did not sense it to be much more
than stimulating table talk.  The autopsy of a work of art—and
the Declaration certainly qualifies as one—completely sublimates
its overall purpose and effect and reduces it to nothing
more than a collection of vulnerable ingredients.  As I read on, I
kept being reminded of e. e. cummings' wholly appropriate
couplet:

>as long as you and I have lips to kiss and sing with
who cares if some one-eyed son-of-a-bitch invents an
instrument to measure spring with

The Declaration was conceived as a supremely political document,
intended to provide a legal justification for revolution,
inspire those who would have to fight it, and win as many
supporters, foreign and domestic, as possible in the difficult
days that undoubtedly lay ahead.

Of course, White is not oblivious to the needs which the
Declaration served.  While describing what he calls the document's
&ldquo;unstable constitution,&rdquo; he acknowledges that &ldquo;[I]t
creates in its ideal reader a resolve based on a sense of common
identity, on the justice of the cause, and on necessity, and it
does this enormously well.&rdquo;  Then, one might ask, of what
earthly value was it to engage in the laboratory exercise of
looking at every word and phrase through the semanticist's
superpowered microscope?  Why not accept the instrument for
what it so obviously was, an explanation of why revolution was
the only possible course for the colonists and a stimulus to risk
life and limb to make it a successful one?

As one who spends a great deal of his waking time writing
briefs or memoranda for lower and appellate courts, treatises
which are designed to move those to whom they are addressed
to my clients' points of view, I am extremely sensitive to many
of the author's pungent observations on the use and effect of
language.  My criticism, if indeed my remarks reach that
station, is that I do not believe that Professor White can fulfill
the promise he makes to his prospective readers that his &ldquo;book
of readings&rdquo; can be &ldquo;put to work&rdquo; in their own lives.  That he
will tickle and delight them is a given, but that he has created a
useful tool with which to analyze the written (or spoken) word,
I am not prepared to say.  I will leave, as all reviewers, in the
final analysis, must, the ultimate judgment to those who come
to his book with their own degree of expectations.  All that I
can add is that I enjoyed it as one enjoys a completed house,
but I would hardly regard it as capable of teaching me to wield
the hammer, the saw, and the lathe necessary to bring the full
edifice into being.  To paraphrase one who rarely minced his
words, if this be reason, make the most of it.

William M. Kunstler

*Vice-President*

*Center for Constitutional Rights*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Power of Little Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780910187022/Power-Little-Words-Ideas-Improve-0910187029/plp)
John L. Beckley, (Economics Press, 1984), 128pp.

&ldquo;Power&rdquo; is right.  &ldquo;Economics&rdquo; may be the misnomer of
the year for a publisher pricing a book of about 35,000 words
at fifteen dollars: that is heavy going even for these days.

But my first suspicions were aroused by the author's first
words (in the foreword, titled &ldquo;Hello!&rdquo;): &ldquo;This is not a book for
scholars.&rdquo;  He seems to have got it wrong from the start, for if
there is any group of writers (aside from the illiterati who
produce much of the computer documentation these days) who
are in dire need of instruction on the simplification of their
writing, it is scholars.  There are always exceptions, of course,
but, as a group, scholars, whose main function must be to
interpret some facet of the world's myriad phenomena into
terms that others can understand, seem to be extraordinarily
successful at the exact opposite—obfuscation—and a few lessons
in logic, in the straightforward clarification of ideas, and in
basic language skills in expository writing ought to be a
prerequisite for all academic degrees, especially the advanced
degrees awarded to those who are likely to be the ones
responsible for explaining the universe to others.

Beckley, who turns out to be the founder of the Economics
Press, is not your man, I'm afraid.  On pages 20 and 21, for
starters, he presents two passages of writing, the first
&ldquo;from an editorial that appeared in a business magazine,&rdquo; the
second, his rewritten version &ldquo;using somewhat simpler
wordage&rdquo;:

>&ldquo;This has been a time of grand visions for the economy—some optimistic,
some pessimistic.  We have heard proposals for 'reindustrialization.'  We 
have been told about 
structural shifts that are 
carrying us along to a 
service economy.  We have 
heard of the death of basic 
industries—and of their 
renaissance, 
&ldquo;Whatever school of 
thought we embrace, we 
can be misled about the 
essential truth of what is 
going on.  Sweeping visions 
of what is happening tend 
to make us think that 
mystical laws of economics 
will shape the days 
ahead—that we should wait 
to see what is in store for 
us.         
&ldquo;This has also been a 
time of criticism of   
American management, 
with much of the criticism 
coming from within its 
own ranks.  Healthy self- 
analysis can be 
constructive.  But, if we 
wallow in self-blame, the 
effort can be destructive to 
individual companies and 
to the nation.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;This has been a time
of grand predictions for
business—some good, some
bad.  Some people propose
rebuilding our basic
industries.  Others forecast
a shift in emphasis from
manufacturing products to
delivering services-
computer and communications services
for example.  We hear that
basic industries are dying—
then others report they're
reviving.
&ldquo;Whatever school of
thought we embrace, we
can easily be misled.
Sweeping predictions of
what will happen tend to
make us think that
mystical laws of economics
are shaping the days
ahead.  All we need do is
wait and watch it take
place.
&ldquo;American management
has been criticized, with
much of the criticism
coming from its own
ranks.  That's not bad—it's
good.  But enough is
enough.  If we wallow in
self-criticism, it can be bad
for individual companies
and the country as well.&rdquo;

The curious thing about the rewritten version is that
although it is slightly different from the original, it isn't simpler,
and Beckley has done nothing that I can see to improve it.  In
fact, he has changed the tenses of the verbs to detract from the
immediacy of the original message (&ldquo;what will happen&rdquo; for
&ldquo;what is happening&rdquo;), has changed some words for the worse
(substituting &ldquo;predictions&rdquo; for &ldquo;visions&rdquo;), and has distorted the
sense of the original writer's words (changing &ldquo;we should wait
to see what is in store for us&rdquo; to &ldquo;we need to wait and watch it
take place&rdquo;).  The reader can make his own comparisons.

But the book is a waste of time for other reasons.  It would
take a lot of persuading to convince me that people can learn
to write simply and clearly without being subjected to a
training program of some concentration over a period of (at
least) several months; they should be required to write regularly
thousands of words a week which would be edited by
someone who knows not only what he is doing but how to
teach it to others.  There is no shortcut to learning how to write
clearly (let alone well, much less artistically); it cannot be
learned from a book of any kind, and anyone who suggests that
an aspiring writer can take a pill one day and wake up the
following morning knowing how to write well is perpetrating a
fraud.  Another requirement of learning how to write is learning
how to read, how to read critically, and how to understand.
There may be some who are capable of writing well with little
training, but they are geniuses, and we know how few of them
there are.

*Laurence Urdang*

## From A to Zygoste for Yexing Readers
*Louis Phillips, New York City*

Who compiled the first English language dictionary?  The
answer to that question is open to considerable dispute.
Some standard reference works give the nod to Nathan Bailey
who published his dictionary in 1721.  I, however, harbor
considerable fondness for Henry Cockeram who published his
English dictionary in 1623.  The title page of that work at least
uses the words &ldquo;English Dictionarie,&rdquo; and the alphabetical
listing of words contains definitions of considerable charm.  The
title page of the 1623 edition reads:

>The English Dictionarie, or Interpreter of hard English
Words—Enabling as well Ladies and Gentlewomen,
young Schollers, Clarkes, Merchants, and also Strangers
of any nation to the Understanding of the more difficult
authors already printed in our language, and the
more speedy attaining of an elegant perfection of the
English tongue, both in reading, speaking, and writing.
Being a collection of the choisest words contained in
the Table Alphabeticall and English Expositor, and of
some thousands of words never published by any
heretofor
>
>By H. C. Gent.

Now what more from a dictionary can any reader want?  Henry
Cockeram designed his work to be published in three volumes.
As he tells us in &ldquo;A Premonition from the Author to the
Reader,&rdquo;

>First the method is plaine and easie, being alphabetically,
by which the capacity of the meanest may soon
be inlightened.  The first Booke hath the choisest words
themselves now in use, wherewith our language is
inriched and become so copious, to which words the
common sense is annexed.  The second Booke contains
the vulgar words, which whensoever any desirous of a
more curious explanation by a more refined and elegant
speech shall looke into, he shall there receive the exact
and ample word to expresse the same: Wherein by the
way let me pray thee to observe that I have also
inserted (as occasion served) even the *mocke-words*
which are ridiculously used in our language, that those
who desire a generality of knowledge may not bee
ignorant of the sense, even of the *fustian termes*, used
by too many who study rather to bee heard speake,
than to understand themselves.  The last Booke is a
recitall of severall persons, Gods and Goddesses, Giants
and Devils, Monsters and Serpents, Birds and Beasts,
Rivers, Fishes, Herbs, Stones, Trees, and the like, to
the intent that the diligent learner may not pretend the
defect of any helpe which may informe his discourse or
practice.

In one sense, Book Three of Cockeram's work is the great-great
granddaddy of *The Dictionary of Phrase and Fable* by the
Reverend E. Cobham Brewer, LL.D.

We may not know much about the true character of the
Gentleman Cockeram, but there is no doubt that he was a true
lover of the English language—and of its quirks and peculiarities.
And, if his &ldquo;Premonition to the Reader,&rdquo; is a typical
example of the man's style, we can also feel a lively and witty
mind at work.  In addition, he was certainly not given to any
false modesty, for the opening pages of his work contain a
number of verses praising himself.  Nicholas Smith's poem (one
line short of being a sonnet), wherein the first letters of each
line spell out (nearly) HENRIE COCKERAM, provides a choice
example of a poet unraveling, in the labyrinth of fustian
diction, a thick clew of vocabulary:

>To his very good friend, Master *Henry Cockeram*, on
his Vocabulary
>
>H e whose seife love, or too ambitious spirit,  
>E nvies or carpes at this thy Muses action,  
>N ere let him live, or of a Muse once merit  
>R egard or fame, but die in his detraction,  
>I rrevocably plagu'd with Zoilan spight,  
>E re he once taste of Hellicons delight.  
>Could I, oh could I quintessence my skill,  
>O r with Elixir truly alcumize,  
>K nowledge with learning should instruct my quill  
>Effectually to praise thy Muses guise,  
>Re-felling all the criticall disasters,  
>A mong some captious, yet wise seeming masters,  
>Made by her curious eye, their owne distasters.  
>NICHOLAS SMITH,  
>*Eques Auratus Encomiastes Posthumus*.

The *Dictionary* itself is very rare and very difficult to
locate, but Book One is a delight for those readers in search of
out-of-the way, obsolete, quirky and playful terms.  One rainy
afternoon, when I should have been cleaning out my closet, I
decided to compile a list of choice morsels from Cockeram's
book.  Definitions affixed to some of the more common words
may surprise you, but, in any case, here are a few gleanings
from 1623 to enliven your next conversation or your next
Scrabble&trade; game—whichever comes first.

*aconitum*  A poysonous herbe whereon *Cerebus* spued out
his poyson when he was dragd out of Hell by Hercules.

*acromicke*  Having long hair.

*adolescenturate*  To play the boy, or foole.

*bandle*  An Irish measure of two foot in length.

*bath*  Ten Pottles in liquor.

*brachilogies*  Short speeches.

*caligation*  Dimness of sight.

*callette*  A lewd woman.

*curiositie* More diligence than needs.

*cyrne*  A goblet to drink wine in.

*daffe*  A coward.

*danist*  A usurer.

*deboyst fellow*  A lewd scum of the earth.

*definition*  A declaration what a thing is.

*dicker*  Ten hides of leather.

*didinie*  Twins.

*effacinate*  To bewitch.

*elephancie*  Leprosie.

*ephi*  A measure containing five pecks.

*etymologie*  The true exposition of a word.

*fastigate*  To sharpen a thing upward.

*fenchmoneth*  A Moneth (*month*) wherein Does doe Fawne.

>It begins about the Ninth of June, and continueth untill
the Ninth of July, in which time it is not lawfull to hunt in
any forrest without paying fees: which fee, for a paire of
Wheeles is foure pence, and for Paniers two pence, which
fee being once paid they may for that season freely passe.

*flammigerate*  To cast out flames.

*frondosous*  Full of leaves.

*galactopoton*  One that still drinks milk.

*glyciamerides*  Dainty meats.

*gymnasticke*  A teacher of the wrastling sciences.

*haberdepoise*  A pound weight of sixteen ounces.

*hamkin*  A pudding made upon a shoulder of mutton, all
the flesh being first taken off.

*hide of land*  Some say it is one hundred acres.

*hippoboton*  A feeder of Horses.

*hirquiticke*  One part of fourteene yeeres of age, beginning
to bee moved with Venus delights.

*ideall*  A proper man.

*imberbiche*  Without a beard.

*intercourse*  Passing or sending one to another.

*interlucate*  To cut boughs.

*jewife*  A gallows or gibbet.

*jub*  A bottle.

*juorie*  The Elephant's tooth.

*kab*  Three Wine quarts.

*karos*  A drowsie disease in the head.

*kintall*  A hundred weight.

*lachanaopoll*  Which selleth herbs, or herb market.

*lesses*  Dung of some ravenous beast, wolfe, or bear.

*lingle*  A shooe-makers threed.

*lurdein*  A clowne.

*lymphat*  To make mad.

*marches*  Bounds lying betweene two countries.

*Marcian-moneth*  The moneth of March.

*massell*  To stammer.

*mastuprate*  Dishonestly to touch one's privities.

*monologie*  A long tale of little worth.

*mustricle*  A shooe-maker's Last.

*notice*  Knowledge.

*noverca*  A mother-in-law.

*novercall*  Belonging to a step-mother.

*nullifidean*  One of no account or religion.

*obambulate*  To walke abroad.

*option*  Wishing.

*ovatike season*  The time when Hens lay.

*pact*  A bargain.

*pactolean sands*  Golden sands.

*phlebotomie*  Blood-letting.

*pioner*  An underminer in an armie.

*pupillate*  To cry like a peacock.

*pytillise*  To go on tiptoe.

*Quintilian moneth*  The moneth of July.

*racenation*  Gathering of grapes.

*scut*  The taile of a hare or Conny.

*seminairie*  A nurserie.

*sorbition*  A sipping often.

*sugillate*  To beat blacke and blew.

*synopsie*  The full view of a thing.

*tentipels*  Shooes with iron soles.

*thrill*  One that has no nose.

*thummen*  Perfection.

*uberate*  To give suck, to fatten with the brest.

*ultion*  Revenge.

*undosous*  Full of surges and waves.

*urinate*  To dive or swimme under water.

*vacacitie*  Manliness.

*vacation*  Emptinesse, a ceasing from labour.

*wanze*  To perish, to decay.

*waife*  Goods that a felon flying, leaveth for haste behind
him, which are commonly forfeit as the Lord of the soile,
if the right owner be not knowne.

*Xanticall moneth*  The moneth of April.

*yexing*  Sobbing.

*zoograph*  Any-one that painteth beasts.

*zygoste*  One that is appointed to see to weights, a Clarke of
the Market.

## Paring Pairs No. 15

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must he
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  One answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will he published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Hack writer keeps his coins in a row.  
(b). Money all tied up in this?  
(c). Pile on the whip?  
(d). Crazy about Ringo's playmates?  
(e). Singing Nags?  
(f). Helper on Old West carriage.  
(g). Coinvestment in a low dive.  
(h). New England mohel.  
(i). Employ Mehitabel's friend in the ranks.  
(j). Serious times.  
(k). Golden journey?  
(l). Donate kisses.  
(m). Important event for yachtsmen and lions.  
(n). Where British skiagraphs are kept.  
(o). Lucia's &ldquo;Mad Scene&rdquo;?  
(p). Siege perilous.  
(q). Tiny chivalrous man is feeble but never on Sunday-or Saturday.  
(r). Cushion litigation.  
(s). Cobbler-composer.  
(t). Cockney drink sends you into orbit.  
(u). Where funambulists practice.  
(v). This can't hold much.  
(w). Did Miss Piggy transvect this disease?  
(x). Chinese Cat.  
(y). Used car tester.  
(z). An Olympian bribe?  

(1). Aligner.  
(2). Archy.  
(3). Ball.  
(4). Betel.  
(5). Box.  
(6). By.  
(7). Cabinet.  
(8). Case.  
(9). Cat.  
(10). Chair.  
(11). Clipper.  
(12). Daze.  
(13). Dog.  
(14). Drama.  
(15). Electric.  
(16). Eye.  
(17). Flew.   
(18). Fund.  
(19). Guilt.  
(20). Hand.  
(21). Hire.  
(22). Horse.  
(23). Joint.  
(24). Jove.  
(25). Kicker.  
(26). Knight.  
(27). Lip.  
(28). Man.  
(29). Mane.  
(30). Nap.  
(31). Nut.  
(32). Opera.  
(33). Peiping.  
(34). Penny.  
(35). Pillow.  
(36). Psycho.  
(37). Roam.  
(38). Rope.  
(39). Sail.  
(40). Sand.  
(41). Service.  
(42). Shadow.  
(43). Shoe.  
(44). Stage.  
(45). Swine.  
(46). Tire.  
(47). Tom.  
(48). Trip.  
(49). Trussed.  
(50). Venture.  
(51). Walk.  
(52). Week.  
(53). Yankee.


### CORRIGENDA

The imp of the perverse figured noticeably in Paring Pairs
No. 13: clues (i) and (o) were wrong (from another puzzle), but
the answers (22, 36) and (43, 25) were &ldquo;correct&rdquo;—that is, the
clues for which the answers were given did not appear.  At least
one reader, Jinny Jones, figured it all out anyway and got the
correct answer, *Jovial*.  We apologize to those who were bamboozled,
and we promise (to try) never to do that again.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 14

(a). Those waiting to swim?  (36,9) Pool Cue.  
(b). &Eacute;t&eacute;.  (16,1) French Bean.  
(c). Basic weapon.  (42,18) Staple Gun.  
(d). Caused Trojan War and no end of trouble.  (20,17) Helen Gone.  
(e). Interdigitator.  (19,50) Hand Weaver.  
(f). Grand, central illness.  (46,10) Terminal Disease.  
(g). He is not an oinophile.  Pourquoi Pas?  (51,30) Why No.  
(h). Valet dresses lucky Frenchman.  (40,35) Robes Pierre.  
(i). Fortuneteller at *The Times*.  (33,38) Paper Prophet.  
(j). Finis.  (5,12) Book End.  
(k). Mission of the UN.  (34,53) Piece Work.  
(l). Seat monitor filled with ennui.  (6,7) Bored Chairman.  
(m). Tattooed message.  (4,13) Body English.  
(n). Concubine's part.  (2,41) Bed Roll.   
(o). Navajo bottle.  (23,14) Indian File.  
(p). Excessively lubricous French city.  (48,26) Too Loose.  
(q). Book peddler.  (8,37) Coal Porter.  
(r). Silly fool approaching Macbeth's castle.  (11,22) Dunce Inane.  
(s). What Robin Hood did.  (27,28) Made Marian.  
(t). Annoying Peeping Tom.  (52,32) Window Pain.  
(u). Heavy soup.  (31,47) One Ton.  
(v). Sanguine South Pacific betel-chewer?  (3,29) Bloody Mary.  
(w). Exup&eacute;ry novel about heroic departure?  (24,15) Knight Flight.  
(x). Leg.  (43,44) Stocking Stuffer.  
(y). Noise at Wimbledon.  (45,39) Tennis Racket.  
(z). Bill sings well.  (21,49) In Voice.  

The correct answer is (25) Loaf.  The solutions are given
below.  The winner of No. 14 was Edward McHugh, Fitchburg,
Massachusetts.

## Paring Pairs Prizes

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship,*
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or &pound;18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI*; or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box 199,
Aylesbury, Bucks, HP20 ITQ England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer.  Please use a postcard.*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Friday night, shots were fired at two officers in Portsmouth,
Va., more than 100 miles away....&rdquo;  [From the *Los
Angeles Times*, June 2, 1984, Part 1,3. Submitted by Lani
Oliveira, Whittier, California.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Trespasser makes tin alloy less refined (8)  
2\. Stagger, even tear, to weaken (8)  
3\.  Old portico stands after Taos quake (4)  
4\.  No place for Cain in Pennsylvania? (12)  
5\.  Mountain chain quake is rare (6)  
6\.  Turning trash by giant recycling (8)  
7\.  Animate, in elven dances (7)  
8\.  Despair transformed, showed ambition (7)  
9\.  Valuables often found under &ldquo;X&rdquo;? (8)  
10\. Sun god-ruler doing garden chore (6)  
11\. Like Luigi's broken boat?  (You can't attack it) (12)  
12\. Wrinkled nose indicates anti votes (4)  
13\. Cat turns, I turn silent (8)  
14\. Each's companion, is all (5,3)

**Down**

2\. Marking system has notion at heart (8)  
3\. A Paris pearl's out for new ratings (12)  
4\. Control made into chaos (8)  
5\. Congressman exposes fixes (7)  
6\. Copper takes in mob leader as unifying agent (6)  
7\. Medics show a bit of Christmas happiness (4)  
8\. Disturbed when bell sounded in middle of act (8)  
12\. Dad fool Ford?  That'd be revolutionary (7,5)  
15\. Runs test oddly, but gives confidently (8)  
17\. SCRAWL on tiles for 11 points—game? (8)  
18\. Scientist was a mug in Munich (8)  
19\. Direct route from Belgrade outskirts, east to border (7)  
21\. Alpha Centauran usually has heavenly body in orbit (6)  
24\. Cunning leader leaves parade (4)  

**Across**

1\. B-e.g.-un.  
4\. HOLLYWOOD.  
9\. Hope chest.  
10\. NASAL.  
11\. As-sent.  
12\. ARMENi-an.  
14\. Illuminate.  
16\. Fa-me.  
19\. ChicaGO-AT.  
20\. DE-e-R-s-LA-ye-R.  
22\. U-n-S-ta-BLE.  
23\. ESCAPE.  
26\. liaN-a.  
27\. Confide-nt.  
28\. Take issue.  
29\. SADLY.  

**Down**

1\. Be-head-ing.  
2\. GAPES.  
3\. Nick name.  
4\. Hied.  
5\. LITERATURE.  
6\. Yankee.  
7\. O-b-STINAC-y.  
8\. Dylan.  
13\. INTE-r-L-ock-S.  
15\. Loan shark.  
17\. Ear-NEST-ly.  
18\. E-las-TI-cs.  
21\. Hawaii.  
22\. Un-lit.  
24\. A.M.-end.  
25\. K-nee.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v11n2_Autumn_1984)