--- 
title: "VOL XII, No 1 [Summer, 1985]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Brand New Eponyms
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

From Amelia Jenks Bloomer and the puffy ladies' drawers
she helped to popularize to Rabelais' Gargantua and his
gargantuan appetite, from King Tantalus and his tantalizing
punishment to the explosive bikini bathing suit, names of
people and places, both real and imaginary, are continually
becoming enshrined in our everyday vocabulary.  The pervasive
and persuasive influence of mass marketing and advertising has
speeded up this process, and the manufacture of common
nouns and verbs from trademarks and brand names[^a1]
has become a burgeoning source of new words in our language.

From morning until bedtime, much that we eat, drink,
see, hear, touch, and wear is likely to bear a trademark.  Each
year, about 50,000 trademark applications are filed with the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, and almost half a million
marks are kept actively registered.  These figures indicate how
large a role trademarks play in our society.  When a product
achieves wide popular appeal, its trademark may become a
lower-case generic word for all products of its type.  One might
think that manufacturers would be flattered when their creations
achieve such universal fame.  On the contrary, companies
will spend hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees to
protect their marks from falling into the clutches of competitors.
&ldquo;The value of a trademark to a company is tremendous,&rdquo;
maintains Chicago corporation lawyer Jerome Gilson.  &ldquo;Some of
the trademarks in the U.S., such as Coca-Cola, Kleenex, and
Exxon, are undoubtedly worth millions to their owners.  These
trademarks represent the company more than any of its other
assets.&rdquo;

Here is an alphabetical listing of more than forty product
names that have become somewhat generic but that have
survived legal onslaughts and are still registered.  Look on
packages containing these products, and you'll still see a
symbol of their registered status, such as *TM* or &reg;, following
each mark:

>*Baggies*          
*Band-Aid*         
*Brillo Pads*      
*BVDs*             
*Chap Stick*       
*Coca-Cola/Coke*   
*Cuisinart*        
*Dictaphone*       
*Dixie Cups*       
*Fig Newtons*      
*Frigidaire*       
*Frisbee*          
*Hi-Liter*         
*Jeep*             
*Jell-O*           
*Jockey Shorts*   
*Kleenex*         
*Ko-Rec-Type*     
*Kodak*           
*Levi's*          
*Life Savers*     
*Mack (truck)*    
*Magic Marker*    
*Miltown*         
*Novocain*        
*Ping-Pong*       
*Polaroid*        
*Pop Tarts*       
*Popsicle*        
*Pyrex*           
*Q-Tips*  
*Sanforized*  
*Sanka*  
*Scotch (tape)*  
*Sheetrock*  
*Simoniz*  
*Slim Jim*  
*Styrofoam*  
*Technicolor*  
*TV Dinners*  
*Vaseline*  
*Walkman*  
*Wiffle Ball*  
*X-Acto Knife*  
*Xerox*

Do you talk or write about &ldquo;xeroxing&rdquo; a document no
matter what machine you use to do the photocopying?  Beware:
anyone who lower-cases *Xerox* runs the risk of hearing from the
Xerox Corporation, which spends $100,000 a year to persuade
the public not to say or write *xerox* when they mean &ldquo;to
photocopy&rdquo; or &ldquo;a photocopy.&rdquo;  The Johnson & Johnson Company
writes admonishing letters to any periodical that prints
expressions like &ldquo;band-aid diplomacy&rdquo; or &ldquo;band-aid economics.&rdquo;
Although *Band-Aid* has come to be used for any temporary
protective measure, it is a registered trademark and, by
law, should be capitalized.  And if you describe any plastic
flying disk as a frisbee, you could get whammed by the Wham-O
Manufacturing Company of San Gabriel, California.  The
idea for the plastic saucers came from the aerodynamic pie tins
once made by the Frisbie Bakery in Bridgeport, Connecticut,
and the name *Frisbee* remains a registered asset.

Lawyer Gilson maintains, &ldquo;If all Coca-Cola's bottling
plants burned to the ground tomorrow, the company could
walk into any bank in the country and raise enough money to
rebuild completely, just on the strength of its name.&rdquo;  Indeed,
for decades the Coca-Cola Company has been playing legal
hardball to protect its name.  While the courts have allowed
other purveyors of soft drinks to use the name *Cola* because it
is descriptive of the product, the Supreme Court decided in
1930 that the combination *Coca-Cola* and the clipped form
*Coke* are the exclusive property of the company.  In its most
celebrated victory, in 1976, Coca-Cola won an injunction
against Howard Johnson's chain of nine hundred restaurants
for serving HoJo Cola in place of Coke without informing
customers who asked for Coca-Cola by name.

It is ironic that the more successful a product, the more
likely it is that its trademark will become generic and lose its
privileged status as a result of lawsuits by competitors.  Faced
with such a catch-22 possibility, companies must protect and
care for their trademarks or they will be lost.  Suggested tools in
a typical trademark protection kit include:

>&bull; Avoid descriptive names.  At one extreme, generic names
like *hamburger* and *TV repair* are totally descriptive and
useless as trademarks.  At the other extreme, purely arbitrary
or fanciful terms such as *Big Mac* and *Fiesta* make
strong trademarks because they are non-generic.  Between
the two extremes, terms that merely suggest a favorable
aspect of the product can be effective.  Well known examples
are *Rabbit, Whopper*, and *Ultra-Bright*.
>
>&bull; Trademarks should be distinguished in print from other
words: ARRID cream deodorant, &ldquo;Arrid&rdquo; cream deodorant,
or (minimally) Arrid cream deodorant.
>
>&bull; Trademarks should be followed by a notice of their status
and accompanied by the generic name for the product
they identify; BAND-AID&reg; brand adhesive bandages,
LEVI'S&reg; jeans and sportwear.
>
>&bull; Trademarks are always proper adjectives and should
never be used as verbs or common descriptive adjectives.
Avoid *xerox the report* or *simoniz* the car.

Failure to follow such guidelines has resulted in trademark
litigation and loss of invaluable marks.  The name *Zipper*, for
example, was coined by the B. F. Goodrich Company in 1913
as the brand name for its slide fastener on overshoes.  After
numerous bouts in court, the company retained its right to use
the name on footwear, but to what avail?  Zippers are everywhere,
and *zipper*, now lower-cased, belongs to us all.  Aspirin,
too, was once a brand name, but in 1921 the Bayer Company
was deprived of its exclusive rights to the name.  In his classic
opinion, Judge Learned Hand stated that *aspirin* had become
descriptive for the product itself and that consumers do not call
the tablet by its chemical name, &ldquo;acetyl salicylic acid.&rdquo;

As a result of other court judgments, the exclusive rights
to *thermos, escalator, cellophane*, and *yo-yo* slipped away from
the King Seely, Otis Elevator, E.I. Dupont, and F. Duncan
companies, respectively.  And within the past few years, the
Miller Brewing Company has had to relinquish control of the
word *Lite* on low-calorie beer, Parker Brothers has lost its
monopoly on the name *Monopoly*, and the Nestl&eacute; Company has
had to forfeit its exclusive use of the words *Toll House*.

The same fate has befallen other former brand names,
such as: *brassiere* (I'm not putting you on!), *celluloid, corn
flakes, kerosene, lanolin, linoleum, linotype, milk of magnesia,
mimeograph, raisin bran*, and *shredded wheat*.  These words
have made such a successful journey from upper-case brand
name to lower-case noun that it is difficult to believe that they
were ever &ldquo;owned&rdquo; by a particular company.  As more and
more brand names become common descriptive terms, rather
than labels that distinguish particular products, business will
increasingly leave its (trade) mark on our all-consuming American
language.

***

[^a1]: &ldquo;A *trademark* is a word, name, symbol, or device, or a combination of
them, used by a manufacturer or merchant to identify his goods and
distinguish them from others.  Trademarks include *brand names* identifying
goods (&ldquo;Pepsi-Cola&rdquo; for a soft drink), *service marks* identifying
services (&ldquo;The Four Seasons&rdquo; for a restaurant service), *certification
marks* identifying goods or services meeting certain qualifications
(&ldquo;UL&rdquo; for appliances meeting the safety standards of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc.), and *collective marks* identifying goods, services, or
members of a collective organization (&ldquo;AFL-CIO&rdquo; for union locals).&rdquo;— The United States Trademark Association.  Since the last three types of
marks seldom become eponymous, this article will concentrate on
trademarks identifying products, although the same legal principles
generally apply to all these terms.

## In the Name of the Pope
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York City*

In 1978 the Roman Catholic Church had three popes:
Paul VI, John Paul I, and John Paul II.  On August 26,
Albino Cardinal Luciani, was selected to fill the vacancy
caused by the death of Pope Paul VI, and, to the astonishment
of all, he adopted a double name.  There was another
departure from custom: to the name he chose he added *I*,
'the First,' although it was not customary for the first user of
a name to add the ordinal.  But this was a rather minor variance;
the major deviation was the double name, but Luciani
had reasons for both the name and the ordinal.

The pope is known by many names, since each country
translates his name into its own language.  John Paul II is
Giovanni Paolo II in Italy, Jean Paul II in France and
French Canada, and Juan Pablo II in Spain and Spanish
America.  He has but one official name, however, and that is
his name in Latin.  The name chosen by Albino Luciani in
August, 1978, was *Ioannes Paulus Primus*; when asked why,
he spoke of his admiration for Pope John XXIII, adding
&ldquo;and Pope Paul made me a cardinal.&rdquo;

In political terms, we might describe Pope John XXIII
as a liberal, and Paul as a conservative, somewhat to the
right of center.  Cardinal Luciani clearly leaned toward
John's views.  If we look closely at the Latin name he chose,
we find a play on words, for although Paulus is a name of
great religious importance, it is also an adjective meaning
'small.'

And now a great light dawns.  The modest man who
became pope in August 1978 (and died less than five weeks
later) had called himself 'Little John the First', because,
although he hoped to follow in the footsteps of his great predecessor,
John XXIII, he did not pretend to be his equal.
Furthermore, by adding &ldquo;the First,&rdquo; he was expressing the
hope that later popes would also follow the same liberal
line.

In the name of Pope John Paul I, therefore, we find a
whole philosophy and theology.  But even though his successor
did indeed choose the same name, John Paul II does not
appear to have chosen the same philosophy.

## Eccentricity in English Lexicography
*Elmer Suderman, Gustavus Adolphus College*

From the beginning of English lexicography the craft
has been serious, often pedantic.  The first dictionary
in the form in which we know them today, Robert Cawdrey's
*A Table Alphabeticall of Hard Usuall English Words*,
published in 1604, is solemn and brief, defining about 2,500
words.  Cawdrey evidently didn't think of either *lexicography*
or *lexicographer* as hard words, for he defines neither.
But then, since the *OED* has as its first citation for *lexicographer*
as 1658 and for *lexicography* as 1680, one could hardly
expect him to define a word which was not yet in wide use.

He must, however, have had some indication that such
a word would come into the language because *lethargie*,
which would have come just before *lexicographer*, is defined
as &ldquo;a drowsie and forgetfull disease,&rdquo; and *leuell*, meaning
&ldquo;right and straight,&rdquo; would immediately have followed.  I'm
sure Cawdrey didn't deliberately omit *lexicography*, because
he knew that the disease which makes us drowsy and forgetful
is common to both lexicographers and the rest of us in
the use of words and that we often assume that dictionaries
are *leuell*, that is, &ldquo;right and straight,&rdquo; or correct and
authoritative.  A good example of our right and straight attitude
is evident in John Wesley, if he was indeed the author
of *The Complete English Dictionary Explaining Most of
those Hard Words which are Found in the Best English
Writers* (1753), who assures us that his dictionary, &ldquo;by a
Lover of Good English and Common Sense,&rdquo; is both right
and straight.  It is, he thinks, &ldquo;the best English dictionary in
the world.&rdquo;  Henry Cockeram's *English Dictionarie*, published
130 years earlier (1623) makes a similar claim: &ldquo;What
any before me in this kind have begun, I have not only fully
finished but thoroughly perfected.&rdquo;  Lexicographers were not
modest, either in the seventeenth or eighteenth century;
they were very sure that they were right.

And they were serious.  They were interested in a practical,
correct, definitive, and usable tool where the reader
would be able to find, in Cawdrey's self-assured words, &ldquo;the
true writing, and understanding of hard, usuall English
wordes, borrowed from the Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, or
French, Etc.  With the interpretation thereof by plaine English
words, gathered for the benefit & help of Ladies, Gentlewomen,
or any other unskilfull persons.  Whereby they
may the more easilie and better understand many hard English
wordes, which they shall heare or read in Scriptures,
Sermons, or elsewhere, and also be made able to use the
same aptly themselves.&rdquo;

So much for Cawdrey's title page, or a part of it.  It is
not brief, but the definitions are.  Some are defined in one,
two, or three words.  *Literature* is &ldquo;learning.&rdquo; *Lumber* is
defined, correctly enough for that time, as &ldquo;old stuffe,&rdquo;
*malidie* as &ldquo;disease,&rdquo; *mutation* as &ldquo;change,&rdquo; a *baud* as a
&ldquo;whore,&rdquo; and *driblets* as &ldquo;small debts.&rdquo;  His two-liners are
limited mostly to words like *libertine* (&ldquo;loose in religion, one
that thinks he may doe what he liketh&rdquo;), *luxurious* (&ldquo;riotous,
and excessive in pleasure and wantonesse&rdquo;).  *Theology* is
&ldquo;diuinitie, the science of liuing blessedly for euer,&rdquo; and a
*hipocrite* is &ldquo;such a one as in his outward apparrell,
countenaunce, and behauior, pretendeth to be another man,
then he is indeede, or a deceiuer.&rdquo;

Cawdrey's method is not much different from that
exhibited by the early American dictionaries.  Cawdrey
describes an *abricot* as &ldquo;a kind of fruit&rdquo; which, though it
fails to distinguish it from other fruits, is nevertheless not
much different from Noah Webster's definition in his *A
Compendious Dictionary of the English Language* (1806) in
which *apricot* is defined as &ldquo;a fine kind of stone fruit.&rdquo;  Webster
further defined *literature* as &ldquo;learning, reading, skill in
letters or books,&rdquo; and grammar, which Cawdrey doesn't
define at all, as &ldquo;the science of writing correctly.&rdquo;  Cawdrey
does make us smile now and then, particularly when he
spells *progresse* as *grogresse* and *vicinitie* as *virinitie*; but
such misprints were not deliberate or intended to be humorous
or entertain the reader.

Early lexicographers were often capricious.  What seems
far-fetched and therefore titillates us today was not so then.
Thomas Blont in *Glossographia or a Dictionary Interpreting
All Such Hard Words whether Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian,
Spanish, French, Teutonich, Belgick, British* or *Saxon
as are now Used in our Refined English Tongue* (London:
1656) had no intention of being ridiculous in defining *Hony-Moon*
as &ldquo;applied to those married persons that love well at
first and decline in affection afterwards.  It is hony now, but
it will change as the moon.&rdquo;  Blont further describes, quite
seriously, a ventriloquist as &ldquo;one that has an evil spirit
speaking in his belly, or one that by use and practice can
speak, as it were, out of his belly not moving his lips.&rdquo;

Edward Phillips's humor is not deliberate but based on
ignorance.  In *The New World of English Words* (London,
1658) he locates California in the new world, which is correct
enough.  It is, he says, &ldquo;a very large part of Northern
America,&rdquo; but he isn't certain whether it is a continent or an
island.

At least one lexicographer was deliberately idiosyncratic
in his definitions.  That lexicographer, of course, is
Samuel Johnson.  He did not refrain from allowing his wry
humor to intrude even in the definition of his craft.  A lexicographer,
he wrote in *A Dictionary of the English Language*
(1775), is &ldquo;a writer of dictionaries.&rdquo;  So also had every
other lexicographer who had defined the word before him.
So also is it defined today.  But Johnson did not stop there,
but added: &ldquo;a harmless drudge, that busies himself in tracing
the original, and detailing the signification of words.&rdquo;  So
he defined his craft in the first edition and so the definition
remained in the five editions which were published in his
lifetime.  Johnson was aware, as no other lexicographer
before or after him has been, that the writer of dictionaries
must enjoy words and can, without harm to the definition,
intrude his own opinions and prejudices.  Unfortunately,
most lexicographers cannot distinguish their prejudices from
what they consider the final word on the subject.

Johnson was even more eccentric in other definitions.
*Oats*, he said, is &ldquo;a grain, which in England is generally
given to horses but in Scotland supports the people.&rdquo;  A
*stockjobber*, he wrote, is &ldquo;a low wretch who gets money by
buying and selling shares in the funds.&rdquo;  Many would agree
that the definition is still apt.  Nor was Johnson afraid of
words which until recently have not appeared in even the
most authoritative dictionaries.  He simply defines the noun
*fart* as &ldquo;Wind from behind,&rdquo; and turns to Suckling to illustrate
the word:

>Love is the fart  
of every heart;  
It pains a man when 'tis kept close;  
And others doth offend, when 'tis let loose.

For the verb he is satisfied with the definition &ldquo;To break
wind from behind.&rdquo;  To illustrate the meaning of the word
from a reputable source he quotes Swift:

>As when a gun discharge,  
Although the bore be ne'er so large  
Before the flame from muzzle burst,  
Just at the breech it flashes first;  
So from my lord his passion broke,  
He farted first, and then he spoke.

I personally regret and am even a little surprised that
Johnson does not include the definition of *fizzle* as &ldquo;a silent
fart&rdquo; when used as a noun and &ldquo;to break wind backwards
with little noise&rdquo; when used as a verb.  These definitions
appear both in Phillips's *The New World of English Words*
(1658) and later in John Kersey's *New English Dictionary*,
published in 1772.  *Fizzle* retains that definition in the *OED*,
which gives citations as early as 1532 and as late as 1848.
Webster's *Third New International* retains the definitions as
well, although the bluntness is somewhat dulled.  I have
often wondered why, if there is a word to describe a silent
fart, there isn't also a word for a silent fart which smells, a
silent one which doesn't, a loud one which smells and a loud
one which doesn't.  Such discriminations would, don't you
suppose, improve the precision of the English language.

Lexicographers do, then, at least on occasion, allow
their eccentricities to enter into their definitions.  And others
do at times have their fun at the expense of the lexicographer
and of the dictionary.  At least they give the lexicographers
work to do.  We are accustomed to calling any dictionary &ldquo;a
Webster's,&rdquo; having gone so far as to enter into a lengthy
court case in which the court decided that the word had, at
least in the United States, become a generic term for any
dictionary.  In the nineteenth century an English dictionary
in America was often labeled as a *Richardanary*, often simplified
to a *Richard* or even a *Dick*.  The only reference to
this usage that I have been able to find was in John S.
Farmer, *Americanisms—Old* &amp; *New*, privately printed by
Thomas Poulter and Sons in London in 1889.

*Farmer* is one of the most readable of all dictionaries.  I
would willingly take him along for a week on the proverbial
desert island.  He pays attention to American slang as well as
to more colorful American definitions.  While I was unable
to find any definition in *Farmer* as delightful as Captain
Francis Grose's definition of a vainglorious or ostentatious
man as &ldquo;one who pisses more than he drinks,&rdquo; Farmer has
collected a number of rather eccentric words and definitions.

My favorite, I think, is *sockdolager*, which he defines as
&ldquo;a heavy blow, a conclusive argument; a winding-up, a general
'finisher'.&rdquo;  He traces the etymology to a corruption of
*doxology*, &ldquo;and hence the signal of dismissal.&rdquo;  He gives other
etymologies, probably more correct, but to my mind not
nearly as delightful as its connection with *doxology*.

Farmer points out, moreover, that early settlers in
America called all fruits *apples*; that a *back house* is a privy;
that at Harvard &ldquo;to have no bowels&rdquo; is to be poor, destitute,
or without means and adds that the expression is of scriptural
derivation, &ldquo;the word being used in a somewhat similar
sense in the Bible&rdquo; (I wish he had given some examples);
and that a *peacemaker* is a Texas term for a revolver.  President
Reagan's label for the MX as the &ldquo;peacekeeper missile,&rdquo;
is, of course, in the same euphemistic tradition.  On the other
hand, in the nineteenth century a *Quaker* was either a member
of the Society of Friends or a cannon made of wood,
placed in the port-hole of a vessel in order to deceive the
enemy.  Farmer defined *pimple* as &ldquo;the head&rdquo;; *Pork and
Beans* as &ldquo;the American national dish&rdquo;; *prayer bones* as the
&ldquo;knees&rdquo;; *to have prunes in the voice* as &ldquo;speaking huskily,
the cause being emotion&rdquo;; *Ready John* as money; rosebud as
a &ldquo;young unmarried woman&rdquo;; and *slim* as &ldquo;one of indifferent
stand in the community, either as regards social position,
morals, or politics.&rdquo;  A *tooting tub* is a pejorative term
for a church organ, and *to worry* is to take a drink.

Neither Noah Webster, who published the first American
dictionary in 1806 and in 1828 the first unabridged, nor
Joseph A. Worcester, whose *Universal and Critical Dictionary
of the English Language* (1848) was Webster's chief
competition, included many interesting definitions,
although both seemed to be afraid of the word *leg* as too vulgar,
even for use in a dictionary.  *Limb* was the preferred
word, although Webster does speak of the *leg* of a table.  The
prejudice of the lexicographers echoes the prejudices of the
people in general.  *Pants, trousers, breeches* were often
replaced by variants, many of them introduced by Charles
Dickens.  Farmer and Henley in their *Dictionary of Slang
and Colloquial English* (London: 1912) list such words as
*ineffables, inexpressibles, unthinkables, unutterables,
unwhisperables*, etc.  The &ldquo;etc.&rdquo;  at the end is theirs: they
must have been tired of looking for euphemisms for *trousers*
and *pants*.  After all, *pants* or *trousers* don't sound so bad to
us now, and probably didn't offend everyone even in the
late nineteenth century.

But the dictionary does more than define words authoritatively
and eccentrically.  It also furnishes us with
fascinating though now discredited information.  Noah Webster,
in his 1806 edition, informs us that the world was created
in 4004 B.C. but fails to give the hour, set by Bishop
Usher at 9:00 a.m. Enoch was translated into heaven in
3013 B.C., and the great flood swept away all but Noah's ark
in 2348 B.C..  A year later, in 2347 B.C., Babel was built and
the languages of the world came into being.  Webster doesn't
tell us what the original language was, however.  In 2328
B.C. Noah migrated eastward and founded the Chinese monarchy.
Joseph died in Egypt in 1635 B.C., and Moses was
born in 1571 B.C..  One hundred and fifty-two years after
Moses wrote the Pentateuch (1452 B.C.; he died the same
year), the first Olympic games were held.  All this, and
more, Webster told his readers.

Even more practical information comes from Cockerham's
*The English Dictionary* (1623), the first lexicon to use
the word dictionary in its title.  He warns his readers that the
*Hiena* is, like the wolf, a subtile beast that can counterfeit
the voice of a man and will at night call shepherds out of
their houses and kill them.  On a more cheerful note he
advises his readers that the dung of a lizard is good to take
away spots in the eye.

The Rev. Thomas Cooper's *Thesaurus* (1565), the first
great classical dictionary, would have been published five
years earlier had not his wife, fearing that too much lexicography
would kill her husband, burned the first manuscript.
... And I had best quit before my wife burns my
manuscript.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Rather than hitting people on fixed incomes, the elderly-poor
people, period, we took a look at some scared cows.&rdquo; [From a
report on a special session of the Texas legislature in *The
Weatherford Democrat*, 11 July 1984.  Submitted
by Charles Cope, Weatherford, Texas.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;After the data is collected, city archaeologists and volunteers
will decide which houses are best preserved to warrant a more
excruciating examination.&rdquo;  [From *The Alexandria Gazette*,
6 March 1984.  Submitted by Nancy R. Keith, Alexandria, Virginia.]

## A Play on Words
*Anna and Taffy Holland, Lincoln, Massachusetts*

—Operator, I'd like to make a person-to-person call to Paul
Blackstone, area code 413, 345-6789.  What's all that noise
on the line?

—I'm sorry, sir, I didn't get that.  Was that Walt Watson?

—No, no, operator, it's Paul Blackstone.  This is really a terrible
connection.  I'm going to hang up and try again.

—I'm afraid this is the best line available right now.  Perhaps
if you spell it out for me...

—Okay; that's *P-A-U-L*...

—Excuse me, sir, was that *B* as in *ball*?

—No, no—that's *P* as in *Phlox*.

—There's no *P* in *flocks!*

—Yes there is.  *P-H-L-O-X*.  To continue: *P* as in *phlox*, *A* as
in *heal*, *U* as in *beau*, *L* as in *balm*.  That's the first name:
*PAUL*.  Last name, *BLACKSTONE*.  *B* as in *jamb*, *L* as in
*yolk*, *A* as in *real, C* as in *scene, K* as in *knot, S* as in
*corps, O* as in *you, N* as in *hymn*, and *E* as in *role*.  Got it?

—Yes, I think I've got it.

—Good.  And just in case you don't get it through, may I
have your name?

—Certainly.  My name is Sue Washhouse.

—Please spell that for me—I didn't quite get it.

—Sue Washhouse.  That's *S* as in *see, U* as in *queue, E* as in
*are*, *W* as in *ewe, A* as in *pea, S* as in *sea, H* as in *oh, H* as
in *eh, O* as in *you, U* as in *eau*...

—Wait a minute!  What is this *S* as in *C, U* as in *Q*
stuff...?  Never mind.  Just put the call through.

FIRST ALPHABET

>A as in *heal*           
B as in *jamb*           
C as in *scene*          
D as in *djinn*          
E as in *ewe*            
F as in *physics*        
G as in *bight, gnash*   
H as in *hour*           
I as in *wain*           
J as in *jai alai*       
K as in *knead, know*    
L as in *palm*           
M as in *mnemonic*       
N as in *damn*  
O as in *women*  
P as in *psalter*  
Q as in *pique*  
R as in *Worchestershire*  
S as in *demesne*  
T as in *rustle*  
U as in *plaque*  
V as in *Vaterland*  
W as in *wrack*  
X as *xerography*  
Y as in *days*  
Z as in *Czech*

SECOND ALPHABET

>A as in *sea, aye, aitch, jay, eau, pea, are, tea*  
B as in *double-u*  
C as in *aitch*  
D as in *double-u*  
E as in *aye, bee, see, gee, eye, ell, em, en, eau, pea, queue, are, tea, double-u, yew*  
H as in *eh, oh, why*  
I as in *aitch*  
L as in *double-u*  
O as in *you, double-u*  
S as in *see*  
T as in *aitch*  
U as in *eau, queue, double-u*  
W as in *yew, why*  
X as in *eaux*  
Y as in *aye, eye, jay*

## In Praise of Irregularity
*Elisabeth Larsh Young, Cedar Rapids, Iowa*

Irregular verbs may be the thorn in the side of every student
of French, but that language holds worse terrors:
some very eccentric ways of designating the inhabitants of
towns, villages, and regions.

French people, of course, call themselves *Francais* or
*Francaises*, according to sex.  Similarly, the people of Paris
call themselves *Parisiens* or *Parisiennes*.  And so on.  Other
regular endings, as suffixes on place names, indicate 'inhabitant
of': *-ard/-arde, -ist/-iste, -ois/-oise*, to name a few.  But
take some of the many places named after saints.  People
who live at St-Andr&eacute;-les-Vergers, a community known for
hat manufacture, are *Driats*.  Those of St-Ch&eacute;ly-d'Apcher
are *Barrabans*, and those of St-Dizier, on the Marne, are
*Bragards*.  *Imercuriens* inhabit St-Laurent-Blangy, near
Arras, the Medieval tapestry capital of Europe.  (Many a
character in a Shakespearean play would be hard put for
something to get behind, were it not for the arras.)

Near Calais is a texile and metallurgy center, St-Omer,
whose inhabitants are known as *Audomarois*.  Close to
Tours, where they used to say the very best French was spoken,
is St-Pierre-des-Corps.  The people of that rail center
call themselves *Corpop&eacute;trussiens*.  There are other odd twists
in the variations of names of &ldquo;saint places,&rdquo; but these will
suffice.

There is no village &ldquo;P&eacute;trocor,&rdquo; but P&eacute;rigueux, an important
town of the Dordogne, is the home of some 170,000
*P&eacute;trocoriens* and *P&eacute;trocoriennes*.  The *Agathois* hail from
Agde, and the *Tr&eacute;corrois* are the citizens of Tr&eacute;guier.  The
village of &eacute;tables-sur-Mer (literally 'stables on the sea'), a
modest place of perhaps 3,000 inhabitants, gives its folks the
slightly Slavic-sounding label *Tagarins*.  Or take Elne, near
Perpignan.  The logical people of Perpignan call themselves
*Perpignanais*.  However, their neighbors at Elne, about a
twentieth the size of Perpignan, are nothing less than
*Illib&eacute;riens*.  The denizens of G&eacute;vaudan, a region formerly
terrorized by an alleged man-eating wolf, call themselves
*Gabalitains*.  Pont-l'Abb&eacute;, where they make a lot of jam, has
male inhabitants unsurprisingly referred to as *Pontl'Abbistes*.
But, because of the fancy headdresses the ladies
of that charming Breton community wear, the feminine
form is *Bigoudens*!

There are many places in France named Villefranche—
'free city'—most likely stemming from early times.  One cannot
help wondering how the people of Villefranche-sur-Sa&ocirc;ne
(on the River Sa&ocirc;ne) came to be known as *Caladois*.

Neung-sur-Beuvron lies in the chateau country.  The village
name itself is a bit odd; the inhabitants go by
*Nugdunois*.  The people of Moyenmoutier, a village of the
Vosges, apparently traded what would have been a 14-letter
name, *Moyenmoutiens*, for a 19-letter jawbreaker:
*M&eacute;dianimonast&eacute;riens*.  At least there was logic here, for both
*moutier* and *monast&egrave;re* mean 'monastery,' and both *median*
and *moyen* convey 'middle.'  The celebrated French writer
Francis de la Rochefoucauld, if he came from the village of
the same name, was a *Rupificaldien*.

Latin origins account for some of the seemingly freakish
words.  Also, in all probability, some go back to traditions
and legends now lost in the mists of years or at least beyond
the layman's ability to track them down.  But isn't it things
like these that add spice to language—and life?  Let us hope,
then, that all the divers human tongues with all their peculiarities,
will persist, Esperanto and other synthetic languages
notwithstanding.

## Who is Rula Lenska? Some Thoughts on Reference
*Don L. F. Nilsen, Arizona State University*

David Lewis is the president of the Rula Lenska fan
club.  Rula Lenska is &ldquo;the fair one.&rdquo;  There are
twelve hundred fans in her fan club in thirty-five states.
Rula Lenska Day occurs near the end of February, and on
this day some of her fans leave their headlights on for
twenty-four hours; others spray a can of hair spray into their
hair; still others select some unusual activity to do nonstop
for fourteen hours.  All this dedication, and no one has ever
actually *seen* or *heard* Rula Lenska personally.

There is something about the human mind that enjoys
contemplating the nonexistent.  We have magic elixirs.  We
have goblins, woodnymphs, satyrs, griffins, unicorns, gorgons,
elves, gremlins, phoenix birds, cyclopes, minotaurs....
We have Zeus and Jupiter and Odin and members
of their respective courts.  We have skyhooks, and pole
stretchers and left-handed monkey wrenches....  We have
Utopia, Brobdingnag, Erewhon, Lothario, Damavand,
Olympus, Avalon....  We have Santa Claus, and the Easter
Bunny, and the Tooth Fairy, and Old Father Time, and
the Sand Man, and the Boogey Man, and Tinkerbell....
And sometimes we don't even know where fantasy
merges into fact.  When we die, will we go to the Happy
Hunting Ground, or to Valhalla, or to Heaven?  Witches
become so real to us that they are burned at the stake
because they are possessed of the Devil.

In May of 1981, I contacted Thomas Flanigan to ask
him if he would be interested in attending a conference of
the &ldquo;Western Humor and Irony Membership&rdquo; (WHIM).  On
May 21, 1981, he wrote me a response:

>I would definitely enjoy such a conference (WHIM),
but Arizona is a long ways away, and I don't intend
spending money on a plane ticket only to find out
because of its date (April first) that I was the butt of a
cruel April Fool joke.  Imagine the embarrassment
when, returning to Maine, I have to admit that not
only was there no conference, there was also no
Arizona.

Even when someone is convinced that there is a real-world
referent, it's not always easy to determine it uniquely
and correctly.  Ross V. Hersey tells an anecdote about a student
who raised his hand to go to the bathroom.  The teacher
excused him, but the student returned after a few minutes
saying he couldn't find it.  The teacher told him to turn right
in the hall and it would be the first door on the right, but in
a short while he returned again saying he couldn't find it.
This time she sent an older boy with him, and after a while
they returned with a satisfied look on their faces.  &ldquo;No wonder
he couldn't find it,&rdquo; said the older boy.  &ldquo;He had his
pants on backwards.&rdquo;

The relationship between pronouns and antecedents is a
tricky one.  Paul Postal has pointed out that a sentence like
&ldquo;John is an orphan and I don't have any either&rdquo; is ungrammatical
even though it makes perfectly good sense.  This
type of pronoun-antecedent relationship is termed by Postal
an &ldquo;Anaphoric Island,&rdquo; because it is not the antecedent
itself, but a feature of the antecedent (without *parents*) that
is referred back to.

George Burns recently did a television dialogue with
Bernadette Peters, who was playing the part of Gracie:

>GEORGE BURNS: If you keep saying funny things, people are going to laugh at you.
>
>BERNADETTE PETERS (as Gracie): That's OK.  Look at Joan of Arc.  People laughed at her, but she went ahead and built it anyway.

Here, we have another anaphoric island, but with a twist.

We use rules of inference and logic in order to determine
reference.  But such rules are based on our knowledge
of patterns and expectations, and sometimes when these patterns
and expectations change we make the wrong assumptions
about reference.  In his 1964 Master's thesis on humor,
at the University of Utah, John D. Gibb tells about two people
walking down a street.  One turns to the other and says,
&ldquo;Look at that youngster with her short hair, sweat shirt,
pedal pushers and gym shoes.  You can't tell if she is a girl or
a boy.&rdquo;  &ldquo;I can,&rdquo; said the other speaker, &ldquo;because she is my
daughter.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Oh, I'm sorry.  I would never have said that if I
had known you were her father.&rdquo;  &ldquo;I'm not her father.  I'm
her mother.&rdquo;

In *Shuckin' and Jivin': Folklore from Contemporary
Black Americans*, Daryl Cumber Dance tells a similar story
about the use of patterns and logic to determine reference;
in this case the solution is based on egocentricity.  A boy's
mother gave him two nickels, and she told him to put one in
the church collection tray for God, and to keep the other
one for himself.  It happened that on the way to church, one
nickel dropped to the ground and rolled into the gutter.  The
boy says, &ldquo;Uh-oh, there goes God's nickel.&rdquo;

Evan Esar tells another anecdote which illustrates the
same point but in reverse.  A honeymoon couple were at a
railroad station in great anticipation of their great adventure.
The bridegroom, through habit, asked for a single
ticket.  His bride, who was standing beside him at the window,
said, &ldquo;But, John, you're buying only one ticket.&rdquo;  The
young man made a quick recovery.  &ldquo;How stupid of me, darling.
I'd completely forgotten myself.&rdquo;

Another difficulty with reference is that infinite regress
can occur.  The sentence &ldquo;The man who was mixing it fell
into the cement he was mixing&rdquo; is termed an example of
&ldquo;Bach's Paradox&rdquo; because it was Emmon Bach of the University
of Texas who first discovered that in this sentence
each antecedent contains a pronoun that has as its antecedent
a clause which has a pronoun that has as its antecedent a
clause that has a pronoun, *ad infinitum*.

An example of infinite regress occurred at the 1979
meeting of the National Council of Teachers of English.
Chaim Potok was one of the keynote presenters, and he told
a story about someone who found out that Mollie Potok was
the mother of Chaim, and therefore wanted Mollie to autograph
her son's book, *My Name is Asher Lev*.  She signed it
as follows: &ldquo;Mollie, mother of the author.&rdquo;  Later, this same
reader found herself in the presence of Chaim, whom she
wanted to autograph the same book.  Seeing that his mother
had already written in the book, Chaim signed it, &ldquo;Chaim,
Son of the mother of the author.&rdquo;  This is where the anecdote
ends; however, it would have been perfectly possible for the
owner of the book to take it back again to Mollie, and then
back to Chaim, until all of the white space in the book had
been used up.

Of course Chaim Potok is famous, and fame is a necessary
component for instant reference.  But not everybody is
as famous as is Chaim Potok.  Vice-Presidents of the United
States, for example, do not generally bring a spark of recognition
to the listener's ear when they are alluded to.  In 1965,
Vice-President Hubert Humphrey reported on a bit of
research he had done on his predecessors and their contributions
to the office.  &ldquo;Who can forget those storied Vice-Presidents
of the past?   William A. Wheeler!  Daniel D.
Thompkins!  Garret A. Hobart!  and Henry Wilson!&rdquo;

Even when we do recognize a referent, this recognition
(like beauty) is sometimes in the eye of the beholder.  G.G.
Pocheptsov tells a story about a man whose face lit up when
he recognized a former friend walking ahead of him down
some subway stairs.

>He clapped the man so heartily on the back that the
man nearly collapsed, and cried, &ldquo;Goldberg, I hardly
recognized you.  Why, you've gained thirty pounds
since I saw you last, and you've had your nose fixed,
and I swear you are about two feet taller.&rdquo;  The man
looked at him angrily.  &ldquo;I beg your pardon,&rdquo; he said in
icy tones, &ldquo;but I do not happen to be Goldberg.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; said Mr. Becker.  &ldquo;You've even changed your
name.&rdquo;

The juggler, Michael Davis, juggles a variety of objects.
One of these objects is an ax, which he claims was the original
ax which George Washington used to chop down the
cherry tree.  But then his patter continues, &ldquo;However, I did
have to replace the handle.&rdquo;  This is followed by a long
pause, and then he continues..., &ldquo;and the head.&rdquo;

Myron Cohen tells a similar story about a missing referent.
In a telephone conversation with Jane Robin Littman,
Cohen was talking about how people must be able to relate
to the humor.  Mr. Cohen explained,

>You see, it's like this fellow who says to me (he was a
comic)— &ldquo;You know, you bombed in Gloversville, New
York.&rdquo;  I said to him, &ldquo;I was never in Gloversville, New
York.&rdquo;  He says, &ldquo;Yes, but I told your jokes there, and
they didn't laugh.&rdquo;

Well, maybe this didn't actually happen.  Maybe, in
fact, there is no Gloversville, New York, just as there is no
Lilliput.  In fact, there may be a lot of things we talk about
all the time that don't exist, but that doesn't mean we should
not talk about them.  Samuel Goldwyn was perfectly correct
when he said &ldquo;A verbal contract isn't worth the paper it's
written on.&rdquo;  The same might be said about a paper entitled,
&ldquo;Who is Rula Lenska?  Some Thoughts on Reference.&rdquo;  I can
only counter by saying that I believe in Rula Lenska, just as
I believe in Santa Claus and Valhalla and magic elixirs and
a lot of other neat things.  I might even go so far as to say
that language itself is a magic elixir whose main function is
to allow us to imagine things that don't exist—yet.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The president of the Chicago Federation of Labor was
critically ill at Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood
after surgery last week to remove a brain.&rdquo;  [From *New North
News*, 19 May 1984.  Submitted by Daniel F. Roberts, Chicago, Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Jets quarterback Ken O'Brien was acquitted of similar charges
arising out of a bruising melee by the jury.&rdquo;  [From the *New
York Post*, 13 September 1984.  Submitted by Carol Ann Hilton, Staten Island, New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Special retreat for those who have just experienced the loss of
a loved one at Rye Beach on June 15-17.&rdquo;  [Item in a parish
news bulletin in Nashua, New Hampshire.  Submitted by Ralph
Kelley, Hudson, New Hampshire.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We want to provide them [visitors] with the information
which will allow them to make informed decisions on where to
go, so they don't go.&rdquo;  [The warden of the Dorset Heritage
Coast, quoted in *Out of Town*, May 1984.  Submitted by
Elizabeth Watters, Beaconsfield, Quebec.]


#### EPISTOLA {John McCluskey}

When I first began reading Willard Espy's Garden of
Eloquence, I simply assumed that it was a sound and accurate
treatment of its subject.  When I saw in the Bibliography on
page 213 that Mr. Espy had consulted *Webster's New International
Dictionary of the English Language*, Second Edition,
1961, I knew that either the edition or the date was wrong and
supposed that he had simply committed an isolated scholarly
gaffe.  Later, I noticed that *hendiadys* was defined on page 133
as &ldquo;the expression of an idea by two words connected by and,
when normal usage would be to subordinate one to the other,&rdquo;
but on page 178, one of the examples given of *hendiadys* was
&ldquo;He is a man of great wisdom,&rdquo; instead of the normal usage,
&ldquo;He is a very wise man.&rdquo;  The construction involving and,
which was a central feature of the definition of *hendiadys*
given earlier, is nowhere to be found in the illustration.  At
about this point, I began to see inconsistencies, questionable
definitions, and ambiguous illustrations almost everywhere.  On
page 171 *epanalepsis* is given a different pronunciation and
literal meaning than on page 51.  Further, Espy speaks about
*epiphora* on pages 174 and 205 as a rhetorical device containing
the same word or phrase at the end of successive clauses.
But *Webster's Third defines epiphora* as a watering of the eyes
while defining *epistrophe* as the &ldquo;repetition of the same word
or expression at the end of successive phrases, clauses, or
sentences...&rdquo;  I could go on, but I think I have written enough
to raise the question: Why did Dennis Moore not warn readers
about these and other inconsistencies and inaccuracies in Mr.
Espy's book when reviewing it [XI,2]?

*[John McCluskey, University of Tennessee at Martin]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dennis Moore}

When I began reading Mr. McCluskey's letter, I thought,
&ldquo;*first began?*&rdquo;

Still, I wanted to assume the letter was sound and
accurate.  When I saw the gaffe he had committed with
&ldquo;normal usage,&rdquo; I supposed it had resulted from an isolated
instance of confusion.  At about the point I read about
*epiphora*, however, my eyes began to water—in the act of
complaining about &ldquo;inconsistencies and inaccuracies,&rdquo; Mr.
McC. is contributing several more inconsistencies to the pages
of VERBATIM.  His confusion over *hendiadys* and its &ldquo;normal
usage&rdquo; is only one illustration.  (More on another illustration in
a moment.)

As Mr. McC. has discovered, *hendiadys* is treated twice in
Mr. Espy's book: on p. 178 in an excerpt from the Rev.
Peacham's 1577 book, and on p. 133 in a comment on
contemporary usage.  So, when Mr. McC. quotes from p. 133,
he uses &ldquo;normal usage&rdquo; in the way Mr. Espy does there, to
mean usage here in the 1980s.  When Mr. McC. applies the
expression &ldquo;normal usage&rdquo; to the quotation from p. 178,
however, isn't he suddenly setting himself up to judge an
Elizabethan writer's usage by our contemporary standards?
After all, the Rev. Peacham's illustration (&ldquo;He is a man of great
wisdom...&rdquo;) *does* satisfy the Rev. Peacham's definition (&ldquo;...
when a Substantive is put for an Adjective of the same
signification&rdquo;), just as Mr. Espy's illustrations satisfy Mr. Espy's
definition.

Furthermore, Mr. McC.'s reference to &ldquo;the definition of
*hendiadys* given earlier&rdquo; is odd.  If he means chronologically
earlier, then of course the definition on p. 178—the Rev.
Peacham's—is by far the earlier one.  If Mr. McC. is calling the
one from p. 133 &ldquo;earlier,&rdquo; though, isn't he being more than a
bit careless?  When differences in definition four centuries apart
reflect differences in usage, isn't it more useful to acknowledge
the differences than to blur them?

A gaffe that seems far more unfortunate involves Mr.
McC.'s rigid distinction between *epiphora* and *epistrophe*.  I
confirm that *Webster's Third* defines *epiphora* as &ldquo;watering of
the eyes,&rdquo; a definition reassuringly similar to the first definition
the OED gives for the same term.  So far, so good—although the
OED's second definition, labeled *Rhet.*, suggests that at least in
the past epiphora did mean &ldquo;a rhetorical device containing the
same word or phrase at the end of successive clauses&rdquo; (if I may
quote from Mr. McC.'s letter again).  The *OED's* example is
from a seventeenth-century dictionary, whose explanation of
*epiphora* closely parallels the Rev.  Peacham's as Mr. Espy
quotes it on p. 178.

I could go on, but I think I have written enough to raise
the question—*where's the beef?*

*[Dennis Moore, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill]*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald R. Morris}

Richard Lederer, in his delightful article &ldquo;Lost Metaphors
of Land and Sea&rdquo; [XI, 2], is somewhat off the mark in
the etymology of *between the devil and the deep blue sea*.
The *devil* here referred to is indeed 'a seam between two
planks in the hull of a ship,' but those planks are *not* &ldquo;on or
below the waterline,&rdquo; and the phrase is not equivalent to
*between a rock and a hard place*—the phrase does not mean
'caught between equally perilous alternatives.'

The *devil* here referred to is the outboard seam on the
*deck* of a ship.  The deck planking is laid fore and aft; the
outboard plank must curve to conform to the plan view of
the deck.  The inboard edge of this plank, therefore, must be
notched to receive the butt ends of the deck planking, in a
long zigzag pattern.  This notching is usually done by hand
and is complicated by the fact that it is a compound curve,
to allow for the sheer of the hull.  It rarely can be made to
come out exactly right, and the *devil* is consequently a wide
and somewhat irregular seam.

To be caught *between the devil and the deep blue sea*,
therefore, is to be 'balanced precariously on the outboard
plank itself.'  This is not the equivalent of Scylla and Charybdis,
however, since the devil in this case represents safety, in
the form of a step back.  The phrase properly refers to a situation
in which only moving *forward* will lead to disaster,
and a prudent retreat is indicated.  Popular (or more properly,
lubberly) usage has long since converted the phrase to
the usage which Mr. Lederer assigns it, and few if any of the
popular compendiums of phrases or usage give the correct
definition.

This definition of *devil* also figures in another well-known
phrase that has also suffered a lubberly sea-change.
When a seam is caulked to make it watertight, oakum is first
driven into the seam with a caulking iron.  (Oakum is
acquired by picking apart old, frayed rope fragments; while
in Reading Gaol, Oscar Wilde was set to picking oakum.)
The seam is then sealed by &ldquo;paying&rdquo; it—pouring hot pitch
over the oakum from a funnel.

Actually, two seams aboard ship were so difficult to
caulk properly that they were universally known as the *devils*.
The first was the outboard deck seam referred to above,
which could rarely be caulked and paid neatly.

The second *devil* was the *garboard seam* in the hull
planking, between the keel and the garboard strake—the
bottom strake of the hull planking.  This seam was not only
even more difficult to fit properly than the outboard deck
plank (since it involved several compound curves), but was
impossible to get at once the ship was afloat.  It was the seam
where leaks invariably started and couldn't be reached from
inboard because of the ballast (in the old days, gravel)
which covered it.  To caulk the garboard seam the ship had
to be put in drydock, or beached and careened—and even
then caulking was difficult if not impossible, as the working
of the hull continually opened the seam.

*The devil to pay and no pitch hot* thus described a nautical
crisis, and generally referred to a hopeless situation, in
which looming disaster could not be averted.

This phrase was frequently abbreviated to *there was
the devil to pay*, and since this sounded affected to landlubbers
(who had adopted it in the process Mr. Lederer
describes), it was converted in the last century to &ldquo;there was
*hell* to pay,&rdquo; after which the nautical significance of &ldquo;pay&rdquo;
was lost.

Hanson Baldwin, a naval expert, in referring to a
typhoon, once used the phrase &ldquo;To quote an old nautical
expression, 'there was hell to pay and no pitch hot,' &rdquo; and he
has not been alone in this compounded solecism.  Even the
*OED*, while correctly identifying the nautical devil, gives as
an undated explanation of *the devil to pay*: &ldquo;supposed to
refer to bargains made by wizards, etc., with Satan, and the
inevitable payment (!) in the end.&rdquo;

*[Donald R. Morris, The Houston Post]*


#### EPISTOLA {James J. Kilpatrick}

I enjoyed Alma Denny's little piece [XI, 2] on the disasters
that can occur when a single letter gets misplaced.  It is
astonishing how often *marital* turns into *martial* and *run*
into *ruin*.

But your correspondent unaccountably overlooked the
most embarrassing troublemaker of them all.  Do you know
what inevitably happens when we write about public exhibitions,
public performances, public parks, and public
games?  You do know.

As a former newspaper editor I speak from painful
experience on these matters.  During four years of my tenure
we in Virginia had a governor named Tuck and a prominent
state senator named Bustard.

*[James J. Kilpatrick, Woodville, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Kirkham P. Ford}

In her article, &ldquo;Danger!  Letter Loose!&rdquo;  [X,2], Alma
Denny listed a number of changes that omitted or added letters
can inflict on words.  I am reminded of the remarkable
arrangement of beheadable words in:

>(S)how (t)his (b)old (P)russian (t)hat (p)raises
(s)laughter; (s)laughter (b)rings (r)out.

*[Kirkham P. Ford, Paris, Tennessee]*


#### EPISTOLA {Fred R. Shapiro}

Norman R. Shapiro writes that the derivation of *O.K.* from
*oll korrect* is &ldquo;rather fanciful&rdquo; [X, 3].  Obviously he belongs to
the John Ciardi school of etymology, which holds that one
conjecture (such as Shapiro's own *och aye* theory) is as good as
another.  Some people, however, support their etymologies with
evidence.  Allen Walker Read is one, and I refer Mr. Shapiro to
Read's brilliant series of articles in the 1963 and 1964 volumes
of *American Speech*, which demonstrated that O.K. originated
as an abbreviation of *orl korrect* during a craze for jocular
acronyms in the late 1830s.  The orl korrect derivation is fact,
not fancy.

*[Fred R. Shapiro, Forest Hills, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alex McEwen}

Your review of William Safire's *I Stand Corrected, More on
Language* [XI, 1] displays commendable scepticism in questioning
the supposition that *posh* originated from an acronym for
&ldquo;port outward, starboard homeward,&rdquo; denoting preferential
cabin allocation for important passengers.

But shame on you for allowing the expansion of P & O
into Pacific & Orient.  The venerable abbreviation stands for
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, a shipping
line first formed in 1834 to carry mail between Britain
and the Iberian Peninsula, and subsequently extended to serve
Asian ports.

*[Alex McEwen, Ottawa, Canada]*

[Similarly from William A. Woolf, Watford, Hertfordshire.]


#### EPISTOLA {Frederic O'Brady}

Mr. Maurice Sagoff [XI,2] should have looked up some
elementary French before deciding the gender of rime.  It is
feminine, and therefore: rime donn&eacute;e.

*[Frederic O'Brady, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {T.L. Sherred}

Re Gary Muldoon's letter [XI,1], in 1861-65, a soldier who
had seen the elephant had been in action.

*[T.L. Sherred, Utica, Michigan]*


#### EPISTOLA {Philip Taterczynski}

Two observations by way of addenda to two of the articles
appearing in the Winter 1985 issue [XI,3]:

1\.  Another contribution from the media (in the entertainment
sector rather than the news this time) to append to
those compiled by Barbara Lazerson, is the verb to *Water-gate*.
This emerged in the NBC espionage series, &ldquo;Code
Name Foxfire.&rdquo;  The precise usage was a direction to watergate
the door, i.e., place a piece of tape across the latch to
prevent it from catching when the door is shut.  Of course,
one of the problems with Watergate-era neologisms is that
they lose their immediacy among those who have become
aware of the world around them in the time since the infamous
trials.  While teaching freshman composition at the
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, a mere five years after
the hearings, my references to and cautions against the jargon
and circumlocutions which had become so familiar to
me fell on deaf ears. &ldquo;... but we were only twelve years
old then!&rdquo; said the proverbial Voice from the Back of the
Room.  It was the first time I ever felt old and dated.

2\.  Richard Lederer's article on palindromes omitted at
least two interesting extensions of the material he reported.
One was the final question in the interview with Professor
R. Osseforp: &ldquo;And his wife, May, rides a motorcycle?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Aha
may?  A Yamaha!&rdquo;  The other was an extension of a palindrome
which appeared in the article (the original appears in
brackets): &ldquo;Naomi, [sex at noon taxes], I moan.&rdquo;

It is interesting to note that such an obscure reference to
Watergate should crop up in popular entertainment so long
after the fact.  On the subject of palindromes, I suspect, the
books will never be closed.

*[Philip Taterczynski, West Hartford, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {D. J. Enright}

May I interject a couple of facts into Reinhold Aman's
maledictions [XI, 1] against my book, *A Mania for Sentences?*

I have met Philip Howard twice, or at most three times,
briefly; we cannot be said, by any stretch of language, to be
&ldquo;buddies.&rdquo;

The offending book—or the book containing the offending
article—is the nineteenth of mine to be published by Chatto &
Windus; nine of them came out before I joined the firm.
Incidentally, it will be published in the U.S. early in 1985, by
David Godine—whom I do not know and have never worked
for.

I can assure Dr Aman that there was no conspiracy, either
against the literary world or against Maledicta.  But I fear he
will not believe me.  Like his magazine, he seems intent on
finding dirt everywhere.

*[D. J. Enright, London]*


#### EPISTOLA {David Gold}

I would like to make a few comments about the Summer
1984 [XI, 1] issue of VERBATIM:

(1)  Three cheers for Richard Lederer's *A Quiz About
Sexist Language*, but is it then not jarring to read, four lines
below his piece, &ldquo;As all Englishmen ... know ...&rdquo;?  Why not
*English people*?

(2)  Readers may be puzzled by Philip Howard's gloss of
the British English slangism *bottle*, namely 'spirits, chutzpah,
guts, courage' (*English English*), since they are accustomed to
the second word as a designation of a negative quality.
However, as a result of emulated polysemy, it has come, in
English, to denote a positive quality, too (see the explanation of
Jewish English *khutspe* on pp. 273-274 of &ldquo;Words of Jewish
Origin in English Dictionaries: The Case of *farblondzhet*,&rdquo;
*American Speech* 39, 3, 1984, pp. 271-278).

Howard was right to reject a &ldquo;learned Hebrew exegesis
from the Talmud by which the transliteration *bottel*, meaning
'to make something useless or void', has moved into the slang
of British low-life.&rdquo;  Since there has been no direct connection
between &ldquo;British low-life&rdquo; and the Talmud (or the Hebrew
language in any of its forms), there is a missing link (or links) in
this rejected etymology, namely the Yiddish adjective *botl*
'void, invalid'.  However, since the English noun *bottle*
designates something positive and the Yiddish adjective *botl*
has negative associations, the explanation is far-fetched and
Howard correctly rejected it.

(3)  I have not read VERBATIM IX, 1 and 3, but there is
enough in Zellig Bach's letter in XI, 1 to prompt me to express
support for his position (I had already pointed out the absurdity
of treating Sholem-Aleykhem as given name plus family
name in &ldquo;On Quality in Translation: II,&rdquo;  *Babel* 18, 4, 1972, pp.
29-30).  In trying to find the best spelling for this pen name, we
can best proceed from the Yiddish greeting to the name.  The
writing of Yiddish in Latin letters was standardized by Yiddish
linguists in the 1940s and the Standardized Yiddish Romanization
(as it is now called) is unequivocal with respect to the
spelling of the greeting: *sholem-aleykhem*.  It so appears in Uriel
Weinreich's Yiddish and English dictionary which Bach cites
(and not *sholem-aleichem*, as he miscopies from this dictionary).
With respect to the pen name, the obvious solution is
merely to capitalize the greeting, hence *Sholem-Aleykhem* (the
hyphen, as Bach hints, will prevent misinterpretation of this
name as given name plus family name).  This spelling has been
adopted, among other places, in Leonard Prager's *A Selective
and Annotated Bibliography of Yiddish Literary and Linguistic
Periodicals and Miscellanies* and in the *Jewish Language
Review.*

It is interesting that *Mark Twain* is sometimes so misinterpreted,
too (&ldquo;Twain, Mark&rdquo; in bibliographies or &ldquo;Twain's
humor,&rdquo; etc.).  The fact that *Mark* is a common English given
name encourages this misinterpretation.

*[David Gold, University of Haifa]*


#### EPISTOLA {Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady}

Allow me to rectify again a French item in Mary Stewart
Craig's article [XI, 3].

I have no competence in Cajun speech, but *conasse* or
*connasse* does not mean 'prostitute' in French slang.  A
secluded old spinster may be called that.  It means 'stupid
woman' only.  It is a slang feminine form of *con* (female sexual
organ) in rough—not necessarily slang—speech, and
politely [!] you would say &ldquo;idiot,&rdquo; masculine.

By the way, unlike the French, *con's* American equivalent
would be the *masculine* organ, *prick*, and *schmock* is, I
think, probably derived from German *schmuck* (jewel); that
is to say, &ldquo;the family jewel.&rdquo;  An example of male chauvinism,
I wonder?

Re *conasse*, I find confirmation in Aristide Bruant's
*Dictionnaire Francais-Argot*, edition by Flammarion, Paris,
1905, where the word appears under *femme b&ecirc;te.  Prostitu&eacute;e*
has about a hundred slang denominations, one more picturesque
than another, from *cricri ravageur* to *ma&icirc;tresse de
piano*.

From a poem by Aristide Bruant: &ldquo;Bon Dieu! faut-i' qu'
tu soy's connasse!&rdquo;  (Good God!  Must you be such a fool!)

*[Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert A. Stairs}

J. K. Galbraith, writing of his upbringing in rural Ontario
(*The Scotch*, Macmillan, 1964), says &ldquo;We referred to ourselves
as Scotch and not Scots.&rdquo;  He could have added, &ldquo;... or
Scottish.&rdquo;  I have been taken gently to task by friends from
Scotland for referring to them as Scotch.  I was told that the
people are Scots, the adjective is Scottish, and that *Scotch*
means *whisky*.  The fact is that words or phrases entrenched in
the English language all seem to use the form *Scotch*: Scotch
broth, Scotch mist, scotchman, (a pad to prevent chafing in the
rigging of a sailing vessel), hopscotch, etc.

Galbraith's forebears settled in Elgin County in the early
1800s.  A woman of my acquaintance who emigrated from
Scotland about 1880 still resolutely called herself *Scotch* in
1940.  The change in usage in Scotland seems to have taken
place within the last century.

Normal Lowland Scots spelling of plurals, such as *bookis*
'books' and of certain names, *e.g., Wemyss* 'Weems', had silent
*i* (or *y*).  It seems clear that, in the past, *Scottish*, or the spelling
variant *Scottisc*, were pronounced *Scotch.  Scots*, as an adjective,
may have arisen by the same process from the latter
spelling, or perhaps from the plural of the noun *Scot*, which
seems to be ancient.

Perhaps this is one of those words, like *often*, that enables
people who enjoy such things to demonstrate by their pronunciation
whether they know how to spell or how to speak.

*[Robert A. Stairs, Trent University, Ontario, Canada]*


#### EPISTOLA {George Welsh}

The Autumn issue [XI,2] of VERBATIM seems to feature
Chapel Hill but I have to admit that I do not know Dennis
Moore, although I have known Clifton Brock for many years.
Maybe all the local subscribers and contributors can form a
local chapter.

The piece by Robert Fowkes throws us a challenge when
he says that he could not find a sequence of four for his
*Primults or Protohysts*.  A little time spent with *NID2*, however,
turned up at least one for me: *Aram, Rama, amar, Mara*.  And
with the use of a punctuation mark, I can contrive another:
*anom., noma, Oman, mano*.

Three for three is not too difficult: *ips, psi, sip; are, rea,
ear; ean, ane, nea; aam, ama, maa*.

There are plenty of three for four: *Nome, omen, meno;
enam, name, amen; meda, Edam, dame; sear, ears, arse; rone,
oner, Nero; asor, sora, oras; eral, rale, aler; race, acer, cera;
Edar, dare, ared; rede, eder, dere; sero, eros, rose; dore, ored,
redo; rata, atar, Tara*.

Finally, I turned up a couple of *hemitetrad* variants for
Fowkes: *rere, erer; nono, onon; rara, arar*.

*[George Welsh, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alan Frank}

I appreciated Robert A. Fowkes's article [XI,2] on
primults and would like to add a few of my favorites:
*echoic: choice Marchais: archaism stable: tables: ablest*
(Marchais is [was?] leader of the French Communist Party.)

I would also like to point out an error of less than a letter
in Alma Denny's &ldquo;Letter Loose.&rdquo;  Harry S Truman's
name should not have a period after the S.

*[Alan Frank, Medford, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {Emery R. Walker, Jr.}

Here are a few palindromes not on Mr. Lederer's list
[XI,3]:

>Pa's a sap.  
Won't lovers revolt now?  
A dog!  A panic in a pagoda.  
Draw putrid dirt upward.  
Poor Dan is in a droop.  
Zeus was deified, saw Suez.  
I roamed under it as a tired nude Maori.  
Draw no dray a yard onward.  
&ldquo;Do nine men interpret?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Nine men,&rdquo; I nod.

*[Emery R. Walker, Jr., Claremont, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Maxey Brooke}

Anent Norman Ward's article [XI,1], &ldquo;I wonder what the
English called spoonerisms before the Rev. W. A. was born in
1844?,&rdquo; in 1711, Addison called them *paragrams* from the
Greek phrase *ta para gramma skommata* ('jokes by the letter')
and attributed them to Aristotle.

*[Maxey Brooke, Sweeny, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman Shapiro}

Not all the animals (and animalcules) in Richard Lederer's
*Language Zoo* [IX,2] belong there.  *It's just not cricket* has
nothing to do with the insect (from an onomatopoeia, via
French *criquet*), but with the game (Flemish *krick*, a &ldquo;stick,&rdquo;
via an archaic French word for goal post).  But even the best
research is bound to have a bug in it.

*[Norman Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {David H. Spodick, M.D.}

Among the many delights of the prizewinners' issue
[XI,3] was Alex Auswaks's piece on meaningful Russian surnames.
As a literary dilettante, I was captivated by his style
and, as a linguistic dilettante, by his masterly command of
the language.  Yet, I wonder why Mr. Auswaks chose to
transliterate the guttural *kh* by *h*.  There is no *h* in Russian.
Indeed, the Russians transliterate the Western *h* by g.  Thus,
no Russian is allowed to forget that they fought the Great
Patriotic War against a country whose leaders included
Gimmler, Gess and that arch-fiend, Gitler.

I have long wondered why the press and experts like
Mr. Auswaks transliterate most Russian *o* sounds like our *o*.
The Russians write it &ldquo;*o*&rdquo; but all Russian *os* that are not part
of the stressed syllable are pronounced &ldquo;*ah*.&rdquo;  Thus, &ldquo;Gromyko&rdquo;
is pronounced *GrahmEEkah*, &ldquo;Chernenko,&rdquo;
*CherniENkah*, and so on.

More to Auswaks's subject: If he has been reading
*Pravda* or *Izvestia* he would find that when these organs
report on Gromyko's telling us off, it will frequently come
out &ldquo;Gromyko gromit (*GrahmEEkah grahmit*:) nyet&rdquo;—
&ldquo;Gromyko (Mr. Thunder) *thunders:* No,&rdquo; making effective
use of the root of his name.

The Russians, of course, are not alone in using surnames
to convey personal qualities directly or indirectly.
Plays of the Restoration Comedy era have characters like
*Surface*, connoting superficiality, and *Volpone*, conveying
wolf-like qualities, and there is the modern parody of that
era that features a scoundrelly physician, *Sir Cecil Malpractice.*
Finally, the allusion to the emphative of the Ryazan
dialect *kadi* is reminiscent of the more general Russian
emphative (usually pejorative), *je*, as in Prokofieff's suite
about an Asian military officer, named Ki—Lieutenant
Ki*je*.

*[David H. Spodick, M.D., University of Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {R. Antony Percy}

Norman Ward was a bit hasty in his statement that
*spoonerism* has no synonym.  *Sixth Chambers* and *Webster's
Second* give the word *marrowsky*, with the supposed origin
of a Polish count.  Can any of your readers shed further light
on him?

*[R. Antony Percy, Norwalk, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Ure Anderson, Jr.}

I was delighted by Richard Lederer's article on Palindromes
[XI,3], but should like to comment briefly on my idea
of a perfect palindrome and why the Greek inscription,
properly written, is the only perfect palindrome I know of.

>For me, a perfect palindrome:
(1) has the same order of letters in each direction;
(2) involves no change in capitalization on reversal;
(3) has no changes in the distribution of spaces between words; and
(4) has something interesting to say.</quote>

All single word palindromes which are not proper nouns
(e.g., *noon, madam, level*) meet the first three tests.  &ldquo;Able was I
ere I saw Elba&rdquo; meets every test except the second, but would
also meet that test if it were cast, like a telegram, in all capital
letters.

As for the Greek inscription, it is my understanding that it
appeared around a fountain at Hagia Sophia and not over the
doorway.  It must also be noted that PS is one letter in Greek
and that the second word in the inscription is misspelled and
should read *ANOMEMA.*  Further, ancient Greek inscriptions
were always done in capitals with no spaces between the
words.  As it says at the beginning of a chapter in the Greek
grammar I studied 45 years ago:

>NI&psi;ONANOMHMAMHMONANO&psi;IN
'Wash your sins, not only your face.'

I might also note that the interesting aspect of the
Napoleonic palindrome is marred by the fact that the Emperor
raised a good bit of hell, and did so ably, after his escape from
Elba and before his rustication to St. Helena.

*[John Ure Anderson, Jr., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Harris}
A pistol, eh?  (*Eh* is Canajan for *huh*).

Baseball announcers need no grounding in Latin to be
effective, as Tony Kubek proved a couple of years ago while
doing the colour commentary for a Blue Jays game.  He came
up with this comment about a player whose name I didn't
quite catch, listening as I was not to what he was saying but to
how he was saying it: &ldquo;... can throw almost as well with either
hand, but is a little more dexterous with his left hand.&rdquo;  Does
that not have sinister connotations?  The player in question
would have to clap with the backs of his hands.  A post-baseball
career as a pianist would be out of the question.

Actually, Kubek was quite *correct.*  But as a Latin scholar,
he makes a great shortstop.

*[John Harris, Toronto, Canada]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Out of our minds.  Into your hands.&rdquo;  [Slogan from a TV ad for
*Quasar* home entertainment products.  Submitted by Frank
Abate, Old Saybrook, Connecticut.].

## English English: *Frenglish*
*Philip Howard*

The French and the English are old friends and old enemies,
old neighbors and old strangers.  The great object of
the children's game called &ldquo;French and English&rdquo; is to run off
with the property of the opposing party, which is what the
grown-ups have been doing for centuries.  We are about to
celebrate the three hundredth anniversary of one of our
most important French connections.  In October 1685 Louis
XIV signed the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, so depriving
the French Huguenots of their remaining right to freedom
of worship and lighting the signal for religious persecution.
About 200,000 of his most energetic citizens fled the
country with their industries and skills, impoverishing
France and enriching the rest of the world.

One of the ways in which they enriched us was in their
imports into the English language itself.  The nickname of
the French Protestants, &ldquo;Huguenots,&rdquo; has one of those
doubtful etymologies dear to the heart of English pedants.
The learned Onions derives it from the name of a Geneva
Burgomaster, Besancon Hugues.  Geneva was the home of
Calvin's ecclesiastical dictatorship, or sectocracy, and a convenient
sanctuary just across the border for French Protestants
when persecuted.  He argues that the connection came
by assimilation from the Swiss German word *eidgenoss*
'oath-associate,' or 'confederate.'  It seems such a tall etymology
to me, especially since what they speak in Geneva is
Swiss French not Swiss German, that it might just be true.

The principal alternative etymology comes from Henri
Estienne in *Apologie pour H&eacute;rodote*, published in 1566.
Henri asserts that *Huguenot* comes from *Hugues* or Hugo,
which seems fair enough, and that it is derived from the fact
that the Protestants of Tours used to meet at night near the
gate of King Hugo.

The Huguenots, perhaps because they arrived as refugees
who had lost everything, worked hard and made their
names and fortunes.  The first Governor of the Bank of England,
and seven of the original twenty-four founder-directors
were Huguenots.  The colony of Huguenot weavers
at Spitalfields on the east of the City of London made it the
world center for silk and velvet manufacture.  Huguenot
goldsmiths and other decorative artists changed the face of
England.  And Huguenot names became Anglicized and
added to the national nomenclature of worthies: Blanch-flower
and Cazalet, De La Mare and Layard, Olivier and
Roget of blessed memory to wordsmiths.  Garrick, the actor,
and Paul Revere, of Longfellow's *The Midnight Ride*, were
Huguenots.

If you walk around London or the South of England,
every so often you will see a heartening imperative: &ldquo;Take
Courage.&rdquo;  This is not, as you might suppose, a pious injunction
from our native equivalent of the Moral Majority, but
an advertisement for beer made by one of our biggest breweries,
Courage's.  It is not, in my opinion, one of our better
beers.  But the name Courage is clearly Huguenot.

One of the great English firms is Courtaulds, manufacturers
of all kinds of synthetic fibers and fabrics.  There hops
another Frog.  Courtaulds came over with the Huguenots.
Their products bring a little touch of French into the English
language.  For example, Courtelle, a popular synthetic
fabric, comes from the old Huguenot surname, with the suffix
*-elle* that suggests either femininity, as in *mademoiselle*,
or a homely diminutiveness, as in *bagatelle.*

Now here is a really British English word for you: *bosie*
or *bosey.*  It is a technical term of cricket, I am afraid, and I
am aware that there is no subject in the world that induces
incredulity and ennui in Americans faster than cricket.  A
friend of mine who writes detective stories, which are
always published in the States, had the last one turned down
on the grounds that one quite short scene took place at a
cricket match.  *Bosie* is another name, particularly in Australia,
for a *googly.*  A *googly* is a ball delivered by a bowler
that looks as if it ought to break from left to right across the
bat of a right-handed batsman.  In fact, the bowler releases
the ball from right out of the back of his hand and imparts a
final flick with his fingers, so that the ball in fact breaks
from right to left, or else comes through straight and with a
high bounce, giving the batsman a very nasty turn indeed.

The *bosie* was invented by a *Bosanquet*, a Huguenot, of
course.  Not *Bosanquet* the philosopher, nor *Bosanquet* the
lawyer, nor *Bosanquet* the archaeologist, but *Bosanquet,
B.J.T.,* the cricketer who played for Middlesex.  He secretly
invented the *googly* at a childish ball game called tishytoshy,
and unveiled it late in the nineteenth century in the
presence of the great batsman, Victor Trumper, instantly
dismissing him.  The Australians were so amazed by this ball
that bounced the wrong way when it was pitched, that they
called it a *bosie*, and still do.

When Frenchmen give their names to a cricketing
term, they are truly naturalized.  The Huguenots are preparing
to celebrate the three hundredth anniversary of their
arrival here.  Among other jollities they have drawn up are
pedigrees demonstrating that Prince William and Henry of
Wales are descended from Huguenots through fifteen lines,
through both the royal and the Spencer families.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Man trying to get kite electrocuted.&rdquo;  [Headline in the *Tampa
Tribune*, 2 September 1984.  Submitted by Billy Finch, Tampa, Florida.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A 10 week *Beginners Quitting* course.&rdquo;  [An offering of the
Cyrville Community Centre, appearing in *The Banar* n.d.
Submitted by I.G. Brossley, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Cherokee Nation's main push is health prevention and
health promotion.&rdquo;  [A quote from the newly appointed director
of Health and Human Services, appearing in *Cherokee Advocate*,
March 1984.  Submitted by Richard Mayo, Sallisaw, Oklahoma.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Five persons presumed drowned off the California coast by
the Coast Guard after their boat broke up in the area of a
treacherous shoal.&rdquo;  [From the Springfield, Mass.  *Morning
Union*, 16 March 1984.  Submitted by Ronald R. Jay, Springfield,
Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The settlement to get the Solvang cityhood proposal on the
November ballot almost fell apart Thursday, but the inertia
generated by months of tough negotiation was enough for
another unanimous vote.&rdquo;  [From *The Lompoc Record*, 20 April 1984.  Submitted by Arthur G. Heinrich, Lompoc, California.]

## Lost Tropes
*David Galef, New York City*

The average college graduate, that useful representation
of a certain level of learning, knows what a metaphor
is.  He will also probably be able to tell you what a
*simile* is.  Unless he is specifically skilled in rhetoric or
poetry, however, he may balk at *catachresis.*  This term
refers to 'an extended, often mixed metaphor, as in Shakespeare's
&ldquo;to take arms against a sea of troubles.&rdquo; '  *Hendiadys*,
too, may provoke a scratching of the head; *hendiadys* is
the 'use of two nouns instead of a noun and an adjective, as
in &ldquo;weeping tears and pity&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;weeping pitiful
tears.&rdquo; '  There is a long list of poetic and rhetorical tropes
with odd names, from *anaphora* to *zeugma.*  Many date back
to Latin or Greek and were best suited for use in those languages.
Just as the complex poetic meters of *double glyconics*
and *choriambs* have faded, so have many of these figures of
speech.  They are, in effect, lost tropes.

Most elementary courses in poetry will dutifully go over
the basic tropes a modern poet uses.  Besides *metaphor* and
*simile, alliteration, personification*, and *irony* will get their
due.  On a level once removed, logophilic students will learn
*apostrophe* (&ldquo;O noble trope&rdquo;), *metonymy* and *synecdoche*
(they will confuse these two), *ellipsis* ... probably *oxymoron,
onomatopoeia, hyperbole*, and *litotes*, too.  There are,
of course, classic examples of each figure.  Providing an
instance of *litotes*, a former English teacher of mine once
remarked, &ldquo;I would not say that he was the dullest of scientists.&rdquo;
He was talking of Einstein.

After this secondary level of tropes, however, one finds
murkier depths.  Should one decide to become a rhetorician,
a classicist, or a well-schooled poet, one enters an arcane
world where *zeugma* is king, or possibly I mean *syllepsis.
Zeugma* occurs when 'two different words are linked to a
verb or an adjective, whereas only one fits literally.'  Pope,
in &ldquo;The Rape of the Lock,&rdquo; does this well: &ldquo;Or stain her
honor, or her new brocade; / Forget her prayers, or miss a
masquerade; / Or lose her heart, or necklace, at a ball.&rdquo;
*Anacoluthon* is another interesting beast, a change in grammatical
structure within the same sentence, as in Wallace
Stevens's &ldquo;To the One of Fictive Music&rdquo;:

>For so retentive of themselves are men  
That music is intensest which proclaims  
The near, the clear, and vaunts the clearest bloom,  
And of all vigils musing the obscure,  
That apprehends the most which sees and names,  
As in your name, an image that is sure,  
Among the arrant spices of the sun,  
A bough and bush and scented vine, in whom  
We give ourselves our likest issuance.

As a careful reading will show, the word *that* functions as a
relative pronoun, though the whole sentence seems to lose its
predicate somewhere in the middle of the stanza.  The stanza
ends with a disconnected *apostrophe*, an invocation to something
or someone who cannot answer back, often an inanimate
object or an idea.

*Anaphora* is another good classical device, the repetition
of a word at the beginning of successive clauses.
Thomas Dylan, in &ldquo;And Death Shall Have No Dominion,&rdquo;
uses it to particularly good effect: &ldquo;Though they go mad
they shall be sane, / Though they sink through the sea they
shall rise again; / Though lovers be lost love shall not.&rdquo;
Anaphora should not be confused with *epanorthosis*, the
repetitious use of a particular term for emphasis: the word
*element* in certain of Ben Jonson's poems, for example.
*Anastrophe*, too, has its place, when a reversal of word
order is called for.  In Byron's *Don Juan* occurs an exemplary
anastrophe: &ldquo;All, when life is new, / Commence with feelings
warm, and prospects high...&rdquo;

Obviously, these lost tropes have been used throughout
the history of English, though occasionally one may have to
search a bit.  In his preface to *Lyrical Ballads*, Wordsworth
promoted the use of ordinary speech in poetry, and high-flown
syntax and diction began to wane.  Still, exceptions
throughout the history of English literature abound, both
before and after Wordsworth.  Pope is a great find in this
connection; so is Milton, or any neoclassicist.  A.E. Housman,
great classics scholar that he was, goes to some lengths
to show the comical extremes to which such tropes can lead.
A quotation from his &ldquo;Fragment of a Greek Tragedy&rdquo; will
suffice:

>ALCM&AElig;ON  
I journed hither a Boeotian road.
>
>CHORUS  
Sailing on horseback, or with feet for oars?
>
>ALCM&AElig;ON  
Plying with speed my partnership of legs.
>
>CHORUS  
Beneath a shining or a rainy Zeus?
>
>ALCM&AElig;ON  
Mud's sister, not himself, adorns my shoes.
>
>CHORUS  
To learn your name would not displease me much.

Obviously, Housman is writing with his nineteenth-century
tongue in cheek.  If one pursues the matter back in history,
though, one runs smack against Quintilian's *Institutio
Oratoria* (*The Education of an Orator*,) which takes the
subject seriously.  Aristotle's *Poetics* and Horace's *Ars Poetica*
both refer to the plentitude of tropes available to the would-be
playwright, and caution against excesses.

Still, the possibilities are tempting—and frequently,
one may use a trope without knowing the nomenclature.
The previous sentence, for example, shows the use of *aposiopesis:*
'interruption for effect.'  *Asyndeton* is another method
of assuring emphasis: just remove the conjunctions, as in
Caesar's famous *&ldquo;Veni, vidi, vici.&rdquo;*  The Sixties generation
found Timothy Leary's use of *asyndeton* equally arresting:
&ldquo;Tune in, turn on, drop out.&rdquo;  In many instances, then, the
tropes have survived; their names have not.

As a simple test, see how many of the following tropes
you can match up with their meanings:

>1\. prosopopoeia          
>2\. syncope              
>3\. hysteron proteron     
>4\. paronomasia           
>5\. pleonasm             
>6\. prolepsis           
>
>A.  foreshadowing    
>B. punning     
>C. redundancy    
>D. personification  
>E. time-reversal   
>F. elision

(Answers are provided at the end of this article.)

If certain tropic nuances have been lost over time, so
have the possibilities inherent in modern language.  The fact
that no one speaks Latin today, for instance, means that
word-pictures in poetry are no longer really possible.  Horace's
*Carmina* 1.5 provides a vivid illustration of what was
possible in an inflected language: &ldquo;*Quis multa gracilis te
puer in rosa* ...,&rdquo; or 'What slender youth presses upon you
in the rose bushes...?'  The hint of lechery in the English
hardly conveys what is going on in the Latin, where the
*multa* goes with the *rosa*, and the *gracilis* goes with the
*puer*, all encircling the *te:*

*Quis multa gracilis te puer in rosa*

In other words, the woman is physically surrounded by the
youth and his slenderness, in turn covered by the rose
bushes.  Certain poets, some of scant talent and others of
very great abilities, have attempted the same placement
effects in English, but with limited success.  The seventeenth-century
religious poet George Herbert, with his
shaped poetry (his poem &ldquo;The Altar&rdquo; is in the shape of an
altar), is an interesting exception.  The school of modern
poets who employ typographical tricks may be searching
after this kind of impact, but the results are not quite the
same as in Latin.

One should also point out that Latin, besides being an
inflected language, is also quantitative in its sounds.  In
other words, the length of a vowel-sound matters.  *Malum*,
for example, means an 'evil deed,' while *m&amacr;lum*, with a
longer-held a-sound, means an 'apple.'  Differences in meaning
can usually be figured out from context.  In poetry, however,
quantitative meter becomes important, not the stressed
meter that English readers know.  Instead of the non-stressed,
stressed; non-stressed, stressed syllables in iambic
feet, one might read long-short-short; long-short-short.  Six
feet of this type of meter, with a caesura and maybe a longlong
foot as an occasional substitute, is dactylic hexameter,
the meter of Vergil's *Aeneid.*  As with the usage of certain
tropes, the rhythm and effect are hard to convey in English.
Perhaps the poet best known for trying to adapt English
verse to quantitative meter is the sixteenth-century Englishman
Thomas Campion.  His &ldquo;Rose-cheeked Laura&rdquo; is an
example of a Latin long-short rhythm:

>Rose-cheeked Laura, come  
Sing thou smoothly with thy beauty's  
Silent music, either other  
Sweetly gracing.

The attempt is laudable; the effect is up to the reader to
decide.

Certainly, many of the old techniques are uncommon,
if not awkward, in modern English.  On the other hand,
examples in literature are occasionally felicitous.  The *chiasmus*,
for instance, literally a 'placing crosswise,' concerns a
crossing word-order, as in noun-adjective, adjective noun:
&ldquo;a heart untouched, an impure mind.&rdquo;  Pope's *Essay on Man*
shows a more complex type of chiasmus: &ldquo;The rising tempest
puts in act the soul, / Parts it may ravage, but preserve the
whole.&rdquo;  One can diagram the crossing which occurs in the
second line:

>parts      —      ravage  
preserve  —       whole

As a cross, the chiasmus may also have an implicit Christian
meaning in its usage.

Hellenism, the use of Greek words and phrases, made
more sense in the days when Latin borrowed heavily from
Greek; but one can find T.S. Eliot doing it in &ldquo;Mr. Eliot's
Sunday Morning Service&rdquo;:

>In the beginning was the Word  
Superfetation of *T&Oacute;&eacute;V* [*to hen*: 'the One']  
And at the mensual turn of time  
Produced enervate Origen.

And what of *hypallage*, or 'transferred epithet'?  Tennyson
writes, in *In Memoriam:* &ldquo;The little village looks forlorn; /
She sighs amid her narrow days...&rdquo;  Admittedly, *hyperbaton*,
or the 'separation of words which belong together,' is
more for an inflected language like Latin or Greek.  Still,
there is Milton: &ldquo;Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?&rdquo;  And
the King James' Bible is capable of *synchysis*, or 'interlocked
word-order': &ldquo;Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction,
and maketh him families like a flock.&rdquo;

There are other lost tropes, of course.  In a brief essay
like this, one has to pick and choose.  In so doing, I have left
out *anadiplosis*, the 'use of the last word in one clause to
begin another.'  I have omitted to talk of *synesis*, the 'agreement
of words by logic rather than by strict grammar.'  More
exciting than the discussion of tropes, however, is finding
them in living usage, and many of them still exist, despite
their jaw-breaking names.  *Brachylogy*— a term covering a
variety of condensation tropes, such as *ellipsis* and
*zeugma* — is not dead.  It may be seen in Vergil, and it may
be seen in the pages of next year's poetry anthologies.  Politicians
use the figures in their speeches.  Far from sounding
archaic, the words may come across as graceful, powerful,
or poetic, which is the whole point, after all.

Answers to quiz: 1D, 2F, 3E, 4B, 5C, 6A.

Note: The author wishes to acknowledge the help and inspiration of
Rita Fleischer and Floyd Moreland of the Latin/Greek Institute at
City University of New York.  Without their tireless efforts in teaching
the classics, much of this material might never have seen the
light of print.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Puns*](https://www.abebooks.co.uk/book-search/title/puns/author/walter-redfern/)
Walter Redfern, (Basil Blackwell, 1984), 234 pp.

How do you judge a pun?  It can be as hard to tell a
good one from a bad one as it is to distinguish between the
common tern and the arctic tern.  This is so difficult, even
for experienced bird-spotters, that (a distinguished ornithologist
recently told me) a new species has had to be evolved—
the comic tern.  Apparently this piece of nomenclature is in
such general use among the chaps with binoculars that
it no longer raises even a smile, having passed from a joke
into common parlance.  For someone like myself who can
scarcely tell a hawk from a handsaw, it is hard to say how
good a pun this is.  Pretty good, I would say, even if common
and arctic terns are dull and boring birds.  On the other
hand, if their behavior consists of comic turns, then it's very
good indeed.

Suppose I were to say that the pun is mightier than the
word.  *Pun/Pen* is all right, but *sword/word* works better
when written than spoken.  Even so, I would justify it on the
same grounds as Byron's for rhyming *laureate* with *Iscariot*
when writing about Southey in *Don Juan.*  Byron says in a
footnote, &ldquo;as Ben Jonson did to Sylvester, who challenged
him to rhyme with &ldquo;I, John Sylvester, Lay with your sister.&rdquo;
Jonson answered, &ldquo;I, Ben Jonson, lay with your wife.&rdquo;  Sylvester
answered, &ldquo;That is not rhyme.&rdquo;  &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Ben Jon
son, &ldquo;but it is *true*.&rdquo;

The pun *is* mightier than the word, since it says more
than one thing at a time, often producing a third meaning in
the process, just as a mixture of blue and yellow makes not
only blue-and-yellow but, more importantly, green.  Take
an example from that master of paronomasia, Peter de
Vries.  His book-title *Without a Stitch in Time* is a play on
words that endlessly turns on itself, like a pair of snakes biting
each other's tails (or tales).  Since a stitch in time saves
nine, to be without a stitch is disastrous.  The naked and the
dead, perhaps.  At any rate, de Vries does not fail to have us
in stitches, in which case in time we are not without a stitch.

The epigraph to Walter Redfern's *Puns* comes from
Raymond Queneau: &ldquo;Tant d'histoire, pour quelques calembours.&rdquo;
Like all of Queneau's puns, this is an excellent one,
though not translatable.  Because *histoire* has a double
meaning, Queneau's expression can be rendered both as &ldquo;So
much history over a few puns&rdquo; and, at the same time, &ldquo;Such
a hoo-ha over a few puns.&rdquo;  (Incidentally, when I just said
*double meaning*, I could have said *double entendre*, which
is quite a complicated pun in itself.  In French it's *double
entente.*  The sea-change that took place in the passage across
the Channel is itself a pun, since *entendre* means both to
'hear' and to 'understand,' just as *entente* means both *'understanding'*
and *'agreement.'*  Redfern tries to take a step
further when he says that the goal of his book, &ldquo;a bipartite
study of wordplay in French and English,&rdquo; is a *double
entente cordiale.*)  Redfern describes his dizzying work as
part-anthology, part-gloss, part-invention, part-speculation.
It is indeed *une histoire*, giving at the same time the story of
puns and making a hoo-ha over them, theorizing like mad
about the use of puns, the usefulness of puns, the uselessness
of puns, the need for puns, the fun of puns, while simultaneously
and shamelessly taking the opportunity thereby provided
to quote his favorite specimens and to let off a good
many of his own.

He discusses erotic puns, scatological puns, puns in
advertising, puns in the press, puns in literature, history,
and all over the place.  Puns aboundeth everywhere.

Compulsive punning is a symptom of psychological disorder,
as anyone who has known a schizophrenic will know.
This does not mean that schizophrenics are the only compulsive
punners.  As in so many ways, here &ldquo;the lunatic, the
lover and the poet are of imagination all compact.&rdquo;  The pun
combines lunacy, love, and poetry in a word.  It is, in Johnson's
phrase, an unexpected copulation of ideas, and (one
might add) it is a mating that produces offspring that may
be beautiful or foul, brilliant or dull.

The pun is word-play, and play-behavior is based on
flight and fight: that is to say, fear and aggression.  Redburn
emphasizes the aggressive aspect of puns: they &ldquo;make people
groan, squirm, flinch, grimace, or wince.&rdquo;  We speak of agonizing
puns.  Queneau spoke of his ambition to elevate the
pun to the level of torture.  (I have just noticed that I have
mistyped the author's name a couple of sentences ago.  Sigmund
would have had great fun analyzing why I wrote
*Redburn* instead of *Redfern.*)  I think he (Redfern) does not
make enough of the defensive use of the pun.  It is the
weapon of the quick-witted physical weakling against the
gorilla who kicks sand in his eyes on the beach and enables
him to evade an unequal physical contest and to vanquish
on his own equally unequal terms of verbal juggling.
(Equally unequal?  Moron versus the oxymoron.)  The quickest
punster I have ever met suffers from a terrible congenital
handicap.  One thinks immediately of Pope—that razor-sharp
wit imprisoned in (and slashing out of) that feeble
body.  Or of the poor chap in Stevie Smith's poem, who was
not waving but drowning.

The United States has produced some great punsters,
notably Perelman and de Vries, but has tended to sniff at
puns as being a bit too English and therefore an un-American
activity.  Redburn, Redfern, whatever his name is,
quotes Max Eastman saying that he counts it &ldquo;a point of
legitimate pride in my country... that it has, upon the
whole, manfully resisted the transplantation and general
propagation of the household pun.&rdquo;  As an Englishman, I
would reply that puns are better than guns, which are what
are toted Stateside, and that we Limies find it hard to see
just what is so funny about spelling words wrong in the
Artemus Ward manner/manor.

Jesus punned, though the Peter pun doesn't work so
well in English as in French where Pierre is both a first
name and a stone.  Shakespeare punned constantly.  The
deer/dear and heart/hart puns can get tedious, but he used
them formidably for tragic as well as comic effect: Hamlet's
&ldquo;A little more than kith and less than kind&rdquo;; Gaunt's deathbed
playing on his own name; the witty and dying Mercutio's
referring to himself as &ldquo;a grave man.&rdquo;  Donne, Swift,
Wilde, Lewis Carroll, Flaubert, Joyce, Beckett, Nabokov
—where would they be without their puns?

Redfern (I've got it right this time) could have said more
about metaphor as puns (Is not a metaphor always a kind of
pun?), rhymes (ditto) and visual puns both in art (such as
Picasso's bull's head, made out of a bicycle saddle and handlebars)
and in nature (such as the penis-like fungus *phallus
impudicus* which made the Rev. Francis Kilvert wonder
how God could have had such a dirty mind).  Samuel Beckett
knows the answer: &ldquo;In the beginning was the pun.&rdquo;

Only occasionally is Redfern's book irritating.  Mostly it
is fun, funny, entertaining, informative, and thought-provoking,
punningly operating at the same time on a high
intellectual level and low gorblimey one.  He does over-play
the &ldquo;As the actress said to the bishop&rdquo; card, though it is, in
practice, one that unleashes hidden meanings extraordinarily
often, and often extraordinarily funnily.

A final word of warning.  This is not a book for Snarks.
As you will remember, there are three unmistakable marks
by which a Snark can be identified.

>The third is its slowness in taking a jest.  
Should you happen to venture on one,  
It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:  
And it always looks grave at a pun.

Definitely not recommended reading for a Snark.  But a
comic tern would enjoy it.

*Richard Boston*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Wordtree: A Transitive Cladistic for Solving Physical &amp; Social Problems*](https://www.amazon.ca/Wordtree-Transitive-Cladistic-Physical-Problems/dp/0936312009)
Henry G. Burger, (The Wordtree, Merriam, Kansas, 1984), 382pp. 

What is it that makes two people think alike?  Upbringing;
social sphere; education; acquaintances and companions;
country, region, even neighborhood of origin and residence;
travel.  All these are factors that would have to be
shared by people for them to have essentially the same mental
attitude and view of the world.  Moreover, the genetic
factor suggests that even given close similarity of environment,
two individuals would have also to be biologically
alike—one the clone of the other, say—to truly share the
same sort of mind.

All this may serve to point up what is the essential flaw
in a remarkable book called *The Wordtree*, a unique new
language research tool.  Editor and publisher Henry G.
Burger has been compiling, processing, refining, and preparing
the book over the span of twenty-seven years, and the
product of his long and nearly solitary toil is an achievement
that merits the serious attention of linguists.  Applying his
own theory of a hierarchical, semantic taxonomy of language
(the *Cladistic* of the subtitle refers to the branching
structure that results from this approach), Burger offers for
each of some 20,000 key concept-words or &ldquo;actemes&rdquo; a definition
in two parts, each of which is itself an acteme at a
higher level in the hierarchy.  Each acteme listed in the text
can theoretically be traced back along its constituent, defining
branches until ultimately we arrive at a set of 42 conceptual
starting points.  (More on these below.)  As a result, a
given acteme, with all of its defining branches illustrated in
a drawing, would give the appearance of a genealogical
chart or, metaphorically, a *Wordtree.*

There is great potential value in this sort of semantic
research, but in the rigorous adherence to a two-and-only-two-branch
approach, and in the unswerving use of one-word
&ldquo;definitions,&rdquo; Burger has oversimplified his methodology
to the point where it frequently yields dubious results.
Many of Burger's two-part analyses are so strained, unclear,
or downright bizarre that only the editor himself—and that
unlikely individual who might possess *precisely* the same
mindset and world-view — can reasonably expect to make
full and fruitful use of the book.

We should add, in defense of Burger's theory: 1) his
approach is in the spirit of and contributes to the notion of
semantic indexing, a concept presently being pursued by
many language researchers and one which eventually may
make automatic machine-translation a formidable reality;
1) the still widespread resistance to and unfamiliarity with
on-line research tools, making it practically necessary for
reference material to be published in book form, are obstacles
preventing a full realization of the value of Burger's
hypothesis.  *The Wordtree* would prove far more useful and
benefit greatly were it an on-line, highly accessible, quickly
manipulable electronic utility, open and ready for muchneeded
refinements, corrections, and expansion.

The layout of the book is in three basic parts: 1) front
matter running 54 pages, with theoretical explanation, general
background, and explanatory notes; 2) 130 pages of text
in which the 20,000 or so actemes are presented in hierarchical
order, from simple to complex, numbered sequentially
and shown with their various derivatives and related forms;
3) 184 pages consisting of an alphabetic index of all actemes,
as well as thousands of other associated forms for each of
which the user is given an appropriate reference.  It is worth
noting that while these page counts are modest, *WT* is in
fact dense with information, as each text page has six columns
of 142 lines.  The editor asserts that the amount of
material is equivalent to a &ldquo;regular-sized book&rdquo; of 1755
pages; it is certain that *WT* contains far more information
than the page count would normally indicate.

As it stands, *The Wordtree* (according to the claims of
its editor) gives access to an array of more than 250,000
words, creating a source that is intended as &ldquo;a handbook of
physical and social engineering&rdquo; that allows one to look up a
word or concept and trace it to its cause or follow its effects.
Burger has applied and carried through his theory of binary
branching, ultimately tracing the language back to 42 primitive
concepts that serve as his basic starting points for all
subsequent branching.  Some of these primitives—*create,
ascertain, relate, need, change, agree, order* (all to be
regarded as transitive verbs) — are at the base of Burger's
genealogical theory of semantics.  This is a noteworthy and
potentially powerful concept.  Could these 42 in fact be key
semantic building blocks?  If so, a theory stemming from
them could yield exciting results, especially if the concepts
represented are universal to all languages.

Unfortunately, owing perhaps to an overzealous application
of a result-oriented, engineered approach to language,
Burger's system shows many signs of weakness.  We
have already mentioned one of the rigid constraints of the
method: binary (only) branching and one-word (only) defining.
This principle results in the following &ldquo;definitions,&rdquo; all
of which appear in *WT* (each element is to be considered as
a transitive verb):

>1\.   to retrieve = discover & bring
>2\.   to explain = symbolize & particularize
>3\.   to conflate = gather & present
>4\.   to illume = level & bend
>5\.   to bastile [*sic*] = fortress & confine
>6\.   to brown = henna & dim
>7\.   to ensweep = discloister & overtrip

Exception can be taken to all of these: they are either too
simplistic (1), abstruse (2), misleading (3, 5), bizarre (4, 6),
or simply incomprehensible (7).  Admittedly, these examples
have been selected for criticism, but objectionable definitions
are not hard to find and seem to this reviewer to outnumber
the arguably adequate ones.

This flaw is aggravated by insistence upon the principle
of transitivity: all the concepts that are the key branches in
Burger's system must be regarded as transitive verbs.  Some
very peculiar *-ize* and *-fy* combinations appear, e.g.,
*interrogativize, insonify, sensize, complexify, utilitarianize*,
not to mention a plethora of weird compounds which,
despite the author's insistence that the great majority are
taken from documented citations, have the hollow ring of
nonce, viz., to *transhumanate*, to *racetaunt*, to *forecomprehend*,
to *freezeframecopy*, to *jackiegleason.*  These
and many other exotic forms seem to have been used so that
Burger could bridge conceptual gaps in his branching structure.
Add to these difficulties the fact that many English
words which (until *The Wordtree*,) had never been regarded
as verbs undergo functional shift within these pages
—e.g., *to ecstasy, to prose, to wall, to health*—and the
methodology appears truly Procrustean.  Whether these grating
novelties stem from an artificial or naive attitude toward
language, the result is that *The Wordtree* displays, on nearly
every page, the harsh results of an inflexibly applied hypothesis.

One can perhaps overlook the self-aggrandizing and
highly defensive views of the author as expressed in the front
matter (which cautions, for instance, against unauthorized
use, photocopying, or counterfeiting, offering a bounty of
$600 for evidence of such that leads to a conviction).  Even
the crabbed, printout-style type (set, even more unfortunately,
in all capitals) and difficult organization, which
render the book unattractive and far from convenient to use,
may be forgiven on the grounds that *WT* is the first edition
of a radically different sort of word book that was created
principally by one man under constraint of limited funding.
In conclusion, we recommend that semanticists and lexicological
theorists peruse this unique creation and explore its
principles.  Although it contains numerous disconcerting,
even absurd elements, Burger's *Wordtree* is worthy of study,
if only to emphasize the potential in a theory of semantic
indexing.  *The Wordtree* is certainly not the answer to the
theoretical problem, but years from now it may well be
regarded as an instructive attempt that provided some
insight—on what to avoid as much as on what to do.

*Frank R. Abate*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The bar will be moved to the back of the room, allowing
even greater visibility of The Pubic Garden.&rdquo;  [From *The
Newsletter* of the Ritz-Carlton, Boston, Massachusetts, Winter
1985.  Submitted by Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt, Washington,
D.C.]

## Inscrutable Chinese Puzzle: Dialects or Languages?
*Charles P. Trumbull, Chapel Hill, North Carolina*

There is some argument among scholars as to whether
the different forms of Chinese as spoken in the various
parts of China are in fact dialects or separate languages,
given that they all use the same writing system.  One usually
believes that speakers of one dialect are able to understand
the speakers of another dialect of the same language just as
Englishmen can understand other Englishmen from other
parts of England who speak in different &ldquo;dialects&rdquo; or
&ldquo;accents.&rdquo;  With Chinese this certainly is not so.  Each Chinese
dialect has its many subdialects and these are mutually
understandable just as are the English &ldquo;accents,&rdquo; but the so-called
dialects are as far apart as are English and Dutch or
Spanish and Italian.

It is therefore largely a matter of definition.  Webster
gives as one definition under *dialect:* &ldquo;one or more cognate
languages (French and Italian are Romance dialects.)&rdquo;  *Cognate*
means related by descent from the same ancestral language.
French and Italian as well as Spanish, Catalan, Portuguese,
and Rumanian are all related (by descent) to Latin
and comprise the Latin dialects that we call the Romance
languages.  The Chinese dialects are all descended from
Ancient Chinese spoken during the T'ang dynasty (A.D.
618-907), which, in turn, derived from Archaic Chinese
spoken more than a millennium earlier during the Chou.
These Chinese dialects are in fact separate cognate languages
and differ from Ancient and Archaic Chinese as do
French or Spanish or Italian from Latin and from each
other.

In the areas now comprising France, Spain, Portugal,
Rumania, and Italy, the official language was Latin during
the time of the Roman Empire.  Romans occupied all of the
government and military positions and thus served as a stabilizing
force to keep the language constant and uniform.
The common man — including the soldiers, the colonizers,
and the natives — spoke Latin, albeit a more popular form
known as Vulgar Latin.  The Roman script consisted of symbols
which represented sounds, what we now call the
Roman alphabet, so that the words of Latin sounded exactly
as they were spelled.  It was a phonetic writing system.

When the Roman Empire fell in A.D. 476 there was no
longer a central government tying the European areas
together and the population fell into isolated groups, frequently
beset by incursions of the Goths from the north.  As a
result, many dialects began to develop, each with its many
subdialects.  Centuries later, as the individual countries were
formed, one subdialect was decreed to be the official language
of each: that of Castile became Spanish, of Tuscany,
Italian, etc.  Still, many of the subdialects persist to this day.

The writing system of each of these languages remained
the same: i.e., the Roman alphabet.  However, the symbols
of this alphabet were continuously rearranged to reflect the
changing sounds of the language in such a way that the pronunciation
of the words could generally be determined
from their spelling.  French, however, lags markedly behind
her sister languages in this respect.

With Chinese, the story was a similar one, except for
the writing.  The dialects of China developed in much the
same way as did those of Europe—only they did so twice.
The early history of China was a cyclical one in which a
strong dynasty controlling the entire country fell into political,
moral, and economic decay and was overthrown, usually
by barbarian tribes along her border.  China then disintegrated
into many warring kingdoms, each trying to defeat
the others in an attempt to reunify the country.  Finally,
after several hundred years, a new dynasty was established
and ruled for three or four hundred years before the process
started over again.

The Western Chou, the first of the great Chinese dynasties,
lasted from 1027 to 771 B.C.  Its people spoke Archaic
Chinese.  Its area was very much smaller than that of today's
China, covering the Yellow-Wei River basins through the
present-day province of Shensi and extending south to
include the Yangtze in central China.  It was completely surrounded
by hostile barbarian tribes, who eventually forced
the king to move his capital from the west to the east.  The
result was that the king had only nominal control over his
territorial lords, and the country was broken up into many
small kingdoms.  Although the years from 771 to 256 B.C. are
officially known as the Eastern Chou, they really consisted
of two periods of warfare known as the Spring and Autumn
Period and the Warring States Period.  In the first, the number
of kingdoms was reduced to only a few; in the second,
those few fought until one dominated, reuniting China in
221 B.C.  All in all, the fighting continued for some five centuries.
This new dynasty was the Ch'in, from which the
name *China* derives.  During these years of fighting, the language
split into many dialects according to political and geographic
boundaries.

The new ruler set about making China great again.  He
simplified and standardized the Chinese writing system into
its basic modern form.  He established the dialect of his capital,
Ch'ang-an, as the official language of his government
and of its civil service throughout the land, but he did not
try to force this language upon the common man.

The Ch'in dynasty barely outlived its first emperor,
who was widely hated.  After but five years of rebellion it
gave way to the Han, a dynasty that lasted for more than
four hundred years, from 202 B.C. to A.D. 220.  It expanded
its territory to almost the equal of present-day China.  In its
brilliance and magnitude the Han dynasty was the equal of
the Roman Empire.  However, it did not unify the language
but merely followed the practice of the Ch'in in using the
dialect of Ch'ang-an as the language of the court and of the
officials assigned throughout the realm.  The local dialects
continued as before.

When the Han fell, there followed another period of
disunity, with many kingdoms and much fighting; that
lasted until A.D. 589, at which time the country was reunited
by the northern Sui kingdom, a feat comparable to that facing
Charlemagne as he tried to reestablish the Roman
Empire.  As with the Ch'in before them, the Sui shortly gave
way to another dynasty, this time the T'ang, which ruled for
almost three hundred years (A.D. 617-907).  The T'ang established
a civilization unexcelled anywhere in the world.  Its
capital, Ch'ang-an, was the largest and most cultured city in
the world; its artists, sculptors, and poets were among the
finest the world has ever produced.  One of its unheralded
feats was its unification of the language, so that by the end
of its reign the entire country, with the exception of the
non-Chinese minorities, was speaking the Ch'ang-an language,
now known as Ancient Chinese.  It is from this language
that all modern Chinese dialects developed, although
a few aspects of those spoken in the provinces of Fukien and
eastern Kwangtung date further back.

After the decay and fall of the T'ang dynasty, there was
again a period of disunity.  First was the fifty-three year
period known as the Five Dynasties.  This was followed by
the Sung dynasty.  But after 170 years of rule it had to abandon
the northern half—the cultural half—of the country to
a tribe called the Chin.  In 1234 the Mongols defeated the
Chin and in 1279 took over all of China, calling themselves
the Yuan dynasty.  The Mongols had no interest in unifying
the language nor the time in which to do so.  They merely
followed the example of their predecessors and used the version
of Chinese spoken in their capital, Peking, as the court
and government language.  Their dynasty lasted lass than
100 years; in 1368, the Chinese once again took over control
of their own country, with the Ming dynasty.  The capital
remained in Peking.  By this time, the diversity of dialects as
we know them today had become firmly established.

When the Manchus from the north defeated the Ming
and proclaimed the Ch'ing dynasty, in 1644, they continued
to use the Peking language, but again only as the official
governmental language.  The top governmental officials
throughout the country were called &ldquo;mandarins&rdquo; by the Portuguese
missionaries who arrived near the end of the Ming
Dynasty, and their language thus became &ldquo;Mandarin.&rdquo;  The
word comes from the Portuguese verb *mandar* 'to govern.'

As for the dialects themselves, there are six major ones.
It is common to divide them into two main groups: one,
Mandarin, spoken in all of China north of the Yangtze with
the exception of that river's estuary, and south of the Yangtze
in all areas west of the coastal provinces; and two, the
numerous dialects as found in those coastal provinces.  Mandarin
in its many subdialects is spoken by more than three
fourths of the population of China; it is the native tongue of
more people than any other language.  It is divided into
three groups: northern, which covers most of China north of
the Yangtze; southern, which is centered along the Yangtze
basin between Nanking and Wuhan; and southwestern,
which is spoken in the noncoastal provinces south of the
Yangtze and in the southern half of Szechwan.  (In the western
half of the country almost no Chinese of any kind is spoken.)
These three groupings of Mandarin have been compared
to English as it is spoken in the United Kingdom,
North America, and in Australia and New Zealand.  There
are different subdialects or &ldquo;accents&rdquo; within each group, as
well as differences in vocabulary, comparable to use by
Americans of *streetcar, elevator*, and *gasoline*, while the
British say *tram, lift*, and *petrol.*

The coastal dialects consist of Wu, which covers the
Yangtze River estuary and all the province of Chekiang and
parts of Anhwei and Kiangsi and which is typified by the
speech of Shanghai; Foochow, spoken in the northern half
of Fukien; Amoy-Swatow, the dialect of southern Fukien,
the eastern tip of Kwangtung, and the island of Hainan
(Foochow and Amoy-Swatow are collectively known as the
Min dialects, with certain features predating the Ancient
Chinese); and Cantonese, which covers most of Kwangtung
and the southern half of Kwangsi: it is typified by the speech
of the city of Canton.  Cantonese is the sing-song dialect spoken
by most of the Chinese in the United States.  The sixth,
Hakka, is the dialect of a people rather than of an area.  It is
predominant in eastern Kiangsi, which is not a coastal province,
and in central Kwangtung, and it is found in isolated
groups throughout all of southern China.  The Hakka people
were originally from north central China; from A.D. 300
through 1900 they migrated southward and overseas in several
separate waves triggered by invasions, wars, and
oppressions.  Overseas, their dialect is common in the South
Pacific and Hawaii.

There are several other minor dialects scattered about
China, the most important of which is Hsiang, located
around Lake Tung-t'ing.  In general, the others are spoken
by very few people, and are likely to disappear in the face of
dominance by other, more widely spoken, neighboring dialects.

How do the dialects differ?  Primarily they differ in pronunciation.
Differences in grammar are minor; vocabularies
differ as a given word may differ according to the choice
of ideograms.

In ancient days Chinese was monosyllabic, each word
consisting of but one syllable.  Throughout the years, as the
language became more and more homophonous and as
knowledge increased and the world became more technologically
sophisticated, polysyllabic words were created by
stringing together two or more of the one-syllable words to
arrive at new words, the meanings of which were determined
by the syllables contributed.  Chinese, in all its dialects,
is now a truly polysyllabic language.  In the discussion
which follows, *word* will stand for &ldquo;monosyllable.&rdquo;

Each Chinese word consists of an initial, which is
always a consonant, and a final, which consists of one or
two vowels which may finish off with a nasal consonant.  In
Mandarin there are two finals which consist of three vowels,
*iao* and *uai*, which never take the nasal endings.  Many
words do not have initials and so commence with a vowel or
one of the semivowels *w* or *y.*  The nasal endings are *m, n*, or
*ng.*  In Ancient Chinese many words endings in nasals were
cut short by opening the lips after starting an *m* or by lowering
the tongue after starting an *n* or *ng*, thus giving a muted
*p, t*, or *k* sound.  Also, Ancient Chinese had both voiced and
unvoiced, aspirated and unaspirated initials.  To illustrate:
using' as an aspiration mark, English has an aspirated *k*' in
*kiss* and unaspirated *k* in *sky*.  Both are unvoiced.  When
voiced, *k* becomes *g.*  In English, voiced consonants are generally
unaspirated; but you can imagine an aspirated g'
when the starter of a race shouts *Go.*  Thus you have *k', k, g'*
and *g.*  The same applies for *p* and *b, t* and *d, ts* and *dz*, and
*ch* and *j.*

It is in these initial and final consonants that the greatest
changes took place as the Chinese dialects developed.  By
the laws of linguistic sound change, words tend to become
simpler, not more complex.  In most dialects the voiced initials
were changed to unvoiced ones.  (All dialects have initials
*l, m*, and *n*, which are always voiced—they cannot be
sounded otherwise.)  In some dialects, the *p, t*, and *k* endings
were dropped; in others they were kept; in still others some
were dropped, but not all.  In most cases where a final *p, t*,
or *k* was dropped, the word was stopped by closing the
windpipe rather than by stopping the breath.  This form of
articulation, somewhat resembling a slight cough, is called a
glottal stop.  Other changes took place as well: vowel sounds
and initial consonant sounds changed.

Cantonese changed the least of the dialects.  It kept all
of the final consonant endings, and its vowels remain closest
to those of the Ancient Chinese; but it did change initial
sounds from voiced to unvoiced.  Only Wu and the minor
Hsiang dialects have kept the voiced initials, although,
under certain conditions in connected speech, Amoy has
kept some.  Along with Cantonese, the Hakka and Amoy-Swatow
dialects have kept the full set of final consonants
and each has approximately the same initial consonants.  Yet
each developed so independently from the other that they
are today completely separate languages.  Only Amoy-Swatow
retains the glottal stop.  Somewhere in its development
some of its words did lose their final consonants.  Wu
dropped not only the *p, t*, and *k*, but also the final *m*, and
uses the *n* only after the vowel *a.*  Foochow kept only the *ng*
and *k*, its *m* and *n* having turned into *ng* and the glottal stop
having replaced the *p* and *t.*

Another way in which the dialects differ is in the number
of initial consonants.  All have thirteen in common, but
their totals vary from fourteen for Foochow and Amoy-Swatow,
to sixteen for Cantonese, eighteen for Hakka, and
twenty-one for Mandarin.  Wu, with all its voiced consonants,
has thirty-six.  The greater numbers of some are
caused mainly by variations in the *s, ch*, and *j* sounds.

If simplification is the sign of greatest development,
Mandarin has progressed the furthest of all.  The only final
consonants it has kept are the *n* and *ng;* it has kept none of
the earlier voiced initials, and it does not use the glottal
stop.  It has four retroflex initials, *ch', ch, sh*, and *j*, the last
representing the sound of retroflex *r*, and three sibilant initials,
*ts', ts*, and *s*, which are often used without finals to
form a great many words.  In such cases these initials are
voiced and, in the Wade romanization system, this voicing is
indicated by spelling changes: the adding of *ih* to the retroflex
initials and the changing of sibilants to *tz'u, tzu*, and
*szu.*  Neither the *ih* nor the *u* is pronounced.  Mandarin has
become so simplified that it is the most homophonous of all
the dialects, having as many as 143 words pronounced *yi* in
a common Taiwan dictionary, 123 as *chi*, 100 as *chih*, 99 as
*hsi*, and 93 as *yen.*  Words that were once pronounced *lan,
lat, lam*, or *lap* are now all *lan*.  Whereas Cantonese has *la,
lam, lap, lan, lat, lang,* and *lak*, Mandarin has only *la, lan*,
and *lang.*

As an example of how the sounds of words changed
during the evolution of the dialects, here is how a man from
Peking would read a sentence from the *Analects* of Confucius
and how a man from Canton would read that same sentence:

>Peking: *tsi yue wo wei chien hao jen che wu pu yen che*
>
>Canton: *tsi ut ngo mei kin hou yan cha wu pat yan cha*

As can be seen, some words are identical, some are close,
and some bear no likeness whatsoever.

Chinese is a tonal language.  The tone, or musical quality
of a word has as much to do with its meaning as does its
pronounciation.  In Ancient Chinese there were four tones for
each of two vocal registers, an upper and a lower, for a total
of eight tones.  There was a high even and a low even tone, a
high rising and a low rising, a high falling and a low falling,
and two short even tones, called entering tones, for the
shortened words ending in *p, t*, or *k.*  As the dialects developed
so did the tones, so that the tonal system of each dialect
differs from that of the others.  Often, the tonal systems vary
among subdialects of the same dialect.  While these tones
kept the same names as they evolved, they often exchanged
registers, became falling instead of rising, or even combined
into one tone from two.  In the case of Cantonese, an additional
entering tone was added, giving it nine tones, which
accounts for its sing-song quality.  Mandarin dropped the
system of two registers altogether and, with no *p, t*, or *k*
endings, also dropped the entering tones; yet it ended up
with four tones.  Some of the Mandarin subdialects have five
tones, using an entering tone to go with the glottal stop
which some of them did keep.  The tones of the other dialects
vary between five and eight in number.

Although the Chinese dialects developed in a manner
similar to that of the Romance languages, the writing system
did not.  The Chinese did not use a phonetic alphabet but a
system of ideographs, or characters, each of which represented
a meaning or an idea rather than a sound.  Each character
had a one-syllable sound that was assigned to it.  At the
time of the Chou dynasty, in many of those characters that
consisted of more than one element, one of the elements
indicated the sound; but, as the language changed, those
phonetic elements became meaningless except to etymologists.
As the Chinese dialects emerged, the sounds of words
changed, just as they did in Europe — and in accordance
with the same laws of linguistic change.  Moreover, the
sound of the character representing each word changed.  To
complicate matters still further, the sound of each word was
different in each dialect, with the result that the sound of a
given character in one dialect was different from the sound
of that same character in another dialect.  Each character
still had the same meaning in each of the dialects, however.
Consequently, the speakers of one dialect can understand
the writing, but not the speakers, of all the other dialects.

Which brings us back to the question of whether the
Chinese dialects are separate languages.  Those who say that
they are not give as one of their reasons that these dialects
are all found in one country and that, combined, they form
the national language of China, whereas the Romance languages,
although technically dialects of their mother tongue,
Latin, are found generally in one country only and form the
national language of that country.  Also, they say, the common
writing system allows all Chinese to communicate and
has been a unifying force in the country for millennia,
whereas the different writings in the European countries
have been, if anything, separating forces.  Those who argue
that there are many Chinese languages hold that language is
speech and that writing is merely a means of recording the
language through the use of symbols.  Furthermore, they
state, up until very recently, more than ninety-five percent
of all Chinese were illiterate, hence, their writing system
meant nothing to them and did not in any way constitute a
part of their language.  Thus, unless they speak the same dialect
(or language), the vast majority of Chinese are unable to
communicate with one another.  It is unlikely that the
answer that will satisfy both sides of the question will soon
be found.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Roofs were collapsing everywhere.  The cries of the dead and
the dying filled the air.&rdquo;  [From a description of the destruction
of Pompeii in *Lost Cities and Vanished Civilizations* by Robert
Silverberg, page 13.  Submitted by George Johnson, Wausau, Wisconsin.]

## Speaking English
*Julie Elizabeth Graham, Preston, Lancashire*

&ldquo;When a passenger of foot heave in sight, tootle
the horn.  Trumpet at him melodiously
first, but if he still obstacles your passage then tootle
him with vigour.&rdquo;

The author of this warning to motorists in Tokyo was
not in the calculations that led Professor (now Sir) Randolph
Quirk of University College, London, to announce that English
has become the world's dominant language.  The international
use of English, according to the Professor, now
surpasses all other languages.  Around the world about 370
million people speak it.  And the rest, it appears, try to.  The
international misuse of English is a growing industry.

Consider, for example, the sign in the hotel elevator in
Belgrade: &ldquo;To move the cabin, push button for wishing
floor.  If the cabin should enter more persons, each press button
for wishing floor.  Driving is then going alphabetically
by natural order.&rdquo;  Or these instructions gracing a packet of
convenience food from Italy: &ldquo;Beasmear a backing pan, previously
buttered with good tomato sauce and after, dispose
the canelloni, lightly distanced between them in a only
couch.&rdquo;  Clearly the constructor of that message was not
about to let a little ignorance of English stand in the way of
a good meal.  One of the beauties of our mother tongue is
that even with the most tenuous grasp, anyone can speak it
in volumes if enthusiastic—a willingness to &ldquo;tootle with
vigour,&rdquo; as it were.

This hearty announcement appears in a Yugoslavian
hotel: &ldquo;The flattening of underwear with pleasure is the job
of chambermaid.  Turn to her straightaway.&rdquo;  This polite
request can be found in a Tokyo establishment: &ldquo;Is forbitten
to steal hotel towels please.  If you are not person to do such
thing is please not to read this notis.&rdquo;  The syntax may not be
entirely faultless, but could any two messages convey more
discretion and good will?

To be entirely fair, English is full of booby traps for the
unwary foreigner.  Any language where the unassuming
word *fly* signifies an insect, a means of travel, and a critical
part of gentlemen's apparel, is asking to be mangled.  Consider
for a moment the plight of the poor foreigner who
must learn that in the English- and American-speaking
world, one writes *down* a name but lights *up* a cigarette,
that one can *slow down* or *up* but can only speed up, that
the simple word *set* has 58 uses as a noun, 127 as verb, and
10 as practical adjective.

With such baffling complexities to contend with, it is
little wonder that a traveler to Hong Kong can see a dentist's
sign announcing: &ldquo;Teeth extracted by the latest methodists.&rdquo;
Or this exhortation outside a tailor's shop in Rhodes: &ldquo;Order
now your summer's suit.  Because is big rush we execute customers
in strict rotation.&rdquo;  Or the Bangkok dry cleaner who
suggests: &ldquo;Drop your troussers here for best results.&rdquo;

The vagaries of English are such that even native speakers
cannot always communicate effectively—as visitors to
America often discover.  Indeed, Robert Burchfield, editor of
the *Oxford English Dictionary Supplement*, created a stir
not long ago on both sides of the Atlantic when he
announced his belief that American English and English
English are drifting apart so rapidly that within 200 years
the two people won't be able to understand each other at
all.  That may be.  But if Briton and American of 2185 baffle
each other, it is possible they won't confuse many others—
not, at least, if the rest of the world continues expropriating
English words and phrases at its present rate.  Already Germans
speak of *die Teenagers* and *das Walkout* and German
politicians snarl *No comment* at German journalists; Italian
ladies coat their faces with *colcrem;* Rumanians ride the
*trolleybus;* and Spaniards, when they are chilly, put on
*sueters.*  And almost everywhere one can find *Night Clubs,
Hamburgers,* and *Television.*

Partly, this is because so many innovations have come
from the English-speaking world.  But even greater reason
for their popularity may be that English phrases are often
gems of clarity, brevity, and snappiness.  The French have
viewed this creeping polyglottism with a touch of disdain
and, in 1977, introduced legislation outlawing all foreign
words in advertisements.  Instantly exiled were *le weekend,
le hot dog, le brainstorming,* and *le refuelling stop*, among
many others.

Elsewhere, however, English continues to penetrate.
The Yugoslavs, for example, picked up the word *nylon* but
took it to mean a kind of shady variation, so that a *nylon
hotel* is a 'hotel of ill repute,' a *nylon beach* 'a place where
nudists frolic.'  German took on *licked* as a description for a
modern structure, streamlined and clean.  Other nations
have left the words largely intact but given the spelling a
novel twist.  The Ukrainian *hercot* might seem wholly foreign
until one realizes *hercot* is what a Ukrainian goes to his
barber for.  Similarly, unless you heard them spoken, you
might not instantly recognize *ajscrym, muvingpikceris*, and
*peda*—Polish for 'ice cream,' Lithuanian for 'moving pictures,'
and Czech for 'pay-day.'

The Japanese in particular are masters of the art of seizing
a foreign word and alternately beating it and aerating it
until it sounds like a native product.  Thus the *sumato*
('smart') Japanese seasons his conversation with *upatodatu*
expressions like *gurma foto* ('glamour photo'), *hikurasu*
('high class'), and *kyapitaru gein* ('capital gain').  The more
difficult words are simply and brusquely truncated.  So
&ldquo;modern girl&rdquo; becomes *moga* and &ldquo;commercial&rdquo; merely a
sort, snappy *cm.*

Fracturing the English language is certainly not a new
phenomenon.  More than a century ago Mark Twain passed
on to the world this hypothetical conversation he found in a
genuine Greek-English phrase book:

>&ldquo;How is that gentleman who you did speak be and by?&rdquo;  
&ldquo;I did think him Englishman.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;He is of the Saxony side.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;He speak the French very well.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;Though he is German, he speak so much well that
among Italians, they believe him Italian; he speak
the French as the Frenches themselves.  The
Spanishmen believe him Spanishing and Englishes,
Englishman.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;It is difficult to so much well enjoy several languages.&rdquo;  

With education standards around the world rising, it is
perhaps inevitable that fractured English, like Cornish and
Sanskrit, will one day become a dead language.  But it is
hoped that for at least a few years yet, the traveler abroad
may still expect to tootle with vigor and have his underwear
pleasurably flattened.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Infant seats pose nutritional problems.&rdquo;  [Headline from *Tufts
University Diet &amp; Nutrition Letter*, Vol. 1, No. 10.  Submitted
by Laurence T. May, Jr., Cambridge, Massachusetts.]

## Paring Pairs No. 18

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM.*

(a). Watch for the &ldquo;Man of the Year&rdquo; cover article.  
(b). Twist fourth (third?) digit.  
(c). Prompter affords relief.  
(d). C, C, C, C, C, C, C.  
(e). An augur on the town.  
(f). There is something in a *vacuum!* (Don't be too sheepish.)  
(g). Foggy conditions aboard ship.  
(h). Hillumination for Christmas tree in port?  
(i). Comics have trick joints.  
(j). (De)pressing golf club.  
(k). Too much (in years).  
(l). Head of *Solidarnosc*.  
(m). &ldquo;Dessert's ready!&rdquo;  
(n). Embassy from the Rams?  
(o). Source of hydrocephaly.  
(p). Provides cash flow at the orchard.  
(q). Religious bigshot.  
(r). Enroll for prison penmanship class.  
(s). What an aggregation!  
(t). Knight's garment worn over armor.  
(u). Surd nocturnal warmonger.  
(v). Siamese expired—just a crazy pattern.  
(w). Record—the other way emphatically.  
(x). Blister is a real drag.  
(y). Ambisextrous ambidextrous.  
(z). Lie in ambush to test the garland's gravity.

(1). Age.  
(2). Aid.  
(3). Apple.  
(4). Arbor.  
(5). Aries.  
(6). Bell.  
(7). Call.  
(8). Cannon.  
(9). Church.  
(10). Coat.  
(11). Con.  
(12). Double.  
(13). Down.  
(14). Dyed.  
(15). Ewe.  
(16). Finger.  
(17). Fun.  
(18). Hawk.  
(19). Head.  
(20). Hitter.  
(21). Iron.  
(22). Knees.  
(23). Knight.  
(24). Lei.  
(25). Lights.  
(26). Mission.  
(27). Mousse.  
(28). Over.  
(29). Piece.  
(30). Poll.  
(31). Position.  
(32). Right.  
(33). Role.  
(34). Sad.  
(35). Script.  
(37). Seer.  
(38). Seven.  
(39). Sight.  
(40). Sir.  
(41). Souffl&eacute;  
(42). Sum.  
(43). Switch.  
(44). Tie.  
(45). Time.  
(46). Toe.  
(47). Total.  
(48). Turnover.  
(49). Under.  
(50). Water.  
(51). Weather.  
(52). Weigh.  
(53). Wring.  

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Two winners will be drawn from among the correct
answers, one from those received in Aylesbury, the other
from those received in Essex.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send their
answers to VERBATIM, Box 199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20
1TQ, England; all others should send their answers to
VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT, 06426, U.S.A.  *You need
send only the correct solution, not the answers to all of the
clues.  Please use a postcard.*

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 17

(a). Crying nun who writes a sentimental human-interest column.  (46,44) Sob Sister.  
(b). What a union marriage broker effects.  (48,22) Sweetheart Contract.  
(c). No one talks on the radio about the deceased inheritor. (23,31) Dead Heir.  
(d). Someone who makes pointed punches is okay.  (5,53) Awl Wright.  
(e). Prop for Keystone Kop?  (2,47) Arch Support.   
(f). Unnecessary if you roll up your sleeves.  (10,3) Bear Arms.  
(g). Confined at home for Sudanese repose.  (29,40) Hausa Rest.  
(h). Sudden recoil of the cat.  (6,34) Back Lash.  
(i). Does the mitey hunter return to his sordid hotel with this?  (27,7) Flea Bag.  
(j). Dance for church bigshots on the express train?  (21,8) Cannon Ball.  
(k). Good grief!  Are they the houris in Hades?  (32,11) Hell's Belles.  
(l). Two cheers for No. 2—most unusual!  (38,4) Rah!  Rah! Avis.  
(m). Sad seraph is in a nightclub with a Navy flyboy?  (12,1) Blue Angel.  
(n). Ennuy&eacute; alongside car in the marathon?  (43,13) Running Bored.  
(o). Descend low enough to spank.  (33,14) Hit Bottom.  
(p). English dental work, now in Arizona.  (35,15) London Bridge.  
(q). An unjustified spanking.  (17,39) Bum Rap.  
(r). A horse that follows a scorched-earth policy.  (30,18) Hay Burner.  
(s). An incidental method of purchasing milk serum. (20,51) Buy Whey.  
(t). He who irritates Gautama is strictly from Hungary. (16,37) Buddha Pest.  
(u). It takes 13 tricks, a 4 (loaded) base hit, or... (28,45) Grand Slam.  
(v). Italian with the knowledge and good scents.  (41,36) Roman Nose.  
(w). Moldy ass is overrepresented in Parliament.  (42,19) Rotten Burro.  
(x). What the owner needs to support his corporation. (49,9) Waist Basket.  
(y). Where to keep the ribbed fabric?  (25, 24) Faille Drawer.  
(z). What to expect from an honest greens grocer.  (26,50) Fair Weigh.  

The correct answer is (52) Whipping.  The solutions are
given below.  The winner of No. 17 is Howard M. Berger,
Lake Worth, Florida.  The European winner of No. 15 was
Bill Sloman, Cambridge, England.

*MALEDICTA: The International Journal of Verbal Aggression*
is a 320-page &ldquo;cornucopia of forbidden verbal delights&rdquo; and
&ldquo;the bible of billingsgate&rdquo; (Associated Press).  This annual
collection of serious and humorous uncensored glossaries and
essays on insults, slurs, curses, and epithets worldwide is the
&ldquo;clearinghouse for connoisseurs of profanity&rdquo; *(New York Times
Book Review).*  Featured on BBC, on ABC, NBC, PBS television
networks, in *Time, Newsweek, Wall Street Journal,* and
many other publications.  Latest volume: $18.50 (USA) or
$19.00 (foreign) postpaid.  Full refund guarantee.  Order from:
*Dr. Aman, Maledicta Press, 331 South Greenfield, Waukesha,
WI 53186-6492, USA.*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Musicians upset horse cart (9)  
6\. Show members' excellent class (5)  
9\. Social one garbled text about nomad (9)  
10\. Play &ldquo;Change for a Cent&rdquo; (5)  
11\. A lieutenant gets into her skimpy blouse (6)  
12\. Weather protector can make L.A. rumble (8)  
14\. Rude element of young—all antisocial (9)  
16\. Kick out former gym class locker opener (5)  
19\. The Spanish and the German are senior (5)  
20\. Flailing wildly, has thing about rash (9)  
21\. Witches try English town (8)  
23\. &ldquo;State has oak, for example.&rdquo; Oak, for example? (6)  
26\. Put on center of cute sinker (5)  
27\. Sap mixed brownish-gray fur (9)  
28\. Experience altered state (5)  
29\. Blabbermouths rebuilt Emery Arms (9)  

**Down**

1\. Phone exchange...Ring! Use for party (4,5)  
2\. Trickily got a decal registered (9)  
3\. Run off during hotel opening (5)  
4\. Friend's word has the fifth letter (4)  
5\. Height measurers have changes?  About time!  (10)  
6\. Glum lecher goes nuts over curve (9)  
7\. Llamas return, lacking a little (5)  
8\. Special edition has contents of complex transaction (5)  
13\. Raging current by a cathedral town (10)  
15\. Handled glasses: Gentle ... Rot!  Smashed! (9)  
17\. To some, middle age is from 7. to 11 (5,4)  
18\. Lack of weight can make one thing less (9)  
21\. West Pointer has drink in Connecticut (5)  
22\. Planet visible in part of Vega before sunrise (5)  
24\. Using few words, gives bum steer (5)  
25\. Made up cheese (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. M-OCKE-d.  
4\. Starfish.  
10\. All-Star.  
11\. REN-eg-ES.  
12\. WI-ndowsi-LL.  
13\. Love.  
15\. In-STE-ad.  
17\. Incense.  
19\. ELE-ctor.  
21\. Group-ie.  
23\. Spas.  
24\. DISAPPO-in-T.  
27\. Ea-RRING.  
28\. Chic-ago.  
29\. Fo-rewo-rd.  
30\. REPELS.

**Down**

1\. M-e-AN-wh-I-le.  
2\. Cal-ends.  
3\. EXTROV-ERTS.  
5\. Th-rill-ing.  
6\. RENT.  
7\. In-grow-n.  
8\. Haste.  
9\. ORES.  
10\. Acc-O-m-PLICE.  
16\. Der-ringer.  
18\. EX-ER-t-I-on.  
20\. EM-per-OR.  
22\. Pr-iv-ate.  
23\. She-l.f.  
25\. Arch.  
26\. Vi-ew.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v12n1_Summer_1985)