--- 
title: "VOL XII, No 2 [Autumn, 1985]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Nullspeak: A Question of Rotating Strawberry Madonnas
*Steve Bonner, Rockville, Maryland*

Some linguists concern themselves with the evolution of
languages over time.  Others prefer to study language
as it is used at a fixed point.  I suggest we pause for a
moment to consider language as it will never be used.  Ever.
This involves the deliberate construction of phrases that
could never, under any circumstances, be construed to have
any meaning whatsoever.  Consider the expression

>*rotating strawberry madonna*

I submit that no human being has ever uttered this phrase.
More important, I suspect that no one ever will.  I am unable
to construct a scenario in which a speaker would find it necessary
to use this construct.  Note that the important criterion
here is that the phrase not only be absurd, but thoroughly
unusable.  I'm not sure what it would mean for a
madonna to be &ldquo;strawberry,&rdquo; and I certainly see no advantage
in having one that rotates.  Here are a few more:

>*glorious b-flat noodles*  
*carbonated burlap gentleman*  
*forgetful elbow soda*  
*mighty duckie snacks*  
*concealed explorer fondue*  
*feathery professor moments*  
*angry tuba gravy.*

The more memorable expressions of this form have some
properties in common.  For example, they must conjure up
imagery.  They must deal with familiar, everyday objects in
order for any absurdity to peek through.  Thus, even though
a *glorious b-flat cyclotron* may never be devised, the expression
doesn't warm the heart quite like the noodles, simply
because our daily experience with cyclotrons may not, a priori,
preclude the possibility of their being either glorious or
tuned in the key of b-flat.

But why do we insist that our expressions be absurd?
Aside from the sheer frivolity of it all, we should note that
every memorable passage that we have ever read has used a
(perhaps slightly) absurd—or at least creative—use of
images.  P.G. Wodehouse writes:

>Bashford Braddock removed his opera hat, squashed it
flat, popped it out again and replaced it on his head.
He seemed disappointed that he could not play a tune
on it.

This nervous tic of Bashford's leaves us with a whimsical
mental superposition of a man's garment and an orchestral
instrument.  Braddock may be persuaded to provide us
with a

> *polyphonic garment rendition*

The effective use of metaphor in literature requires that
the quantities under consideration be normally separate
entities.  It does us no good to liken two things which are
understood to be equivalent from the outset.  Indeed, the
entire creative process itself is nothing more than a deliberate
synthesis of opposing, or even contradictory notions.

Having rationalized as to why we engage in such nonsense,
we may now proceed with reckless abandon:

>*naughty symphonic potatoes*  
*accelerating tweed mailman*

I suppose, as in the case of the *garment rendition*, we could
try to produce a situation in which we would be compelled
to discuss the *accelerating tweed mailman*.  But to engage in
such an endeavor would be to miss the point.  The mental
picture we get exists independently of the specific situation,
and any attempt at producing a world in which the mailman
might live would only serve to distract.

If we can devise useless phrases, why not useless words
as well?  For example, how about the word *geoslavic?* In
morphology, it seems not at all unreasonable.  But I challenge
the reader to place it in context—any context.  Here
are a few others:

>*agrinasal*  
*micromatrimony*  
*hexayummy*  
*rotunditron*

An object might be describable as &ldquo;yummy,&rdquo; but the addition
of the prefix *hexa-* just doesn't seem to add anything.
(This is not, of course, to say that Madison Avenue won't use
it anyway.)

One might describe &ldquo;words&rdquo; such as *geoslavic* as
&ldquo;semantic fragments.&rdquo;  After all, we are adjoining chunks of
words—roots, prefixes, and suffixes—to obtain new words
that convey rather curious, hybrid notions of (perhaps)
dubious usefulness.  One might draw an analogy between
this and genetic engineering.  Components of words selected
at random and spliced together may, if done correctly, produce
a new, living thing, which takes on a personality all its
own.  Thus, even though I've never seen a *rotunditron*, I
have already begun to form a mental picture of one.

How does this process differ from that used in Lewis
Carroll's &ldquo;Jabberwocky&rdquo;?  When Carroll informs us that it
was *brillig*, and that *the slithy toves did gyre and gimble in
the wabe*, we (somehow) have an idea of what he is talking
about.  Such is the power of suggestion.  This is, of course,
precisely why &ldquo;Jabberwocky&rdquo; has always been so very entertaining.
But unlike our semantic fragments, Carroll is playing
with phonology, not semantics.  *Slithy sounds* as though
it ought to mean something.  Our fragments operate on
semantic units.  *Agri-* and *nasal* are both firmly implanted in
the Indo-European lexicon, and are both used in a variety of
useful ways (and now in a way that is not at all useful).

I can't help but wonder whether a technical journal
somewhere has already coined the word *geoslavic*, perhaps
in reference to Polish lignite deposits, or some such thing.  I
sincerely hope not.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Tongue Tied by Lost for Words out of Verbatim.&rdquo;  [A
horse with his lineage, listed on a racing program at Belmont
Race Track, Elmont, New York.  Submitted by L. Phillips, New York City.]

## Landmarks in Arabic
*N. C. Nahmoud, Jerusalem*

The etymological distance between Arabic and English
needs no comment, of course, and it was this total
unrelatedness to any of the European languages I knew that
made my initial stages in Arabic somewhat confusing.  I
often felt as though I were alone, wandering through a desert.
Once in a while, however, I would come across an occasional
word which sounded familiar, and I copied it in the
back of my grammar book with a joyful feeling of &ldquo;Whee!  A
landmark!&rdquo;  Of course, obvious words such as those beginning
with *al-*, and others like *cotton, admiral*, and *saffron*
were no surprise.  *Cotton (cot&oacute;n)* was an old friend from
Spanish, *algod&oacute;n; saffron's* ancestor was *safr&uacute;n* 'yellow.'
*Admiral*, I was delighted to find, comes from the poetic
phrase *&aacute;mir alb&aacute;hr* 'prince of the sea.'

One of my first landmark words was *qitt* (masculine).
The feminine of *qitt is q&iacute;tteh*, the literary word for—you
guessed it—'cat.'  There also exists, in literary Arabic, *hirr*
(masc.), *h&iacute;rreh* (fem.), an onomatopoetic alternative.  These
words, however, are not understood by most of the people
one would meet in the *souq* 'marketplace,' who speak colloquial
Arabic.  The local word for cat is *b&iacute;ssi*, (from *pussy*),
which presumably arrived in our city with the British Mandate.
The cats of East Jerusalem, however, respond nicely to
all three of these words.  (As an inveterate cat lover, my
research in the subject has been rather extensive.)

Other words were pure serendipity, one of which was
*d&aacute;raba* 'to strike.'  The first thing that flashed through my
mind was *drub*, as in &ldquo;He received a good drubbing.&rdquo;  Sure
enough, when I looked it up in my English dictionary, there
it was: &ldquo;Arabic: *d&aacute;raba*.&rdquo;  Under *tumbrel*, however, I found
only &ldquo;a farmer's cart, especially a boxlike cart for carrying
and dumping dung: Old French.&rdquo;  I was inspired to look this
one up because of a word I came across in a third-year children's
story.  It was *t&uacute;nbur*, which in the story referred to a
garbage collector's cart.

The category consisting of words like *qitt* and *t&uacute;nbur*
left me wondering if the relationship to similar words in
Indo-European languages might not be a very ancient one.
The words for earth, for example.  One of these is &#92;?&#92;*ard*; the
other is *t&uacute;rbeh*, which gave me an image of turbid, muddy
water.  *S&aacute;ut* is 'voice which, when used in a certain manner,
produces a shout.'  By the same token, &#92;?&#92;*&aacute;wwal* translates to
'howl.'  *Shout* is marked &ldquo;Old Norwegian: sk&umacr;ta&rdquo; in the dictionary,
and *howl*, &ldquo;Middle English: houlen.&rdquo; *Silk*, too, is
given an Old English origin *seolc*.  Yet the identical word in
Arabic means 'thread.' *Nod* seems to me to be an archetypical
Middle English word—yet here is *nad* (pronounced *nod*)
in the Arabic lexicon in front of me, with the meaning
'swing, oscillation.'  The Hebrew infinitive for *'swing'* is
*lenadn&eacute;d*.

There is no dearth of &ldquo;eureka!&rdquo;  words in Latin and its
derivatives, either.  *S&uacute;mu w*, meaning 'height, elevation,'
comes too close to *summum* for comfort.  *Agile*, my English
dictionary tells me, is a Latin-origin word meaning 'able to
move quickly and easily.'  Its Arabic counterpart is *ajaleh*
'speed.'

A French policeman carries a *matraque* 'nightstick'; the
Arabic *t&aacute;raqa* means 'to hammer, knock,' and the Spanish
for 'bang-bang, bonk-bonk,' etc., is *trac-trac*.  Before leaving
the subject, there is the French *casser* 'to break'; in Arabic
'to break' is *k&aacute;sara*.

There is one word which makes me think of the possibility
that, once in a while, there was an exchange of some
sort.  The word is &#92;?&#92;*arsh* 'throne.'  It may be stretching it a bit,
but when I saw this word I stopped for a moment, and the
following scene took place in my imagination.  I pictured a
delegation from an exotic land, standing before the king of
England, once upon a time, long ago.  The visitors marveled
at the ornate throne, for their own king sat upon velvet
cushions on an oriental rug.  One of the men whispered to a
courtier, &ldquo;What is His Majesty sitting on?&rdquo; and the answer
he received might have caused an Old English word to enter
the Arabic language.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Principles of Language and Mind*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780710203236/Principles-language-mind-Waldron-0710203233/plp)
T.P. Waldron, (Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), xxiv + 232pp.

As anyone who has concerned himself with language is
aware, attempts have been made over the centuries to
develop a cohesive, coherent theory of what language is and
how it works.  The problem has occupied some of the greatest
minds in the history of human culture.  The theories have
ranged from the poetic to the structural to the mechanistic.
Yet each of these theories contained the seeds of its own
destruction: Bloomfieldian linguistic theory disallowed any
consideration of meaning—the very *core* of language—on
the grounds that meaning was properly part of a discipline
(or of disciplines) other than linguistics; Friesian theory
resulted in an infinity of grammars, each developed to
describe the context under investigation at the moment; and
Chomskyan theory presupposed an innate propensity for
language that is supported neither by physiology nor by any
other documented science.

The foregoing descriptions are, obviously, greatly simplified.
Yet, each points out a fundamental concern, that
regardless of how intensely these theories have been supported
by their adherents, many linguists have expressed
their dissatisfaction with some of their basic tenets for various
reasons, among them the cardinal objection based on the
unavoidable fact that instinctively they feel that the language
simply doesn't work in the ways the theories describe.
Some of the theories have been advanced out of dissatisfaction
with the traditional eight parts of speech because they
are felt to be improperly descriptive of how language works.
The parts-of-speech system is not, after all, very &ldquo;neat&rdquo;: a
noun, defined as the &ldquo;name of a person, place, or thing,&rdquo; is
identified by its semantic content; whereas an adjective,
defined as &ldquo;a word or phrase that modifies a noun,&rdquo; is identified
by its function.

This lack of &ldquo;neatness&rdquo; has proved frustrating to many
linguists.  But if one can accept that grammar is a descriptive
system imposed on a natural phenomenon (language) and
that we have ample evidence that language is not inherently
&ldquo;neat&rdquo; to begin with, then parts-of-speech grammar is no
less valid than any other and, at least, has the virtue of having
been around long enough to enable a large percentage of
the population to become familiar with it.

And there is no justification for assuming that language
is &ldquo;neat&rdquo;: our days are filled with ambiguities and other difficulties
of communication that we constantly seek to clarify.
There are far more interplays of function than any one
theory of language can accommodate.

This is not to suggest that we should stop trying to
develop a &ldquo;scientific&rdquo; theory of language, only that such theories
can be demonstrated to have failed to provide answers
to many aspects and manifestations of language as it is actually
used.

Moreover, one cannot ignore the fact that for certain
applications, parts of some of the theories have proved useful.
But, for the most part, such applications have been useful
mainly in the computer analysis and synthesis of language
and in machine translation.  Although these are useful
exercises, they must be viewed as artificial, and they have
little or nothing to do with the way human beings use language.
Nor, in fact, have they revealed very much useful
information about how language works.  Above all, except
for a few (artificial) experiments, they do not concern themselves
with language as *art*.  In short, the processing of language
by computer, though undoubtedly useful, must not be
confused with the analysis or creation of natural language;
especially, it cannot be confused with an application of language
in the humanities, any more than a picture created by
a computer program should be confused with one created by
a human being.  In either event, one might accomplish a
superficial approximation or imitation, but that is neither
natural nor art *by definition*.  Computer experts and theorists
who fail to realize this essential fact are only deluding
themselves by confusing language creativity (not to say aesthetics)
with a utilitarian, poverty-stricken imitation of it.
What is disturbing is not the work that computer specialists
are doing, for that may, indeed, be utilitarian, but their
utter failure to understand that all they can ever hope to
achieve (Hal notwithstanding) is a poor simulation.

In the context of the preceding, it is refreshing to read
*Principles of Language and Mind*, for its author, a philosophically
minded philologist at Cambridge University, has
developed what he calls an &ldquo;evolutionary theory of language,&rdquo;
founded on an Aristotelian base (with thanks also to
Plato) and in harmony with the Darwinian theory.  In his
extension and application of evolutionary theory, Waldron
provides a step-by-step analysis and synthesis of the progression
from speech and thinking to the more abstract forms of
theoretical discourse and philosophical understanding, filling
the gaps in the humanities and natural science, and unifying
into logical entity problems formerly treated separately
as the diverse provinces of linguistics, psychology,
logic, and epistemology.  Waldron writes:

>Evolution theory concerns not only the origin of
species but also their survival and extinction.  Its
purpose is the systematic explanation of the findings of
*many* scientific disciplines, and of much else which we
know about life and nature.  All this cannot be
accounted for in terms of genetics and blind 'natural
selection' alone.  There is also conscious human
selection: the result of rational choice, but very often
also, of irrational thought and action.  Ours is the only
species which in large measure controls its own destiny.
Since all conceptual thought (rational and irrational
alike) is language-dependent, an understanding of the
origin, nature, development, uses and misuses of
language, and of its central place in human psychology,
is a prerequisite for determining what course human
evolution will take in the future.  [p. 209]

Waldron's concern is knowledge and its nature.  To
encounter his succinct treatment of the subject is to appreciate
the essentially humanistic character of his approach:

>To know is to be able: to walk, swim, speak,
count, remember, reason, and so on.  Knowledge may
be instinctual; the result of behavioural feedback; or of
sign interpretation.  These forms of knowledge are
common to animal life at large.  But knowledge may
also be conscious, conceptual, theoretical, rational.
Such forms of knowledge are distinctively human, and
are dependent on the symbolic functions of language.
[p. 211]

As described above, theories of language have suffered
from their failure to bridge the gap between the humanities
and natural science.  Indeed, it is Waldron's contention that
heretofore, even among evolutionists, &ldquo;speculation on language,
mind, and human culture in general has tended to be
reductionist in character, thus leaving evolution theory
defective in the very area that concerns us most.&rdquo; [p. x].  In
developing his argument, the author clarifies universal principles
of semantics and of a &ldquo;theory of knowledge in general
and of human understanding and reason in particular.&rdquo;  [p.
209].  He examines current misconceptions of the nature of
language and shows how these exemplify misconceptions
within &ldquo;the three philosophical traditions—idealism, naturalism,
scepticism—which have now engaged in repetitious
and sterile debate for well over two thousand years.&rdquo;

The author disposes of current theories based on behaviorism,
structuralism, and sociobiology:

>...Academic orthodoxy... currently offers
three bogus options which exemplify...confusion
and one-sidedness: a mindless behaviourism which
would reduce all human thought and action to a matter
of stimuli and reflex behaviour; a vacuous structuralism
which sees language as an ethereal, quasi-mathematical
system of signs, curiously detached from external
reality and human experience; and the pseudobiological
doctrine dubbed &ldquo;sociobiology&rdquo; which—by-passing
millennia of evolution, as well as the obvious
perceptual and behavioural origins of language and
intelligence—offers implausible and quite groundless
'explanations' of all aspects of human culture in terms
of genetic determinism and selection pressures.  [p. 188]

In ten main chapters, each a masterful essay, supplemented
by a beautifully turned glossary in which is set forth
a distillate of the concept of the book as reduced to its terminological
essentials, Waldron introduces, develops, and
expounds on his evolutionary theory of language.  Disobeying
the 19th-century &ldquo;rule&rdquo; laid down at Le Cercle de
Linguistique de Paris (forbidding the presentation of any
paper dealing with the origin of language), Waldron presents
a theory, that is at once logical, biological, and psychological,
showing how language naturally emerges from its
prelinguistic antecedents (perceptual and behavioral) to
become the key factor in the development of a distinctively
human kind of intelligence and thought.  As in the case of
many of Waldron's arguments, it is not only persuasively
and simply stated, but it fits neatly into what many people
informally believe to be true about how language works.

*Principles of Language and Mind* is a short book, but it
is not quickly read.  In some ways, in his pithiness of presentation,
the author does his theory a disservice, for, instead of
supplying illustrative examples at the points where they
would help to support an argument, he often relies on the
reader to dredge them up from his own store of knowledge.
For example, the contention that &ldquo;alphabetic perfection&rdquo;
was approached for the first time in archaic Greek [p. 111]
is a notion that could use some bolstering or, at least, some
supportive reference.  Likewise, statements like the following
could use clarification:

>Failure to distinguish a name from a noun is
failure to distinguish a mere sign from a categorial
symbol.  [p. 116]

There is no argument with the point, only that—if only for
pedagogical reasons—it would be helpful to have a somewhat
more expansive treatment than that accorded by the
sentences that follow:

>A *name* is no more than a verbal sign associated
with some individual.  The *noun*, by contrast, is the
categorial symbol *par excellence*.

In the Appendix, further clarification is offered under the
entry *Name and noun* [p. 212].  True, when thus isolated,
the understanding is clear; but set within a paragraph
(which goes on to discuss how classes of discrete individuals
were the starting point for further Aristotelian logical and
epistemological analysis), such statements lose their impact
and, for those who are not philosophers, have their meaning
diminished or diluted.  And there are other places in the
book where a more thorough exposition, with examples,
would have been helpful.  However, that chore will remain
for those who prepare teaching texts from this seminal work.

There are many bright passages in this book, reflecting
not only the author's felicitous use of language but the
uncompromising clarity of his thinking.  He warns against
the acceptance of a mathematical model of language and
calls attention to the fact that language preceded mathematics
(which would be impossible without language), hence
depends on it entirely for its &ldquo;logicality.&rdquo;  In other words, the
use of mathematics to analyze and describe language is a
hysteron proteron.  However, Waldron has respect for mathematics
as a &ldquo;unique deductive system&rdquo;:

>...Mathematics, being a highly specialized
form of theoretical discourse, necessarily observes
[those principles] if it is to be valid.  This does not
mean, however, that mathematics *is* logic or that logic
*is* mathematics.  It means simply that mathematics is a
rational pursuit.  Failure to grasp these simple facts has
helped to create the whole mystique of 'mathematical
logic', which has hung like a pall over modern
philosophy for the best part of a century, and has given
a new lease on life to a seventeenth-century fad: the
craving for a universal fool-proof language which
would do our thinking for us.  It is not language...
which needs to be rendered proof against folly, but
human beings.  No language has yet been known to go
mad.  [p. 174]

Notwithstanding, he emphasizes that regarding language as
a &ldquo;deductive system&rdquo; is a grave error:

>...[S]trenuous efforts have been made and are
being made to convert ordinary language into algebra.
...It now bars progress not in mathematics and
natural science—whose practitioners treat it with the
neglect it deserves—but in the humanities, where
superstition is rife, and where any doctrine sufficiently
opaque to be incomprehensible is treated with respect.
[p. 175]

Many theorists have grappled with the question of the
interconnections between language and thought.  Some
believe that conceptual thought, or theoretical understanding
can exist independently of language, calling to evidence
such common experiences as eidetic imagery, spatial relations,
and other matters that the brain naturally occupies
itself with and that are not readily verbalized.  Waldron's
view is that symbols, which are, at bottom, what we learn
the use of when we learn language, &ldquo;perform many psychological
functions—designatory, categorial, differential,
mnemonic, heuristic—which naturally fuse to form what
we vaguely call thought.&rdquo;  This is, essentially, an
associationist view, but without the stigma that associationism
attracted among behavioral psychologists.  The author's
development of these ideas is adroitly set forth in a chapter,
Speech and Thought, but a thorough presentation of his
arguments cannot be promulgated in a review.
In Waldron's words,

>...[L]anguage is the basis of human reason and
hence the basis, as well as the vehicle, of all theory
whatever: but pre-eminently of all theory of
knowledge, of human understanding, of mind.  [The
theory of language] is no ordinary theory.  It concerns
what human life is about.  But since human reason also
begets unreason—and worse, perverted rationality—
this unique theory concerns also the greatest question of
our age: whether civilized life is to continue to exist at
all.  [p. 201]

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;*Malpractice Made Easy*.&rdquo;  [Title of a book advertised
in *Legal Aspects of Medical Practice*, November 1981.  Submitted
by Dr. V. P. Collins, Houston.]

*Telling Like It Isn't: The Queen's English*

Journalists (or, as Philip Howard dubs them, &ldquo;journos&rdquo;)
seem to be suffering from an ever-increasing paranoia, worrying
whether anyone reads what they write.  Generally, the
news is serious business; but where the opportunity arises,
the headline writer, whether he be the reporter himself or
an aspiring tyro at the copy desk, resorts to all sorts of
devices to catch the reader's attention.  Often, he creates
headlines that reflect his paranomastic tendencies, perhaps
the result of a misspent education.  Many of these are
corny—*very* corny—and almost all do not stand alone as
puns: they become so only in the context of the articles they
head.

The affliction is not confined to American newspapers.
Here are some examples from *The Times*, the first four from
the issue of 10 October 1984, the fifth from that of 29 October,
and the last from that of 1 November:

>*End of the road*—Monaco Grand Prix road race is
discontinued.  [p. 1]
>
>*Nato jets keep Greeks buzzing*—Greek planes turn back
Turkish and US jets from Greek airspace in Nato
maneuvers.  [p. 5]
>
>*Snakes alive!*—Children are forced to flee school
invaded by 80 snakes.  [p. 7]
>
>*Changing her tune*—Chinese opera singer who
defected to Taiwan denounces communism.  [p. 8]
>
>*Shell shock*—French farmers destroy British eggs in
price protest.  [p. 6]
>
>*Labour of love*—Rehabilitation of statue of Eros for
Piccadilly Circus [p. 3]

England, of course, does not always live up to the
romantic image of her that is cherished in the bosoms of
Anglophile Americans.  Chromotrichial punk-rockers with
spiked hair-dos scarcely turn Londoners' heads any longer—
not even the other way; the Englishman's fascination for
westerns may even have created a British Cult of the Urbane
Cowboy.  Judging from some of the mischief being done the
language in what some may regard as a bastion of grammatical
conservatism (at least!), *The Times* does have its howlers:

>Neither he nor his brother want the police to
investigate the assault because they want to deal with it
in their own way.  [30 October 1984, p. 35]
>
>The improved offer to help came after Mr Giorgis's
complaint, accepted by ministers, that the idea of
sending two Hercules for a month was too short for
them to have any impact.  [30 October 1984, p. 1]
>
>But nobody was more surprised than him... [1
November 1984, p. 14: 'Moreover ... Miles Kington']
>
>Boyle had hoped to take over this year but has been
delayed because of pressure on his centre in Edinburgh,
which has dealt with 700 addicts and deprived
youngsters since it opened in August.  [31 October 1984,
p. 12: 'The Times Diary']

...and, on the subject of multiple negatives:

>The court upheld a prosecution appeal against the
decision of a London stipendiary magistrate to dismiss a
charge of failing to provide a breath specimen brought
against Miss P—H—, aged 20.  [10 October 1984, p. 3]

Where else in the world could one find the *Impact
School of Motoring* (Harrow), *Headstone Hire* (seen on a
van on the M-40 motorway), *Graham Spittle, Solicitor*
(Berkhamsted), and *Silicon Glen* (between Ayr and Dundee)?

> *Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?*

*Laurence Urdang*

## English English
*Philip Howard*

I have a friend called Henry Button: a logophile and a
good egg.  He is a retired civil servant, and a contender for the
title of the writer of most letters published by *The Times* of
London on all subjects under the sun and over the moon.  For
years we have been hunting the origins of the British catchphrase,
*He couldn't run a whelk stall*, which is related to the
American saying, *A hell of a way to run a railroad*.

We have sought it with thimbles, we've sought it with
care.  We have discovered enlarged variants, as, *He could not
run a whelk stall on a Bank Holiday on Southend Pier*.  We
have found cognate or related expressions: *He could not run a
village toffee shop; She could not organize a piss-up in a
brewery*.  At present the earliest use of the whelk-stall insult
comes from John Burns, the leader of the London dockers, and
a founding father of British socialism, in 1894.  He was
referring to the vanished Social-Democratic Federation: &ldquo;From
whom am I to take my marching orders—from men who fancy
they are Admirable Crichtons, Pitts, and Bolingbrokes, but who
have not got sufficient brains and ability to run a whelk stall?&rdquo;
There the matter rests at present.  Maybe we shall find an
earlier instance.

But until that glad day comes, Henry has started us on
another wild word chase.  Let us call it Quinquagrams, for want
of a better word.

A Quinquagram is a word of five letters, the components
of which can be so arranged as to give five words, each
beginning with a different letter.  For example, TIMES (God
Bless her and all who hack in her), EMITS, ITEMS, MITES, SMITE.
Another Quinquagram is STONE, which makes TONES, NOTES,
ONSET, and ETONS.  Etons is not in the big *Oxford English
Dictionary*, but it is recorded in both *Webster* and the *Shorter
Oxford Dictionary* as a name for the Eton suits, or monkey-jackets,
or bum-freezers worn by younger boys at Eton College.

With a little bit of fudging, you can make a Quinquagram
out of BORES: it gives ROBES, SOBER, EBORS, and ORBES.  Milton
helps, by spelling *orb* as *orbe* on occasion.  The EBORS is a
perfectly acceptable English way of referring either to the
Archbishop of York and his wife, or as a collective noun to all
the Archbishops of York, past and present.

The *Guinness Book of Records*, which takes an interest in
such dotty superlatives, says that there are 28 anagrams of the
word ASTER.  The trouble is that they are by no means all
English.  A number of them are taken from other languages,
and they include a number of geographical names.  And the
biggest trouble is finding one of them beginning with E to
make a true Quinquagram.  There are two: the auxiliary verb
ESTAR in Spanish, and EARST, described by *Chambers* as an
obsolete form of *erst*.

Then there is REAPS, which gives APERS, SPARE, PEARS,
and EARPS.  What the hell are *earps?*  you may ask.  The verb to
*earp* means to conk someone on the head with a long-barreled
Colt, in the manner of Wyatt Berry Stapp Earp, the famous
gun-fighter at the O.K. Corral, who was always doing it.  I
thought that you would have known that.

And then we should consider EDITS, which gives us TIDES,
DIETS, SITED, and ID EST.  If *P.S*. can become *postscript, i.e*.
might one day become *idest*, e.g.,: &ldquo;The only *idest* in this letter
so far is in the first paragraph.&rdquo;

The letter E is a stumbling block with APTER: PRATE,
RETAP, and TAPER.  E also lets us down with CEDAR: RACED,
ACRED, and DACRE or DACER or DECAR.  To *decar* is to 'get out
of a car,' in analogy with to *debus* and *deplane*.  Yorkshire could
be called a many-*acred* county.  A *dacer* might be a man who
catches *dace*, in the way that a *mother* can be a man who
catches *moths*.  There ought to be a verb to *dacre* from Lord
Dacre of Glanton, the historian Hugh Trevor-Roper, meaning
something like 'to authenticate ropy diaries purporting to be by
Hitler.'

Now the hunt is on for a Hexagram.  TIMERS gives MITERS,
SMITER, and REMITS.  Once again the initial E is the problem.
PRIEST gives RIPEST, STRIPES, ESPRIT, and TRIPES.  Ben Jonson
in *Cynthia's Revels* used the nonce-word *irpe*: &ldquo;From Spanish
shrugs, French faces, smirks, *irpes*, and all affected humours,
Good Mercury defend us.&rdquo;  The authorities guess that an *irpe* is
a fantastic grimace or contortion of the body.

If we turned this useful noun into a verb, it would give
us *thou irpest*, and Bingo, we should have our first Hexagram.
Meanwhile, the hunt goes on.  We pursue it with forks
and hope.  As you can see, it is not all cakes and ale in the
word factory, but serious, gritty research.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Traveler's Phrase Book*](https://www.amazon.com/Travelers-Phrase-Book-Compendium-Commonly/dp/0812035585)
Mario Constantino, et al., (Barron's Educational Series, 1985), vi + 505pp.

This is a nifty little paperback, a chunky 3&frac12;'' &times; 6'',
packed with useful phrases that have been categorized into
a number of different situations in which the traveler is
likely to find himself: The Basics for Getting By, When You
Arrive, Money Matters, At the Hotel, Getting Around
Town, Shopping, Medical Care, etc.  It is not a dictionary,
nor does it have an index; but that makes no difference: it is
still useful, and, as such books go, quite good.

What struck me about it was a certain lack of uniformity
among the sections (French, German, Italian, Spanish).
For instance, in all the sections except the German, under
Problems, Problems, Problems, one finds phrases like:

>Hurry up!  
Look!  
Watch out!  Be Careful!  
Listen!  
Wait!  
I have lost...  
Stop bothering me!  
Go away!  
Help, police!  
I'm going to call a cop!

In all the sections one finds

>I want to go to the American consulate  
to the police station  
Can you help me, please?  
Does anyone here speak English?  
He has stolen my car  
passport  
purse  
suitcase  
wallet  
watch

but only in German can one add ticket
money.

In Germany, you can say &ldquo;I'm lost (on foot)&rdquo; or &ldquo;I'm lost
(driving),&rdquo; but not in France, Italy, or Spain.  Only in Spanish
and Italian can you shout *Fire!*, but otherwise the &ldquo;problems&rdquo;
are pretty much the same.

At the Dentist, you can say &ldquo;I have a rotten tooth that's
giving me a lot of pain&rdquo; only in France, and &ldquo;I can't chew&rdquo;
only in France and Germany.  Is there something sinister in
the suggestion that in France, Italy, and Spain you can ask
the dentist &ldquo;When should I come back?&rdquo;—but not in Germany?
(Shades of *Marathon Man!*)

We discover, under Medical Care, that headaches are
possible in France, Italy, and Spain, but apparently not in
Germany, though there one can tell the doctor that he is suffering
from a venereal disease.

If you are a teacher, doctor, lawyer, businessperson, or
student, you are identifiable in all the countries; but if you
are a mechanic, a salesperson, or a secretary, you may
admit to it only in Germany.

When dining out, it would appear that the Germans
either disapprove of toothpicks or of asking for them; on the
other hand, in Germany you may ask where the toilets are,
and you may have to ask the waiter for a chair, from which
one might assume that they are provided in the other countries.

Under Hotel Service, in France, Italy, and Spain you
can (must?) ask room service to provide

>a towel  
soap  
hangers  
ice cubes  
an ash tray  
toilet paper  
a reading lamp  
an electric adapter

but in Germany you must (can?) also request

>matches  
envelopes and writing paper  
postcards  
an extra bed  
a wastebasket

When Shopping for Souvenirs, only in the German section
does one learn how to say, &ldquo;I don't want trouble at customs.&rdquo;

At Nightclubs, only the French tell one how to say,
&ldquo;May I have this dance?,&rdquo; &ldquo;May I take you home?,&rdquo; and
how to accept.

In Passport and Customs, only in Spain does it seem
necessary to know how to say, &ldquo;What's the problem?&rdquo;  And
under Baggage and Porters, you can learn how to tell someone
a suitcase is missing except in France, where they never
lose your luggage.  In Exchanging Money, only in Germany
can you mention that you think a mistake was made; and
only in Italy can you ask if they accept credit cards—presumably
you don't have to ask elsewhere.

Finally, one might construe from the absence of any
information under Saying Good-Bye, that the Germans
never say it (or, at least, don't like to), for, in addition to the
usual platitudes common to French, Italian, and Spanish
speakers, the last two would appear to be in the habit of saying
&ldquo;Thanks for the (*Sp*. wonderful) evening,&rdquo; &ldquo;I must go
home now,&rdquo; and &ldquo;You must come to visit us.&rdquo;  What seem to
be missing from all are *Adieu, Au revoir* or *&Agrave; bient&ocirc;t; Auf
Wiedersehen; Arrivederci* (or *Ciao, baby!*); and *Adi&oacute;s* and
*Hasta luego*—in other words, just plain *Goodbye!*  I'm only
joking—those are included in a list of Most Frequently Used
Expressions at the beginning of each section.

The book comes in a clear plastic jacket—presumably
gravy-proof for use in restaurants—and has some country
maps, though they show only major cities.  A serviceable and
friendly little package, *The Traveler's Phrase Book* might
have done better to have been more sturdily bound—I have
a feeling that the (so-called) perfect binding is not secure
enough to prevent the loosening of pages from continual use.
If you are on an &ldquo;If-it's-Tuesday-this-must-be-Belgium&rdquo; kind
of tour, you'll enjoy having this as a companion.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Complete Word Game Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780600332633/Complete-Word-Game-Dictionary-Pulliam-0600332632/plp)
Tom Pulliam and Gorton Carruth, (Facts on File Publications, 1984), xvi + 648pp.

People who like to work with words usually like to play
with words.  It was probably through playing word games that
many writers, editors, English teachers, puzzle constructors and
book reviewers first appreciated words *as* words.

Most of these games were portable and public domain:
Ghost, Superghost, Categories, and Hangman required at most
pencil and paper.  A few dollars or a birthday may have gotten
us board or dice games: Scrabble&reg;, Perquackey&reg;, Probe&reg;,
Boggle&reg; or Anagrams.  More recently—and for more money—
we may have bought computer word games.

Playing, we learned things other than spelling and vocabulary:
Bluffing, arguing, applying rules, and bending them.  We
may have first tasted the thrill of victory in debate after
aggressively challenging a questionable word in such a game—
or resisting an aggressive challenger's attack.  Eventually, players
found they needed an objective authority to settle disputes.
A dictionary was agreed upon, and if the word was an entry—
voil&aacute;!  If not, Ah *hah!* Simple enough.

But apparently not simple enough for Tom Pulliam and
Gorton Carruth, who have compiled *The Complete Word Game
Dictionary* to &ldquo;[settle] challenges almost instantly.&rdquo;  Were it not
for their credentials (Pulliam is a frequent *Word Ways* contributer
and Carruth a former Funk and Wagnalls editor in
chief), one might suspect them of having written a cynical ripoff,
a non-book.  The need it fills seems fabricated, the ten-page
preface perfunctory and padded.  The remaining 645 pages are
two lists.  One gives 180,000 words in root and variant forms.
Example: PANIDROSIS PANIER PANIFICATION PANIME PANIMMUNITY
PANINI... you get the idea.  The second list arranges
&ldquo;45,000 High-Scoring Words&rdquo;—containing *J, Q, X* and *Z*—for
Scrabble players' use.

*TCWGD's* preface states that the book's &ldquo;greatest value
will be for the Scrabble player, whether neophyte or tournament
caliber.&rdquo;  Don't believe it.  Serious Scrabblers recognize
only one reference work: *The Official Scrabble&reg; Players Dictionary*
(Pocket Books, $4.95).  Tote *TCWGD* to a tournament
and you'll get some very strange looks.  *OSPD* (as it's called) is a
real dictionary, providing parts of speech and definitions, while
*TCWGD* gives neither.  This is not a quibble; players need this
information to tell which inflections are possible.  For starters,
*OSPD* lists &ldquo;AA: n, pl. -s rough, cindery lava.&rdquo;  *TCWGD* lists
&ldquo;AA,&rdquo; leaving the user to guess whether it can take *-s, -ed, -ly*,
or *-ing*.  Some inflected words are listed, but irregularly.  Too
often the two books do not agree.  Among many examples,
*TCWGD* proposes DHA, BRABANT, and SLIRT, all *verboten* at
Scrabble tournaments, while ignoring the usable ZAIRE,
CARICES, and FOWLPOX.

Finally, Pulliam and Carruth have included too many
longer—hence rarely usable—words.  Boggle, Perquackey, Scrabble,
and Probe players would be ill-advised to study the tens of
thousands of 9-or-more-letter words: when would they use
them?

*The Complete Word Game Dictionary* will help neither
beginning nor advanced word game players.  As such players
will recognize this immediately on seeing the book, it remains
necessary only to warn their gift-giving friends and relatives.

*Barry Tunick*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Crime Dictionary*](https://www.amazon.com/Crime-Dictionary-Ralph-Sola/dp/0871964430)
Ralph De Sola, (Facts on File, 1982), xiii + 218pp.

Ralph De Sola, a prolific compiler of reference books,
has defined some 10,000 terms dealing with the legal and
illegal sides of crime in the *Crime Dictionary*.  What is especially
interesting about the book is that it provides not only
definitions of the entries but other kinds of information that
must be considered encyclopedic.  For example, *Saturday-night
special* is defined as a &ldquo;cheap handgun of the type produced
in large quantities by RG Industries of Miami, Fla.&rdquo;
Go to *RG* and find: *Rohm Gesellschaft* (German—Rohm
Company) initialized corporate name of the Rohm Tool subsidiary
engaged in the assembly and manufacture of handguns
at its Miami, Fla. plant on Northwest 20th Street,&rdquo;
which tells it all—including where to go to do your picketing
and demonstrating or, if you're a crook, where to pick
up your hardware.

The *Crime Dictionary* is not a how-to book, and I'd
rather not know how De Sola came by much of the information
it contains.  On the one hand, it goes back to the period
of the Wild West and, on the other, is so up-to-date that it
(almost) gives addresses where drugs can be purchased
today.  *Mata Hari* and *Judge Roy Bean* are in, but not Doc
Holliday; a special foreign section has *lista negra* 'blacklist'
(misspelt &ldquo;negro&rdquo; on the cover), but not *vache*, French for
'cop.'  One can get a real education here:

>*lobato:* (Mexican Spanish—wolf cub) nickname given to
a Mexican child or juvenile who comes north across
the U.S. border to engage in automobile theft, mugging,
robbery, prostitution or shoplifting.
>
>*Pubang buaya:* (Indonesian—crocodile hole) Djakarta
water hole infested with crocodiles and used as a
place to dispose of people at odds with the current
administration, as during the abortive communist
coup of 1965.

It would be unfair to continue; besides, with the book
in hand, the reader can find his own gems.  Many of the
entries read like fiction or sound like TV crime drama,
which is plentiful these days (and nights).  It is disturbing to
think of these entries as truly reflecting events continually
taking place in the real world, and I welcome the security of
the ivory tower from which I can experience such goings-on
vicariously: I had, in my sheltered life, always thought of
Big Boy as being a variety of tomato; according to De Sola,
a *big boy tomato* would be a woman who uses heroin.
Where have all the heroines gone?

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The mountain is named for the Rev. Starr King, who was an
invertebrate climber.&rdquo;  [From *The Boston Globe*, 25 June 1984.
Submitted by B. Goldstein, New Center, Massachusetts.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*British/American Language Dictionary*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/britishamerican-language-dictionary-for-more-effective-communication-between-americans-and-britons_norman-moss/939020/item/18267489/#idiq=18267489&edition=2593140)
Norman Moss, (Passport Books (National Textbook Company), 1984), xvii + 174pp.

In a serious attempt to avoid adopting too supercilious
an attitude towards this book—after all, it must be measured
against *English English*, by Norman W. Schur, the
most comprehensive work in the field and a VERBATIM
Book—I acknowledge a modicum of admiration for its generally
simple approach to a subject that can become relatively
complicated.  To be sure, the complications are not
strictly lexical or even lexicographical: they stem chiefly
from the differences between the kind of lexical alternation
of the *bonnet/hood, roundabout/traffic circle, dustman/
garbage collector* type and the type that is sociolinguistic
and meaningless without some sort of acculturative comment,
like *tea*, which occurs in both varieties of English but
means quite different things in each, *the Ashes*, which
doesn't occur at all in American English, and *back bencher,
Bath bun*, and *pound* (monetary), which have no equivalent
in American English and, if encountered by an American,
require some sort of explanatory definition.

Although Moss has handled the equivalents well, his
explanatory definitions leave something to be desired.  One
of the main shortcomings of the book is reflected in the lack
of research: the author was either completely unaware of
*English English* or was completely oblivious to it, and one
can only conclude, in examining his dictionary, that it
would have benefited greatly from familiarity with the content
and treatment given in other books, as well.  The copyright
notice bears the dates 1973 and 1984, and, from the
reviews quoted from the *International Herald Tribune, The
Economist*, and *The Sunday Times* in the back-cover blurb,
one must surmise that the book was originally published in
England.

As for the entries themselves, they are brief and generally
useful.  They begin to feel inadequate when one looks up
terms like *bristols* to learn that (quite correctly) the meaning
given is 'breasts.'  But the label &ldquo;Cockney&rdquo; is not helpful, as
the proper form would have been &ldquo;Cockney rhyming slang,
short for *Bristol City/titty*.&rdquo;  Similarly, those wondering
where sod, *n*. and *v*., (which has no usage label, though it is
certainly slang) came from will find no information about
its derivation from *sodomy, sodomite, sodomize.  Blooming*,
on the other hand, is labeled &ldquo;*col*(loquial),&rdquo; and is defined as
&ldquo;an all-purpose adjective, much as 'bloody' is, but mostly
working-class,&rdquo; which doesn't tell the story at all: it was for
many years a euphemism for *bloody* and is rarely heard
today mainly because there is little reluctance in using
*bloody* (once taboo); it is somewhat old-fashioned, almost
having achieved the status of &ldquo;Wodehousian&rdquo; slang typified
by *old chap, old bean*, and *Ain't it?*, now found mainly on
the lips of Bertie Wooster and those who emulate him
(mostly Americans who acquired what they know about
British English from *Jeeves* and similar books).

The book is divided into two alphabetic sections, like a
bilingual dictionary, one American-British, the other
British-American.  The foregoing comments pertain to the
latter section, which contains a number of entries that could
not be classified as British: *aerial*, a variant for 'antenna'—
*not* &ldquo;antennae&rdquo;—in American English [AE] is the only term
for the radio-TV type in British English [BE]; unfortunately,
*antenna*, which in BE used to refer only to the entomological
kind, is not an entry; *anorak* is no longer strictly
*BE* for 'parka'; *Antipodes* never was BE (by which I mean it
was universally known in English); similarly, *balaclava (helmet),
barrel organ, bespoke* ('custom-tailored'), *billiards*,
etc., such entries amounting to, perhaps, five percent of the
total.  The comment at *bill*, &ldquo;The word 'check' is not used for
any kind of bill in Britain,&rdquo; is just plain wrong—it is used
frequently today, possibly having been picked up as an
Americanism from tourists.  What is lacking, in the main, is
commentary on the usage of some terms.  For instance, use
of the term *swan-upping* is always greeted with a smile
in England.  Also, some terms are missing, e.g., *poof* or
*pouf(fe)* 'homosexual,' and others, e.g., *glaze* and *glazier*,
are just as American as they are British.

In the American-British section, users may be misled by
the inclusion of entries like *filling station* (widely used in
Britain), *chutzpah* (Yiddish, not American, though the
influence of Yiddish on *AE* is admittedly greater than on
*BE*), *pipe story* (which I've never encountered), and *polecat*
(which I recently encountered in a crossword puzzle in *The
Times)*.  Where is *Civil War* (different events in Britain and
America)?  And why is *cookie-pusher* in?  And why is *pissed
(off)* in with a &ldquo;*col* (loquial)&rdquo; label?: it is taboo (or nearly so)
in America, while *pissed* ('drunk')—as well as *balls, knockers,
arse*, etc.—can be heard (and sometimes seen) on British
TV.  Also, the statement that *pissed* &ldquo;never means drunk, as
in British&rdquo; is simply at variance with the facts.  And it would
be useful to have included *dummy*, with its senses, in the AE
section as well as the BE.

As with most books, there are some good points in this
one, but they are scarcely inspirational.  The errors abound:
the classification of *maisonette* into the British-American
section is simply wrong, as I have encountered its use in
real-estate advertising for several decades; the omission,
from the BE section, of *estate agent* (for AE *real estate
agent)*; the equivalent given there of *realtor*, which is, in
fact, *Realtor*, a registered title; the omission from the entry
*rock and rye* of any mention of the large block of rock candy
in the bottle (whence, of course, the *rock*); the inclusion of
*eavestrough??*  (for 'guttering'); the inclusion in BE of *gunsmith*
(same as in *AE*); *runner beans* (*BE*) are 'green or
string beans' in *AE*, not *French beans*, which are green
beans sliced lengthwise.  I have never heard of *fruit bread*; a
*garter snake* does not have &ldquo;three stripes around its body&rdquo;
but along it; *gloryhole* is too rare to be included; *gook*
should have a label other than just &ldquo;*col*(loquial)&rdquo; (as properly
done for *greaser, guinea*, and *wop*); *Gulla* (properly
*Gullah*) is too rare for inclusion; and *gyp* 'cheat, swindle' is
not necessarily &ldquo;used lightheartedly.&rdquo;

In short, Mr. Moss has some work to do, at home and
abroad.  Period.  (Which isn't in *AE*, though *full stop* is in
*BE.*)

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*From Beowulf to Virginia Woolf*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780252011504/Beowulf-Virginia-Woolf-Robert-Manson-0252011503/plp)
Robert Manson Myers, (University of Illinois Press, 1984), ix + 91 pp.

The subtitle, &ldquo;An Astounding and Wholly Unauthorized
History of English Literature,&rdquo; and the title page information,
&ldquo;New Edition/Thoroughly Devised/Diffusely Illustrated,&rdquo; give
only the slightest hint of the rough trade in scholarship that
follows.  For that matter, it precedes as well, with a frontispiece
literary map of the British Isles on which are identified
landmarks like *The Hence of Forth, Pepys' Dairy, Heath Cliff,
Jonathan Cape, Longman's Green, McGraw Hill*, and *Macmillan-the-Floss*.

The text, punctuated here and there by full-page profane
illustrations, treats of the great tradition of English literature
and its influences from the German *minnowsingers* and the
French *chansons de beau geste*.  Famous events (the defeat of
the Invisible Armada), famous people (Lady Zane Grey),
famous literary works (*Love's Labour's Lust, The Merchant of
Venus*), famous political bodies (The Parliament of Fools), and
other famous references are here, though, as a point of
criticism, this reviewer noted the absence of Famous Amos
(albeit he spilled his cookies on the American scene in—where
else?—California).  Reproductions of famous and influential
paintings, like that of Ann Gothica Radcliffe, mistress of
Udolpho, bride of Frankenstein, and founder of Radcliffe
College, abound.  This valuable exegesis includes the early part
of the twentieth century.  Unaccountably lacking is any mention
of the decline of the cinema (so aptly treated by Edgar
Allan Wallace in *The Fall of the House of Ushers*).  Despite this,
the author has managed to convey with great sensitivity the
panorama of the English literary traduction, which lovers of
the genre should take sitting down, as that is the most suitable
place for its perusal.

*Laurence Urdang*


### OBITER DICTA: *Lost and Found*
*Eric Winters, Marble Dale, Connecticut*

For some miraculous reason some words lose a letter when
they cross the water, be it the English Channel or the Atlantic
Ocean.  To exemplify:

For a while, England's reigning dynasty was the House of
Hanover, named after the German city of Ha*nn*over.  One *n*
was obviously lost in the Channel crossing.

When I studied history in Vienna, the name of the famous
Austrian Empress was Maria There*si*a.  In England (and, of
course, also in this country), she is known as Maria Theresa.
Another case where a letter must have fallen into the water.

The symbol Al signifies the metal that we call aluminum.
In England and on the Continent it is known as aluminium.
There exists a story, probably an apocryphal one, which tries to
explain this discrepancy.  A secretary in a Canadian city
supposedly typed a long treatise on this metal and consistently
spelled it aluminum.  Instead of having the whole paper
retyped, the word aluminum was accepted.

Anyway, two *i*'s and one *n* got somehow lost on their sea
voyages.

Conversely, only one case comes to mind where the
opposite happened and a letter was *gained*.  In English (British
and American English alike), the word *address* differs from the
spelling in other languages (e.g., German and French) where
the word is spelled with only one *d*, namely: *adresse*.  Where
did the additional *d* come from?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The manuscript has now become priceless,&rdquo; a Harvard spokesman
said, although it is not in Johann Sebastian Bach's
handwriting, which would have made it even more valuable.
[From an article in *The Washington Post*, 19 December 1984.
Submitted by Ivan R. Schwab, Morgantown, West Virginia.]

## Noah Webster—An Appreciation
*David Soibelman, Los Angeles, California*

Recently I looked up a word in a newspaper story
quoting a police officer: &ldquo;... I think the Department
will be able to work with the community to prevent an
exanthemus [*sic*] of existing problems in Venice [a Los
Angeles community].&rdquo;

I found the reporter had misspelled this odd word and
was amazed that a cop had used a Greek-root word, *exanthem*—properly,
too.  I had rooted out the word in my copy
of the massive *Webster's New International Dictionary*,
Third Edition, a huge and heavy volume of 550,000 entries.
It is a direct and living descendant, grown fatter and more
sophisticated, of Noah Webster's master work, *The American
Dictionary of the English Language*, 70,000 entries,
published in 1828.  The author was 70 at the time of publication
and had devoted years to the production of this great
work.

Yet this genius, this Renaissance man in the world of
words, has not been voted into The Hall of Fame for Great
Americans.  Many lesser folk whose names come not easily to
mind have been elected, but when Webster's name was considered
he failed in several ballotings.

America's literary heritage truly can be said to have
been born in Webster's creation.  In it, in seventeen words,
he defined dictionary as &ldquo;a book containing the words of a
language arranged in alphabetical order, with explanations
of their meaning.&rdquo;  Clear, concise, and understandable; the
modern fat volume takes twenty-one lines to define the
word.

Webster was more than a compiler of dictionaries.  He
was a volunteer in the American Revolution, lawyer, school
teacher, and author of school texts: his famous Blue-Backed
Speller—so called because of its blue binding—sold in the
millions.  Yet, whatever occupied his time, he always was
afire with the belief that the United States should have its
own version of the English language.  In his *Dissertations of
the American Language* he wrote, &ldquo;... As an independent
nation, our honor requires us to have a system of our own,
in language as well as in government.&rdquo;

In exemplifying this theory he taught this country to
drop the British *u* from words like *honour, humour, colour,
favour*, and *glamour*, and to excise the *k* from *musick,
publick*, and other such words.  His dictionary also transposed
the final two letters in the British spelling of *theatre,
centre, chambre*, and other words ending in *re* to conform
to the simpler and more logical American form.  He also
changed the ancient and earthy *plough to plow*.

Nevertheless, he failed in one of his orthographic
endeavors: he did not succeed in taking the *a* out of *leather,
feather*, and *weather*, nor in changing *tongue* to *tung*, and
*ton* and *tonnage* to *tun* and *tunnage*.  Many years later, Theodore
Roosevelt, Congressmen, teachers, and losers of spelling
bees tried to reform the American spelling of certain
words by deleting letters and combinations of letters because
they were unnecessary to their pronunciation and interfered
with their meaning.  They failed.

Webster did not hesitate to take on those who questioned
his knowledge of the language.  He even won a
number of skirmishes with Dr. Samuel Johnson, the great
English lexicographer, poet, and critic, who sneered at
American words as &ldquo;barbarisms&rdquo; and the language of the
Yankees as a &ldquo;dialect,&rdquo; then a pejorative term.  Webster
accused his English counterpart of slovenly research and
quoted Greek, Roman, and Norman etymologies in support
of his barbs.

There was a practical and proprietary side to Webster
also.  More than anyone else he may be considered the father
of American copyright laws.  To safeguard his rights to the
spellers, as well as the rights of other writers, he advocated
the establishment of copyright laws, succeeding in the late
1780s in persuading several states to enact such laws.  And in
1790 Congress followed with a federal copyright statute.

In 1806 he turned out his first dictionary, A *Compendious
Dictionary of the English Language*.  Its 37,000 entries
constituted the first major dictionary since Dr. Samuel Johnson's
in 1755.  It defined compendious as &ldquo;concise, brief.&rdquo;
One of England's greatest lexicographers called Webster &ldquo;a
born definer.&rdquo;  This mini-dictionary included about 5,000
new Americanisms: *skunk* &ldquo;a quadruped remarkable for its
smell&rdquo;; *tomahawk* &ldquo;an Indian hatchet&rdquo;; *bravo* &ldquo;one who
murders for hire, an assassin&rdquo;; and some homespun coinages:
*hickory, applesauce, succotash, chowder, handy*, and
*bullfrog*.  To promote the sale of his works he traveled the
country as far south as the Carolinas by horse, carriage, and
steamboat, taking orders wherever he went and filling notebooks
with words, ancient and new, listening to the speech
of people, seeking the origin of their words and expressions,
all the while studying etymology, philology, and linguistic
and orthographic lore, and lecturing on the language, on
education, and on government.

A farm lad, he had entered Yale at 16 where studies
often were halted by recesses caused by lack of food, aggressive
action by the Redcoats, or by outbreaks of typhoid
fever.  In one such interval, he and his father marched to
join the fighting at Saratoga; but they arrived too late: Gentleman
Johnny Burgoyne had surrendered to General Horatio
Gates on October 17, 1777, a day after Noah was 19.

To prepare himself for the herculean task of writing his
Dictionary, Webster is said to have taught himself 26 languages,
including Anglo-Saxon and Sanskrit.  Books in 20
languages—reference works, grammars, and dictionaries—
cluttered the large round table on which he wrote his 1828
magnum opus.  To do his research, he moved to Amherst,
where he also became active in the town's civic and academic
affairs.  He was elected to the Massachusetts legislature,
became a trustee and president of Amherst Academy,
and, with Samuel F. Dickinson, grandfather of poet Emily
Dickinson, he helped found Amherst College.  Yale, his alma
mater, awarded him an honorary LL.D. in 1823.

He was a man of disparate interests.  He was an
orchardist, a gardener, an experimental scientist, a constant
traveler.  He was a councilman and alderman for Hartford
and served on its school district committee.  He plugged for a
municipal water system, and for planting elms along the
sidewalks; and he wrote on such diverse topics as meteors,
the art of growing potatoes, experiments relating to dew,
and mythology, and to keep his hand in, on the affinity
between the languages of Europe and Asia.  But a foray into
medical and health topics led him astray.  He wrote a two-volume
*Brief History of Epidemic and Pestilential Diseases*,
contending, among other egregious reaches, that yellow
fever had its sources in noxious vapors billowing up from fissures
in the earth.

Webster died at 85 in New Haven, on May 28, 1843.
Men who love words for their own sake, writers, etymologists,
philologists, and lexicographers appreciate the greatness
of the genius whose dictionary was the sturdy progenitor
of today's American word books.  To many, the name
Webster has become virtually eponymous, a household
word, connoting the standard, the apotheosis of American
dictionaries, which are today filled with strange words.  By
his works he has added an incandescent nimbus to the shining
and singular splendor of the American language.


### OBITER DICTA: *Distribution*
*Laurence Urdang*

Articles in VERBATIM have dealt with various dialects of
Spanish in which the same word has quite different meanings—usually
a quite harmless one in the form of the language
spoken in one country contrasting with a taboo sense
in a form spoken in another country.  The phenomenon is
called *distribution* by linguists, for the same word is differently
distributed in different dialects—whether semantically
or by usage level.  Perhaps observers of English have commented
on the same situation in British and American English,
but if they have, I am unaware of it.  Below is a collection
of some differences between the usages in England and
America of a few words, with explanatory remarks.  Perhaps
our readers will be interested in contributing to the list.

| AMERICAN                                                                           | BRITISH                                                                                                                                  |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| *ass* bottom; jackass; fool.                                                       | *ass* jackass; fool.                                                                                                                     |
| *all in* exhausted.                                                                | *all in* 1. everything included. 2. anything goes; *Amer*.  all-out, as in *all-in wrestling*.                                           |
| *balls* *Taboo*. testicles.                                                        | *balls*, Somewhat risqu&eacute; because of the 'testicles' sense, but quite common as an expletive expressing disgust, frustration, etc. |
| *bum* hobo; tramp.                                                                 | *bum* bottom, arse.                                                                                                                      |
| *cheesy* shoddy; cheap.                                                            | *cheesy* swank(y).                                                                                                                       |
| *cock* 1. *Taboo*. penis. 2. male bird.                                            | *cock* 1. male bird. 2. *Chiefly in satirizing Americans*. penis.                                                                        |
| *cunt* *Extremely vulgar, taboo* 1. female pudenda. 2.  a most undesirable person. | *cunt* 1. a fool; an idiot.2.  female pudenda (*but far less frequent)*.  See fanny.                                                     |
| *dinky* small; shabbily made.                                                      | *dinky* cute.                                                                                                                            |
| *fanny* *Cute*. bottom.                                                            | *fanny* 1.  bottom. 2. *Taboo*.  cunt.                                                                                                   |
|*knock up* *Slang*. to make pregnant.   |    *knock up* wake up; rouse.
|*mean* cruel.           |                     *mean* stingy.
|*pissed* *Vulgar*. 1. drunk. 2. angry. |  *pissed* *Colloquial*. drunk.
|*rubber* condom.          |                   *rubber* eraser.
|*smart* clever; intelligent.         |        *smart* chic.
|*table* postpone.       |                     *table* bring up for discussion.
|*twat* *Taboo*. cunt.      |       *twat* *Colloquial*. silly fool; berk.
                                                            


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Regardless of anything to the contrary in this booklet,
if your medical insurance terminates for any reason including
death, you...may elect within 30 days...to continue
such medical insurance...&rdquo; [From *Group Insurance
for 1-14 Employees*, Consolidated Group Trust, The Hartford,
p. 70.]

## Antipodean English: *Of Camels and Tamarillos*
*George W. Turner, University of Adelaide*

Salesmen who aspire to sell snow to Eskimos might
spare a moment's admiration for the Australians who sell
camels to the Middle East.  Camels are not native to Australia,
but in desert areas they have become as much part of
the landscape as kangaroos.  The word *hooshtah* 'a shout of
encouragement to a camel' might now, in its English use, be
called an Australianism, since all the *Oxford English
Dictionary's* recent quotations to illustrate the use of the
word are from Australian sources.  Australia is now the only
place where camels run wild and the only source from
which other countries can replenish their stocks.  In 1975
sixty-five Aussie camels even emigrated to the USA.  They
required no work permits, as they were destined to provide
disease-free stock for zoos.

There were desultory attempts to bring camels to Australia
as early as 1840, but it was not till the 1860s that large
shipments were brought in from India.  With them came
drivers collectively referred to as *Afghans*.  Most were from
Afghanistan, some from Rajasthan, Baluchistan, West Pakistan,
a few from Egypt, Iran, and Turkey.  All were Muslims
and spoke Pashtu.  Besides providing outback transport for
explorers and goldfields, they were employed in building the
rabbit-proof fence in Western Australia and the Overland
Telegraph Line from Adelaide to Darwin.  They did not
bring women and could not, in accordance with the prejudices
of the time, become British citizens, so few remain;
but their collective name, shortened to *Ghan*, survives in the
historical term *Ghan towns*, Afghan settlements on the outskirts
of some inland towns, and, especially, in the name of
the train, the *Ghan*, that runs from Adelaide via Port Pirie
to Alice Springs.  The old Ghan was subject to many delays
as lines were washed out by floods, so that a train could easily
be two weeks late in arriving at its destination.  By 1980,
a new and more reliable standard-gauge line was completed,
but the name *Ghan* survives for the train.

No new name for camels was needed to sell them.
Across the Tasman in New Zealand, however, export industries
are aided by a little linguistic engineering.  Two well-known
New Zealand exports, neither of them native, are
tree-tomatoes and Chinese gooseberries, but neither is called
that by the exporters.  The tomatoes are a South American
fruit, a rich source of vitamin C and long popular in New
Zealand.  About twenty years ago, the name *tamarillo* was
deliberately contrived, much as a brand name is.  On the
basis of *tomato*, a diminutive *-ill-* was added; then *tomatillo*
was altered, in honor of a legendary Maori tribal hero,
Tama-te-kapua, to *tamatillo*; and then a change to
*tamarillo* was considered more euphonious.  And so a new
word was born.

At about the same time, an export market for Chinese
gooseberries was growing in the United States.  The trouble
was that at that time China was not popular in the USA.
The invention *kiwi-fruit* proved more acceptable, and a
thriving industry perhaps owes much of its success to the linguistic
artifact.  But perhaps in the new international climate
growers will want to change the name back again—or
try to sell their Chinese gooseberries to China.

## Spherical Containment Device
*Theodor Schuchat, Bellevue, Washington*

I hereby salute Bartelt Design & Manufacturing of Mill
Valley, California, for trying—with a smile—to dispel
some of the verbal fog drifting across the face of American
business and industry, obscuring the simple truth.  Bartelt
makes one of those wooden gadgets that stand on your
kitchen table or counter and hold a roll of paper toweling
upright.  You tear off a piece to wipe up a spill.  Self-evident.

Bartelt's version of this commonplace item, however, is
sold with Technical Bulletin No. 3306-7, an illustrated sheet
that explains, with a straight face, how to get the roll of
paper toweling on Bartelt's Towel Tote and how to tear off
a piece after the roll is installed.  The Technical Bulletin, by
Jeff Bartelt, is a parody of the fatuous nomenclature that
clutters the contemporary American economy.  The stick on
which the paper roll is impaled is called a Vertical Tube
Core.  The wooden base is identified as a Low Friction Moisture
Resisting Pad.  And Bartelt gives away a trade secret by
admitting that its Spherical Containment Device was &ldquo;formerly
Knob at Top.&rdquo;  The latter, Bartelt explains, is &ldquo;anthropomorphically
designed&rdquo; and &ldquo;welcomes the carrying hand
(left or right).&rdquo;

We've been seeing entirely too much of this kind of pretentious
prose lately.  The Strand Theater in Madison, Wisconsin,
has the nerve to call its trash cans &ldquo;patron assistance
containers.&rdquo; John McSweeney of Cedar Falls, Iowa, makes
so bold as to advertise that he builds &ldquo;hog containment
units&rdquo;: pigpens to thee and me.  No self-respecting business is
satisfied with a truck these days: it must operate a &ldquo;mobile
unit.&rdquo;  The truck with the television camera gear, of course,
is a &ldquo;location production unit.&rdquo;  The carts they push down
the Northwest Orient aisles are now &ldquo;food modules.&rdquo;  Once
the Seattle Public Library had a bookmobile; now it has a
&ldquo;Traveling Library Center.&rdquo;

If the frequency with which I encounter it is indicative,
even classier than operating a &ldquo;unit&rdquo; or a &ldquo;module&rdquo; is running
a &ldquo;center.&rdquo;  A hospital laundry calls itself a &ldquo;Fabric
Care Center.&rdquo;  A drugstore is now a &ldquo;Family Health Care
Center.&rdquo;  The ship's bridge has become the &ldquo;Vessel Control
Center.&rdquo;  In Seattle, Kelley's Telephone Answering Service
doesn't have an office; it has its very own &ldquo;Communications
Center.&rdquo;  The St. Louis airport has replaced its ticket counters
with &ldquo;service centers,&rdquo; but the computer goes down anyway.
Not to worry, though, the trouble-shooting mechanic
is hard at work, providing &ldquo;hardware support&rdquo; to the &ldquo;end-user.&rdquo;
Why can't they just repair the machine for the customer?
Because plain talk is unfashionable nowadays, that's
why.  Because they get more money for old railroad ties if
they call them &ldquo;landscape timbers,&rdquo; that's why.  Because
people will more willingly wash windows and clean floors if
you label their truck a &ldquo;pollution control unit,&rdquo; that's why.

Who dreams up this fustian?  It is people who sit at a
&ldquo;work surface&rdquo; instead of a desk, the kind who carry a &ldquo;data
transport system&rdquo; instead of an attach&eacute; case.  They're the
ones who sold me an &ldquo;Energy Management System&rdquo; instead
of a thermostat.  They never need laundry or dry cleaning,
only &ldquo;textile services.&rdquo;  They think we don't know what's
afoot when they go into a massage parlor that calls itself an
&ldquo;Adult Social Service Center.&rdquo;

But Bartelt Design & Manufacturing is a beacon of
hope amid the miasma that surrounds us.  They're using the
right weapon: laughter is the only intelligent response to
mindless affectation.  Poking fun at the pretentiousness of
others apparently is profitable, too.  Bartelt's Towel Tote is a
bestseller.  And I can hardly wait to read the Technical Bulletin
that accompanies the gadget they make to hold toilet
paper.

## Some Impletons

*DEFINITIONS*

1\.  When mischeivous elves put on a striking show, it is an IMP&mdash;.  
2\.  They breathe IMP&mdash;, which may harm their lungs.  
3\.  They drink frothy IMP&mdash;, which pins them to the wall.  
4\.  We drive them upwards to take the IMP&mdash;.  
5\.  All their legitimate acts, mmentioned or not, are IMP&mdash;.  
6\.  Blown into the mine, they discover a rich IMP&mdash;.  
7\.  They pass along their creative work, known as IMP&mdash;.  
8\.  Scholars pleading for information on their traditions become well-versed in IMP&mdash;.  
9\.  Their imminent demise is IMP&mdash;.  
10\.  Merely by hinting at duplicity, they IMP&mdash;.  
11\.  They guaranteed not to fall off the IMP&mdash; on the skyscraper.  
12\.  They shut up the Cockney elf's dog, an IMP&mdash;.  
13\.  The street wasn't IMP&mdash;, the elf's horse could not traverse it.  
14\.  Nor could his burro; it was (or wasn't) IMP&mdash;.  
15\.  Through togetherness they hope to escape penalty by IMP&mdash;.

*SOLUTIONS TO SOME IMPLETONS*

a)  act      
b)  air      
c)  ale      
d)  art      
e)  assable  
f)  el      
g)  ending  
h)  ledge   
i)  licit   
j)  lied    
k)  lode
l)  lore
m)  (h)ossible
n)  'ound
o)  unity
>
>*ANSWERS TO SOME IMPLETONS*
>
>1-a  
2-b  
3-c  
4-f  
5-i  
6-k  
7-d  
8-l  
9-g  
10-j  
11-h  
12-n  
13-m  
14-e  
15-o


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Hot Cod Pieces are Perfect for Little Soldiers.&rdquo;
[Headline in *The Australian*, March 27, 1985.  Submitted by
Dr. H. H. Macey, Floreat Park, Western Australia.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Eugene Klein, who owns the colt along with his wife,
...&rdquo;  [From the *Columbus Dispatch*, May 19, 1985.  Submitted
by Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]


#### EPISTOLA {A.M. Kinloch}

Like most articles in VERBATIM, Frank R. Abate's &ldquo;Postpositive
Modifiers in English&rdquo; [XI,2] is informative as well
as amusing.  However, it does contain one blunder: the
phrase *penny dreadful* does not exemplify a postpositive
modifier.  In this phrase, the word *dreadful* is a nominal,
meaning 'a story of crime written in a sensational or morbidly
exciting style; a journal or print of such character; a
'shocker.'  *colloq.'  (Oxford English Dictionary, s.v. dreadful
C. sb.*).  The whole phrase, *penny dreadful*, is recorded with
the meaning 'paper of a crude, sensational kind aimed at
older children' in the *Oxford Dictionary of Current Idiomatic
English,* vol. 2 (Oxford: O.U.P., 1983), page 453, col. 1. Neither reference points out that the word *penny* in the
phrase in question meant 'costing one penny,' and is hence
an adjectival or modifier, preceding its nominal.

*[A.M. Kinloch, University of New Brunswick]*


#### EPISTOLA {Walter Staaks}

The note on postpositive modifiers in English [XI,2] by
Frank Abate was particularly interesting to me.  When
teaching American university students the placement of
adjectives in French, to underline this structural difference
between French and English I would invite them to come
up with examples of adjectives following the noun in their
own language.  Not surprisingly, they failed to find many on
the spur of the moment.  The construction is rare.  Having a
head start on them in pondering the question, I was able to
cite several combinations like those offered by Dr. Abate.
(In French, of course, although it is true and generally
taught that most adjectives come after the noun, their preposition
is by no means limited to the dozen or so bland
high-frequency qualifiers often limited as normally precedent;
to the contrary, nonrestrictive adjectives are frequently
placed before their nouns for the sake of rhythm,
emphasis, or other stylistic considerations.)

I write now in acceptance of Dr. Abate's invitation to
supplement his lists.  Saving the best till later, I begin with
pairs that might be rejected under strict interpretation of the
rules of the game:

1.  Combinations most often but not exclusively
encountered as headings of columns of statistics, like *free
throws attempted, fumbles recovered, points scored*, etc.
These are at least akin to Abate's *accounts payable/
receivable.*

2.  Similar to the above, nouns plus past participles
occurring alone as headings or in elliptical constructions
[meaning (nouns) that are/were/have been (+ past participle)],
e.g., *questions unresolved, measures taken, topics
addressed,* etc.  Such pairings are innumerable, and probably
shouldn't count.  Incidentally, this noun-plus-past-participle
parallels French structure exactly, whereas German
syntax requires that the adjective precede.  On the other
hand, of course, an indefinite pronoun plus adjective, e.g.,
*nothing new, someone important,* reflects German structure
and differs slightly from the French.

3.  Titles (of books, poems, shows, paintings, organizations,
and the like): *Paradise Lost, Brideshead Revisited,
Alcoholics Anonymous, Mood Indigo, Voyage Extraordinary,
Boy Blue, House Beautiful, Mission Impossible, Toys
Unlimited, Moments Musical,* etc.  Dr. Abate, who mentions
*Vanity Fair* and *Knights Templar*, obviously does not
exclude this category.

4.  Pairs consecrated by convention: *life eternal* (Biblical),
*joy unconfined* (poetic), *virtue triumphant* (literary),
*proof positive* (judicial), *delegates at large* (political), *person
or persons unknown* (legalistic), *steak tartare* (culinary),
*patent pending* (without verbal context), *brother mine* (in
semi-facetious address), *battle royal* (idiomatic), *laughs aplenty*
(colloquial), *chicken supreme, veal Florentine,* etc.
(gastronomical).  One should no doubt draw the line short of
*degrees Fahrenheit,* because the modifier is elliptical for &ldquo;on
the Fahrenheit scale&rdquo; and could be—perhaps ought to be—
separated from its noun by a comma or parentheses.

Of the above group, the first seven could grammatically
be transposed without alteration of sense, and may therefore
be less than perfect examples.  In this connection I applaud
Abate's &ldquo;God Almighty,&rdquo; which when inverted changes in
tone from profane to reverent.

I forbear to suggest seriously the names of beings, from
*Chicken Little to Pope Pius*—the latter especially, since it
involves a pun that the editor surely &ldquo;could do without.&rdquo;

If the ideal postpositive modifier is (a) one which usage
forbids to precede and (b) is not a participle, there seem to
be very few, and Abate has proposed several of them, like
*heir apparent, time immemorial,* and *devil incarnate.*  To
these perfect examples I can add, without extensive searching,
only three (besides any of the above that might be
acceptable): *minister plenipotentiary, things French* (or any
of countless other adjectives thus placed for emphasis with
respect to the colorless noun [one would not say &ldquo;art
French&rdquo;!]), and for the crowning delight, *cherries jubilee.*
(Never to be served with Bud Lite.)

*[Walter Staaks, Associate Professor, Emeritus, Purdue University]*

[*Dr. Abate comments:* Many of the culinary combinations
are such, of course, because of their being loan translations
from a Romance phrase (*veal Florentine, steak tartare*, etc.)
or because they pick up the postpositive placement on the
model of the French syntactical rules.]


#### EPISTOLA {Caldwell Titcomb}

The engaging article by Frank Abate on &ldquo;Postpositive
Modifiers in English&rdquo; [XI, 2] contained &ldquo;a fault too too
unpardonable,&rdquo; to borrow an example from Shakespeare.  I
refer to his inclusion of the term *penny dreadful.*  Although
we most often use *penny* as a noun and *dreadful* as an adjective,
in this phrase the words are in the standard adjective-plus-noun
order.  *Dreadful* has been around as a noun for
more than a century, being a designation for a lurid and
sensational crime story such as used to be printed in the late
19th century and sold for a penny.

On 30 January 1883, the *London Daily News* informed
us, &ldquo;Persons of culture are apt to speak harshly of penny
dreadfuls, as they call the novels which appear in cheap
weekly journals.&rdquo;  And the *Morning Advertiser* for 18 March
1891 told us, &ldquo;The chairman said he must have been reading
some penny dreadfuls or other low literature.&rdquo;  Note that the
plural is not *pennies dreadful.*  A synonym was the *penny
awful*, in which again the second word was a noun.

The cheapness could be conveyed by the adjectival use
of *shilling* as well as *penny*.  Someone with a low opinion of
Robert Louis Stevenson reported in the *Athenaeum* for 14
November 1885 that &ldquo;Mr. Stevenson is writing another shilling
dreadful.&rdquo;  Those with a taste for alliteration could
employ the term *shilling shocker*, as in the *Illustrated London
News* of 17 September 1887: &ldquo;The three-volume novel
may be dying out, as they tell us; but we have the shilling
shocker rampant among us.&rdquo;  That was the year that saw
publication of the most influential early example of the
genre: *The Mystery of a Hansom Cab* by Fergus Hume
(1859-1932).

The current theatre season in New York has offered
Charles Ludlam's play *The Mystery of Irma Vep*, which
bears the subtitle &ldquo;A Penny Dreadful.&rdquo;  *Penny* as an adjective
is at least as old as the 17th century.  And I am old enough to
remember that in this country we had what was called a
*penny postcard.*

*[Caldwell Titcomb, Brandeis University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Emily Mitchell}

Your article, &ldquo;Postpositive Modifiers in English,&rdquo; [XI, 2]
was highly interesting and must have spurred many readers
of VERBATIM to seek further examples of grammatical influences
of Romance languages on English.  It did me, and my
contribution to your list of noun-modifier pairs is in the
form of place names.  The first lakes discovered by the 17th-century
French explorers in North America were named by
placing the modifier after the word *lake*, and thus we have
Lake Ontario, Lake Huron, Lake Superior.  This method of
naming lakes has prevailed in the U.S., although small lakes
are usually named in the reverse way, modifier-noun, such
as Loon Lake or Rogers Lake.

Capes were also named in reverse order (the first to
name them were English explorers): Cape Fear, Cape Cod,
Cape Hatteras.  There are also points thus named: Point Possession,
Point Pleasant, Point Judith.  Of rivers named in
reverse order, I know only of the River Rouge in Michigan,
so called by the French.  Most of the Florida keys are in
modifier-noun order but there are notable exceptions, due to
the Spanish influence: Key West, Key Largo, Key Biscayne.

Single mountains have traditionally been labeled in
English with the modifier following the geographic term:
Mount Snow, Mount Ida, Mount Moriah; so have ports:
Port Royal, Port Ritchie, Port Charles, and all forts: Fort
Bragg, Fort Leavenworth, Fort Ancient.

It seems that reverse-order place names in this country
can be attributed to the French, to the Spanish, and to the
English, whose language, of course, had been subjected to
the influence of a Romance language before they reached
here.

*[Emily Mitchell, Niantic, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Carolyn Williams}
Michael Gorman, in &ldquo;The Trivial Pursuit of Grammar,&rdquo;
[XI, 4] errs if he supposes that Trivial Pursuit was
intended for anyone with perception.  Nobody with a reasonably
developed sense of values would ever buy it, for it must
qualify as the most over-priced board game ever produced!
But leaving aside the awful grammar, it seems that the game
is guilty of factual errors also.  A magpie, as I was able to
verify in my back garden this morning, has *three* distinct
colours of plumage: black, white and blue.  Honest.

*[Carolyn Williams, Derby, England]*

## Light Refractions: *Puzzling and Processing*
*Thomas H. Middleton*

I do most of my writing on a word processor.  Using a
word processor has great advantages—and a few disadvantages—over
writing the old-fashioned way, with pen,
pencil, and typewriter.  The most obvious of the advantages
is the ease with which you can do your rewriting.  Just push
a few of the proper keys and whap!  what you don't want no
longer exists, and you can replace it with what you do want.
By the same magic, you can shift whole blocks of words,
moving them from this place to that in the text.  It makes
editing a cinch.  All the changes take place on a screen, and
when you get just what you want, you push some buttons to
let your printer know that you're ready to see the whole
thing on paper.  Then you get a beer or a cup of coffee and
listen to the printer go through its blappety-blap-zip-zip.

Most of the writers I know have used typewriters for
years, and some of them have even done most of their
rewriting on the typewriter.  I can't do that.  My mind has
always been so tatterdemalion that I've never, *never* put the
right words in the right order on a typewriter the first time
around.  Not even in a friendly letter.  Even a half-page note
to an old pal has usually required a scrawled first draft on
scrap paper before commitment to honest-to-God stationery.
I've always envied those guys who could slide a sheet of
blank paper into a machine and tap out just the right stuff
the very first time.  Years ago, I decided that the only way I
could write for publication was to use a pen or a pencil and
do my rewriting as I went along, so that by the time I finished
my first draft it was completely indecipherable to anyone
but me.  Pages were covered with crossouts, carets, stars,
circled numbers, and words in circles connected by long,
looping, meandering arrows leading to the spots in the text
where the words were to be moved.  Only when I'd reread
these scrawls, turning and twisting the pages to reveal scribblings
along margins and on backsides, finally sensing that I
had managed to marshall my refractory thoughts in what
seemed to me to be recognizable order, did I finally put a
sheet of paper in my typewriter.

That I had to go through this tortured process depressed
me, and still does.  It shows that my mind lacks the discipline
to square itself away without looking at its own skimbleskamble
output on paper and piecing the elements together
like a puzzle.  Probably what I like most about the word
processor is that I no longer feel like such a fool.  I straighten
my thoughts out on the screen of my TRS-80 Model III
Microcomputer, and those outrageous squiggles and arrows
that used to accuse me of mental dishevelment are not there
as silent witnesses to my ineptitude.

The computer-word-processor has a few disadvantages.
In my own case, an important disadvantage, but one that is
easily overwhelmed by the aforementioned advantages, is its
lack of portability.  When I used to do all my columns on a
legal pad, using a pencil or ballpoint, my favorite way to
write was to hop on my bicycle and write the column in my
mind as I rode approximately three and a half miles to the
beach in Santa Monica, then another three miles along the
beach bike path to an outdoor restaurant.  There, having
conjured an inchoate but viable composition, I'd order a
salad and a glass of wine and scribble my thoughts as I sat in
the southern California sunshine.  That was where I'd do my
puzzle-solving—my mental house-straightening.  Then I'd
ride home and translate the scribbles into a coherent piece
on my typewriter.  I can't load my TRS-80 on my ten-speed,
and so nowadays I sit here in my office on the second floor
of our home, dealing with ephemeral little light-letters.
Every time I hit a snag in my thoughts, the refrigerator
whistles softly from downstairs, and too often I respond to
its siren call.  The result is predictable.  I've expanded
through the hips and waist, and the muscle-tone of my legs
is now shot to hell.

By now, everyone is computer-wise enough to know
that an entire day's work can be wiped out in a flash—literally—if
some disturbance shatters the inner integrity of
whatever goes on among those tiny chips that miraculously
hold your mind's work on their invisible electrical charges.
A sudden loss of power due to a windstorm or a cantankerous
appliance somewhere can blank out your screen, and
when the power comes back, you'll very likely see the screen
covered with a mess of extraterrestrial markings interspersed
with familiar but meaningless numbers and letters.

Some people, on discovering that you've been doing
your work on a word processor, seem to think you haven't
actually done the writing.  I was giving a talk to a group of
writers a few weeks ago, and I mentioned this phenomenon.
Later, a woman told me of having been introduced as &ldquo;Jane
Brown.  She's just had her novel published.&rdquo;  The couple to
whom she'd been introduced replied appropriately, &ldquo;How
wonderful!&rdquo;  Then the introducer added, &ldquo;She used a word
processor.&rdquo;  The enthusiasm disappeared.  Poor Jane Brown
had been accused, however mutely, of having let a machine
write a novel for her and of having taken full credit for the
machine's work.  She said she felt like screaming, &ldquo;Hey!
They were my words!  The word processor just processed
them!&rdquo;  But she said she'd have felt like a damned fool.  I can
see her point.

Now we come to the major problem with word processors
and computers in general: It seems that the geniuses
who deal easily with microchips and their bits and bytes and
all that sort of baffling esoterica are seldom very good at
making themselves clear in the English language.  My TRS-80
came with a few manuals, among them a little booklet
called *Getting Started With TRS-80 Basic.*  I suppose this
booklet was designed to take the computer-fear out of the
mind of the new owner.  It was full of drawings of what
must be a &ldquo;user-friendly&rdquo; computer—a talkative little
computer-human cartoon character who gets into amusing
situations and makes little inside jokes about computer stuff.
No one who wants to learn how to operate his marvelous
new machine is helped much by a gabby little comic-strip
guy.  What you want is a way of looking up what you want
to know, and that is often quite impossible in a computer
manual.

In my *Disk System Owner's Manual*, for instance,
there's a page that purports to tell me how to append files.  If
you're computer-illiterate, you probably don't know what
that means.  Bear with me.  It says:

>*APPEND* *source-file destination-file*
*source-file* is the specification for the file which is to
be copied onto the end of the other file.
>
>*destination-file* is the specification for the file which
is to receive the appendage (addition).
>
>*Note:* Both *source-* and *destination-files* must be in
ASCII format (data files or BASIC programs saved
with the A option).

It's that *&ldquo;Note:&rdquo;* that caused me trouble.  Because I have
friends who've been involved in the computer field for decades
and are willing and able to converse in clear English
with me, I know that *ASCII* is pronounced &ldquo;asskey,&rdquo; but I
have no idea what, in fact, *ASCII* means.  That isn't my
friends' fault; it's mine—and the manual's.  In the index, I
looked up *ASCII*.  No diceky.  Under *ASCII*, they list lots of
pages on which the term *ASCII* appears, usually in the
phrase *ASCII format*.  But nowhere does it tell me what
*ASCII* stands for, or what *ASCII format* means.  I figured
they'd at least tell me what &ldquo;the A option&rdquo; is, but nowhere
in the index can one find *A, Option*, or *A Option*.  So that
*&ldquo;Note:,&rdquo;* which appears to be an important bit of information,
means absolutely zilch to one unfamiliar with the science.
From sympathetic souls, I have learned that this
problem arises in the owners' manuals of virtually every
computer and computer program ever manufactured.

&ldquo;Error messages&rdquo; appear on your screen with only the
tersest elucidation of their import.  You go to your manual to
see what's happened in the innermost workings of your computer's
bowels.  (I used that word for fun.  If ever there was a
machine whose inner workings cannot be thought of as
&ldquo;bowels,&rdquo; the computer is it.  I think of my computer's interior
as phantom quicksilver.)  If you can find the error message
listed in your manual's index, you're doing well.  If you
can find a further explanation of the error you've committed,
buy yourself a drink.

One of my most frustrating experiences is to type SAV,
which is the &ldquo;save&rdquo; signal on one of my programs, follow it
with what in computer lingo is called the FILENAME (meaning
that I want what I've just written to be saved on the
diskette), to hear the humming and whirring that tell me the
TRS-80 is working its heart out, then to have flashed on the
screen NO ERROR FOUND.  I repeat the process: SAV, followed
by the filename, and again, instead of getting my file saved,
I get the &ldquo;error message&rdquo;: NO ERROR FOUND.  The circularity
is infuriating.  If you can find in your own manual just
exactly what any &ldquo;error message&rdquo; means, you're lucky.  If
you can discover what can be done to correct the error,
count yourself uncommonly blessed in the sight of the great
computer god IBMAC.

Still, in spite of its sometimes frustrating ways, my
computer-cum-word-processor is welcome on my desk any
time.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Gorbachev Tows Communist Line.&rdquo;  [Headline in *The
Anchorage Times*, March 13, 1985.  Submitted by DeLynne
Chambers, Anchorage.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...Furniture Company's seventy-fifth Diamond
Anniversary.&rdquo;  [From an advertisement on radio station
WGAY, Arlington, Virginia.  Submitted by Charles T.
Reyner, Arlington.]

## Words That Don't Look Right
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

Last year, St. Paul's School, where I teach, sponsored a
series of programs designed to heighten our community's
awareness of the realities of living in a nuclear age.
The last of these programs began with a debate about the
Strategic Defense Initiative, popularly known as Star Wars,
between a speech-writing Naval Commander representing
the Defense Department and a University of New Hampshire
Physics Professor.  As one would guess, the Commander
stoutly defended Star Wars as scientifically feasible and strategically
ideal.  As his speech soared to its conclusion, the
Pentagonian exulted: &ldquo;In Star Wars, America has finally
come up with the penultimate defense system!&rdquo;

Oops!  The egg-on-the-face solecism in the Commander's
exclamation is the word *penultimate*.  The speaker obviously
thought that *penultimate* means 'the absolute ultimate.'
So do a lot of us, like the Tony Award winner who
was quoted in a recent issue of VERBATIM as saying, &ldquo;I knew
what my goal was when I saw Lauren Bacall touring in a
play in Buffalo.  To be an actress like that—well, to me that
was the penultimate!&rdquo;  But *penultimate* doesn't mean the
absolute ultimate.  Derived from the Latin *paene* 'almost,'
and *ultimus* 'last,' *penultimate* means 'next to the last.'
Thinking that *pen-* was an intensifier, rather than a qualifier,
our Naval Commander ended up saying something contrary
to what he meant.  The last thing we want is a penultimate
defense system against nuclear weapons.

Also quoted in a recent issue of this quarterly was this
message: &ldquo;The Bureau of Animal Affairs will help you get
those clucking, flapping pigeons off your window ledge, and
will issue a summons to those who scatter food that attracts
bands of the noisome birds.&rdquo;  Oops!  again.  The Bureau of
Animal Affairs writer, like many other English users, apparently
thought that *noisome* means &ldquo;noisy.&rdquo;  But *noisome* has
nothing to do with noise.  In truth, the word is formed from
a shortening of *annoy* plus the adjectival suffix *-some*.  Most
frequently *noisome* is used to describe an offensive odor,
annoying to the point of being nauseous.

Last year, a March 1984 catalogue from a Portland,
Maine, publishing company came in my mail.  The cartoon
on the cover shows Shakespeare's Juliet, standing on her balcony,
gazing off into the distance, and asking, &ldquo;Wherefore
art thou, teaching aids?&rdquo;  Lower on the page, Romeo stares
up at Juliet and says, &ldquo;Inside!  Eighteen new publications
plus many other fine materials.&rdquo;  I would hope that most of
my fellow Inmates in the House of Correction (of Composition)
caught the blooper.  Quite obviously, the publisher of
English materials interpreted *wherefore* as meaning 'where,'
a mistake that has been perpetuated by generations of
would-be actresses who misconstrue the famous line in
*Romeo and Juliet*, &ldquo;O Romeo, Romeo!  wherefore art thou
Romeo?&rdquo;  But a knowledgeable examination of Shakespeare's
language—&ldquo;Wherefore rejoice?  /What conquest brings he
home?&rdquo;  (*Julius Caesar*, I, i, 32-33); &ldquo;But wherefore could
not I pronounce 'Amen'?&rdquo;  (*Macbeth* II, ii, 39)—reveals that
*wherefore* means 'why,' not 'where,' further proof being the
pleonastic clich&eacute; &ldquo;the whys and wherefores.&rdquo;  Thus, those
who deliver the sentence &ldquo;Wherefore art thou Romeo?&rdquo;
should place emphasis on the word *Romeo* rather than on
the word *art*.

Then there is the general who extended his &ldquo;most fulsome
congratulations&rdquo; to a medal recipient.  It is true that the
original meaning of *fulsome* was 'full, abundant,' but the
well-meaning general overlooked the dominant sense of the
word today—'offensive to the senses or sensibility'—and said
the opposite of what he really meant.

*Penultimate, noisome, wherefore* and *fulsome* are four
especially deceiving examples of words that don't look right,
words that don't mean what their appearance or sound
would have the unwary believe they do.  Here is a small quiz
that presents a dozen additional words whose form or sound
is misleading.  Beware and be wary as you choose the correct
definition for each entry.  Answers appear at the end of this
article.

1.  *antebellum* a.  against women b.  against war
c.  before the war d.  after the war.

2.  *apiary* a.  school for mimics b.  place where apes are
kept c.  place where bees are kept d.  cupboard for
peas.

3.  *cupidity* a.  strong desire for wealth b.  strong desire
for love c.  obtuseness d.  love of amusement parks.

4.  *disinterested* a.  bored b.  lacking a bank account
c.  restless d.  unbiased.

5.  *enervated* a.  nervous b.  energized c.  weakened
d.  cowardly.

6.  *forestress* a.  ancient hair style b.  stress on first part of
a word c.  female forester d.  dread anticipation.

7.  *friable* a.  easily crumbled b.  unhealthy c.  easily
fried d.  relating to holy orders.

8.  *herpetology* the study of a.  herbs b.  herpes
c.  female pets d.  reptiles.

9.  *inflammable* a.  calm b.  incredulous c.  not easily set
on fire d.  easily set on fire.

10.  *meretricious* a.  falsely attractive b.  worthy
c.  good-tasting d.  diseased.

11.  *prosody* the study of a.  drama b.  music c.  prose
d.  versification.

12.  *raze* a.  to burn with the sun b.  to lift up c.  to tear
down d.  to shear.

Taking a simplistic (there's another one!) approach to
words can generate bizarre results.  Once, after one of his
many luncheon speeches on the wonders and promises of
rocketry and space flight, NASA scientist Wernher von
Braun found himself clinking cocktail glasses with an adoring
woman from the audience.

&ldquo;Dr. von Braun,&rdquo; she gushed, &ldquo;I just loved your speech,
and I found it of absolutely infinitesimal value!&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well then,&rdquo; von Braun gulped, &ldquo;I guess I'll have to
publish the speech posthumously.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Oh yes!&rdquo;  the woman came right back.  &ldquo;And the sooner
the better!&rdquo;

*ANSWERS TO THE QUIZ*

1. c.  
2. c.  
3. a.  
4. d.  
5. c. 
6. b.  
7. a. 
8. d.
9. d.  
10. a.  
11. d.  
12. c.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Sarasate had the fastest fingers ever to set foot on
stage.&rdquo;  [From &ldquo;St. Paul Sunday morning,&rdquo; MPBN, May 12,
1985.  Submitted by Charles Bolt&eacute;, Dresden, Maine.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A modern-dress version of the virgin birth is inconceivable.&rdquo;
[From MPBN News, May 10, 1985.  Submitted by
Charles Bolt&eacute;, Dresden, Maine.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The English Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780192191731/English-Language-Burchfield-Robert-019219173X/plp)
Robert Burchfield, (Oxford University Press, 1985), xiii + 194 pp.

Broadly speaking, this book deals with four aspects of
the language:

>(a)  the history of English, including the changes that
are taking place right under our noses;
>
>(b)  the recording of the language system;
>
>(c)  the main features (vocabulary, pronunciation,
spelling, syntax);
>
>(d)  the roles of English outside the British Isles.

The story of the English language is an old one.  We
have been told many times how this thick linguistic soup has
blended through the ages, how migrating Germanic tribes
brewed the stock in a Celtic cauldron, subsequent invaders
added their Scandinavian and Old French ingredients, and
the builders of the Empire sprinkled in the spices culled on
distant shores.  Burchfield does not provide any new facts,
but he does show new facets.  As he tells it, the historical
account takes on the quality of a saga.  In Anthony Burgess's
words, quoted on the dust cover, &ldquo;it conveys an authentic
sense of the great mystery of language.&rdquo;  He also makes us
aware (should we need it) that the story has not come to an
end.  We are witnessing large and small linguistic changes
today, and, what's more intriguing, we are effecting with
our own mouths and pens the processes we observe.  Will
*whom* be completely driven out by *who?*  What is happening
to the apostrophe?  To the subjunctive mood?  We are under
constant pressure to familiarize ourselves with new grammatical
usages, new shifts in pronunciation, not to speak of
the 60,000 words in the four-volume *OED Supplement*,
which Burchfield edited.

The examples are perhaps the greatest charm of the
book.  For each period, for every aspect, there is a profusion
of them.  And how well they are chosen!  Some are unavoidably
on the technical side, but the greater part are helpful
and enjoyable for the general reader.

A language is always in the making; it really is a chain
of imperceptible changes, like the frames of a motion picture.
However, it is possible to take stills.  We call them dictionaries
and grammars.  Burchfield devotes a separate
chapter to their history and taxonomy.  The first English dictionary
offered 2,500 words.  It appeared in 1604, and
became the ancestor of a strain that has never stopped proliferating
(mainly through plagiarism).  Each new generation
has gratified its readers with more entries and additional
features: etymologies, encyclopedic information,
labels for usage, directives for pronunciation, even pictures.

The history of English grammar seems less easy to outline.
We note that during the first half of this century, we
had to put up with &ldquo;historical&rdquo; grammars, which were voluminous
and indigestible to all but scholars (curiously, they
were mainly compiled by foreigners).  Since World War II,
new approaches have been attempted.  Burchfield deals
fairly with them all, though hardly concealing where his
sympathies lie.  He gives Chomsky his due (a &ldquo;messianic figure&rdquo;)
but his heart is with Quirk's *Grammar of Contemporary
English* (a &ldquo;clinical and compendious work&rdquo;).

Much attention is given to the question of prescriptivism
versus descriptivism.  To oversimplify, prescriptivists
are the meddlers who lace every piece of information, be it
on grammar, style, meaning, spelling or pronunciation,
with a catalogue of dos and don'ts.  Descriptivists, on the
other hand, just inform you and then leave you alone (or in
the lurch, depending on what you expected).  In practice, of
course, each dictionary or grammar stands somewhere
between the two extremes.

Non-British readers may be puzzled by the statement
that most changes in pronunciation during the last two centuries
have been brought about by &ldquo;the Mitford factor.&rdquo;  As
some may know, Nancy Mitford was a nobleman's daughter
who, in the 1950s, edited a volume of essays on the relations
between social class and linguistic usage.  In spite of the
authors' probable tongue-in-cheek intent, the distinction
between U (= 'upper class') and non-U became a public
issue that has left many a present-day Englishman in doubt
about whether to call the *john* &ldquo;toilet&rdquo; or &ldquo;lavatory,&rdquo;
whether to *have* or to *take a bath*.  Although relatively few
of these class markers bear on pronunciation, Burchfield has
singled out this very aspect.  The &ldquo;Mitford factor&rdquo; points to
shifts in pronunciation set in motion by sociological rather
than phonetic impetuses.

The last chapter deals with the fortunes of the English
language outside the United Kingdom.  There are two main
manifestations.  First, from the seventeenth century onward,
offshoots of English have been planted by settlers in the various
lands of Empire.  By the time independence came, it was
natural that they should become the national language (or
one of the national languages).  However, they had already
begun to take on hues of their own, and they then developed
even more independently (although there have been, as
Burchfield expresses it, &ldquo;no linguistic Boston Tea Parties&rdquo;).
The results can be seen in Canadian English, American
(U.S.) English, South African English, etc., each with its
own features of spelling, pronunciation, and vocabulary;
eventually each had its own dictionaries.  Of all these, American
English is the most colorful.  It is really a conglomerate
of innumerable geographic variants.  It has also absorbed
much material from the linguistic substrata that already
existed in the country (Amerind, Spanish) or arrived later on
immigrant waves (Italian, Yiddish), and it spawned
subvariants of its own, like Black English and Hispanic English.
Curiously, it has provided more feedback to the mother
language than any other member of the breed.

There is a second strain.  For hundreds of millions of
people, English is not the national but the vehicular language;
other hundreds of millions know it as a second language.
Their study targets may point to Oxbridge or New
England, but the vast majority are conspicuous by their
accents and unusual idioms (and their anxiety about correctness).
Linguists call the various flavors Sri Lanka English,
Japanese English, German English, etc., and, collectively,
the *Englishes* (a pluralization born too late to be included in
the *OED Supplement*).  The ubiquity of English speakers
explains why a Swede and a Peruvian, meeting in Bangkok,
are likely to resort to English as a common language.  English
is today's lingua franca, more widespread than Latin
ever was or Esperanto has ever been or hoped to become.

As Burchfield notes, a lack of English can be a serious
handicap to any denizen of the globe.  But why did he not
devote a few pages to the more general problems that arise
when English penetrates daily life in non-English-language
countries?  This is a fascinating subject, especially where the
national language is written in non-Latin script.  To give a
trivial example, should the Greeks spell the name of their
capital on the English part of their bilingual roadsigns as
*Athens*, as we call it, or as *Ath&iacute;na*, as they call it?  (They
have opted for the latter.)  How do Israelis or Egyptians
manage to insert English Latin-script words into their
Hebrew or Arabic texts that run from right to left?  (By using
special typewriters with two-way carriages.)  And so on.

*The English Language* pays no attention to such worries.
It is Anglocentric, and rightly so.  Would anybody but a
foreigner complain?

*[Harry Cohen, Brussels]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;If you think you've seen everything in Paris, visit the
P&egrave;re Lachaise Cemetery.  It...boasts such immortals as
Moli&egrave;re, Jean de la Fontaine, and Chopin!&rdquo;  [From a travel
agency brochure.  Submitted by Warren L. Felton, Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma.]

## Humpty Dumpty and the Sluggish Slut (or, Subjective Onomatopoeia)
*D.S. Bland, Southbourne, Dorset*

In his *Human Speech* (1930), Sir Richard Paget dealt at some
length with a theory that intelligible language began when
man, besides imitating sounds in the external world, also made
*mouth gestures* which corresponded in some degree to what he
was saying.  A basic example of this theory can be found in
words which express location.  Thus, when I say *here*, I draw
my mouth back, as though towards myself: &ldquo;here&rdquo; is where I
am.  But the opposite gesture is made when I say *there*: the
tongue comes forward and points away from me towards the
place I have in mind.  The same distinction (and the same
movements) can be seen in *ici* and *l&agrave;* in French and *idr* and
*udr* in Urdu.  A further example can be found in *globe*, where
the mouth rounds and closes, as it very nearly does in *round*
itself.  Similar movements occur in *bowl* and *womb*.  For a final
example (to which we will return in a moment) consider this
group: *flame, flare, flicker, flash*, where, in the *fl*- cluster, the
tongue moves in a way that resembles the movement of a
flame.

It would seem, then, that there is something to be said
for the gesture theory of language, but how much in relation
to a highly developed language like English?  Certainly it
cannot play any part in words which express abstract concepts
like *education* and *democracy*.  But *sneer* cannot be
said without the nose and mouth wrinkling in an expression
of dislike, and *namby-pamby*, a person who is sneered at for
his weak affectedness, cannot be so called without a suggestion
of nose-wrinkling.  Ambrose Philip's Christian name and
his insipid pastorals combined in Henry Carey's mind to
produce an unflattering but appropriate nickname which
seems to suggest a gesture.

There is an equal appropriateness in the name *Humpty
Dumpty*.  Anyone so called, we feel, ought to be globular, and
the reason is not far to seek.  There are quite a number of
words ending in *-ump* which express compact rotundity: *bump,
chump* (originally a short, thick piece of wood), *clump, lump,
mumps, plump, rump, stump, tump*, and of course *hump* and
*dump*, the sources of the original egghead's name.  Exceptions
to this conformity are *slump* and *sump* in that they drop down
from a level while all the others rise above the surface.  (Even
so, in a graph, a line indicating a slump is an upside down
bump, and a sump follows much the same contour.)  Further
exceptions are *crump* (which is purely onomatopoeic) and
*pump* (which is quite neutral).  But *thump* hovers somewhere in
the wings, in that it is an action which gives rise (literally) to a
lump.

In this group we have words which force the mouth into a
rounded shape in *-um*, while the solidity of the objects they
refer to is expressed in the plosive *p*.  (And the plosive *b* as well
in *bump*.)

*Slump*, which has figured in this group as something of an
exception, can be brought into another group, however, where
the predominating element is the initial cluster *sl-* combined
with (mainly) short vowels.  A number of them can be brought
together in the following sentence:

>The slovenly sluggish slut slouched out of her slum
with her slops and slithered in her slippers through the
slush.

None of these words (with the exception of *slippers*) denotes
anything very pleasant.  One, *slouched*, seems to include mouth
gesture, while *slops, slithered*, and *slush* are at least partly
onomatopoeic.  But how are we to classify the rest?  Neither *slut*
nor *slum* indicate the object by mouth gesture, and there is
nothing onomatopoeic about *sluggish*.  And yet they all hang
together as a group of words expressive of unpleasant actions
and appearances.  Why is this?  I suggest that it is because there
is a slackness of jaw movement in *sl-*, a slackness reinforced in
five out of the nine words by the -*u*- sound which follows and
which cannot be pronounced without a downward movement
of the jaw.

It is an interesting linguistic phenomenon for which we
seem to have no descriptive term.  All these words sound right
in relation to their meanings (as does *slime*)—that is, most of
them suggest something moistly unpleasant.  And yet no objective
sound (as in *bleat, crash*, or *tinkle*) is being imitated.

I would like to suggest that we call this phenomenon
*subjective onomatopoeia*.  It is, let me hasten to add, an aspect
of language which has not gone unremarked.  The *OED* records
(as of 1860) an extension of *onomatopoeia* from pure echoism
into a device of rhetoric, namely, &ldquo;the use of naturally
suggestive words, sentences, and forms for rhetorical effect.&rdquo;
The illustrative quotation (via Tennyson) is from *Paradise Lost*,
Bk. II, lines 879-883:

>on a sudden open fly,  
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound,  
Th'infernal doors, and on their hinges grate  
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook  
Of Erebus.

Writers on style have also touched on the subject.  Herbert
Read does so briefly in *English Prose Style*, as does Jespersen
(whom Read quotes) and G.H. Vallins in *The Best English*.  But
an identifying term has so far been lacking.

Poets, naturally, have always been aware of the power of
subjective onomatopoeia.  It is hardly surprising that Tennyson
should approve of Milton's use of it.  And Keats also uses it to
good effect in a line in *Autumn*:

For summer has o'erbrimmed their clammy cells.

And not only to good effect but to surprising effect as well,
since *clammy*, like *slush* and *slime*, ought to suggest something
moistly unpleasant.  Prison cells are clammy, and so are sewers
and ghostly fingers laid on one's arm.  But Keats suppresses
these associations by bringing the word into conjunction with
the double *m* sound of *summer* and *o'erbrimmed*.  Say the line
aloud two or three times over and you can feel the honey
sticking to your lips.  Nothing unpleasant about that!

Once we are alerted to it, subjective onomatopoeia may be
noticed at every turn.  Can the full, sustained sound of
*enormous* suggest anything other than a very large object, or
the more restrained sound of *tiny* anything but the opposite?
So too with *meagre* and *mean*, and perhaps even more
obviously with *smooth* and *soothe*, the fitness of sound to sense
is undeniable.

But to every rule there is bound to be an exception.  The
group of words with a *fl*- sound in them, suggestive of a flame,
or the associated group of *flight* and *flutter*, suggestive of the
*flapping* of a bird's wing, make neat little packages in which
gesture language and echoism both play a part.  But *flop*, like
*slump*, is a downward action which has nothing in common
with the movement of a flame or a bird in flight.  And the
group of *sl-* words, mainly indicating unpleasant objects or
ideas, is assailed by one of the most beautiful poetic words in
the language.  When the *slut* has emptied her *slops* and has
returned to her *slum* and her *slob* of a husband, the pair of
them will retire to their *slumbers*.


### OBITER DICTA: *Linguistic Hybrids*
*Frank R. Abate*

Recently we have been noticing an interesting phenomenon,
viz., phrases that combine English words and syntax with
elements taken from Latin or French.  Some of these hybrids
are well established, some jocular or frivolous, some just wrong,
but all share the characteristic of combining English with a
(sometimes tiny) bit of another language that seems to retain
its foreignness despite the English context.

Typical examples of the more established hybrids are &ldquo;pie
*&agrave; la mode*,&rdquo; sometimes printed and most often pronounced
without a French accent; &ldquo;on the *qui vive*,&rdquo; containing the
French equivalent to &ldquo;Who goes there?&rdquo;; &ldquo;*ubi sunt* theme&rdquo;
(sometimes &ldquo;formula&rdquo;), showing the Latin for &ldquo;Where are they
(now)?&rdquo;  used of a literary motif which addresses the transitoriness
of life; &ldquo;a certain *je ne sais quoi*,&rdquo; often heard on the lips
of those affecting a sophisticated air—wags with a flair for
mockery have since coined &ldquo;a certain *je ne sais pas*.&rdquo;

The cited examples seem to possess some legitimacy of
purpose or intent if not the sanction of tradition; at least they
do not jar linguistic sensibilities too violently.  But with widespread
use of *&agrave; la*, as in &ldquo;chicken *&agrave;; la* king,&rdquo; there has been an
erosion of traditional barriers and a way opened to hybrids that
violate grammar or good taste.  A growing number of restaurant
menus tout &ldquo;soup *de jour*&rdquo; and &ldquo;beef with *au jus* sauce.&rdquo;  Also
on the increase in recent years are pseudo-sophisticated uses of
French articles, for instance, &ldquo;Le Car,&rdquo; a compact car of
French design and manufacture, &ldquo;Le Bag,&rdquo; seen on popularly
marketed canvas satchels, and &ldquo;La Shake,&rdquo; a potable yogurt
concoction.  Such bastardizations are apparently considered
very chic (not pronounced like the brand of jeans) by the
Madison Avenue trendy-setters.  While we might accept them
as quaint little leaps of imagination, we wonder how one
determines that *Car* and *Bag* are masculine and *Shake*
feminine.

Readers of VERBATIM are encouraged to send to the
editor's attention other examples of linguistic hybrids that they
have read or heard frequently.  Please exclude from consideration
nonce uses and legal Latinisms such as &ldquo;writ of *habeas
corpus*.&rdquo;  Combinations involving English and foreign languages
other than Latin or French would be particularly appreciated.
Contributions will appear in future issues.


### OBITER DICTA: *Molotov and Other Cocktails*
*J.B. Lawrence, San Bernardino, California*

False etymologies abound.  Here is a chance for your
readers to step on one before it multiplies.

An AP dispatch today [6 July 1984] relating to the political
rehabilitation of V.M. Molotov ended as follows: &ldquo;During
World War II Molotov's name was on an order for mass
production of bottles of flammable liquid that-could be used
against German tanks.  The Germans nicknamed the fire bombs
'Molotov cocktails.' &rdquo;

This may or may not be literally true, although the charm
of the Molotov cocktail was that it was made from locally
obtainable empty bottles, gasoline, and rags.  I doubt that the
overburdened Russian industry was grinding them out, but let
that pass.  The *implication* of this item, which is likely to
become a bald assertion in the future, is that the name &ldquo;Molotov
Cocktail&rdquo; was invented by the Germans some time after
June, 1941, when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union.

The memory of old fogies like myself will contradict this,
but documentation is needed.  All I have at hand is a popularization
called *The World War II Quiz and Fact Book*, by T.B.
Benford (Harper & Row 1982), which says on page 27 that the
*M.c.* &ldquo;got its name from the Finns...in the winter of 1939-40.&rdquo;

That isn't good enough.  A book called *Men Against Tanks*,
by J. Weeks (Mason/Charter 1975), says on page 31 that the
Spanish Civil War &ldquo;produced&rdquo; the *M.c.*  This is confirmed by
*Guerilla Warfare*, by &ldquo;Yank&rdquo; Levy (Penguin 1942, p.33).  However,
neither is explicit as to the origin of the name itself.

Can someone produce a clear citation showing the use of
the term *Molotov cocktail* during the Spanish Civil War?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Among the titles listed by Pocket Books as out of print as
of 9/20/84 in *Publishers Weekly*, June 22, 1984, p. 114, is
Words Most Often Misspelled &amp; Misspronounced.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; '[Eckhard Schmitz] has just totally disappeared,' said
Larry Tankersly, chief investigator for the district attorney's
office.&rdquo;  [From the *San Francisco Chronicle*, June 9, 1984.
Submitted by N.M. McGee, Daly City, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It all depends on the rappaport you have with your
doctor.&rdquo;  [From the *Donahue Show*, NBC, June 4, 1984.
Submitted by Alma Denny, New York City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;As a member of AAA East Florida, you are currently
covered...under Group Policy No. AAA 00119.  Benefits...
include assistance with expenses incurred for the following services:
Hospital room and board, Hospital services, including laboratory
fees...cats and splints...&rdquo; [From a mailing piece
distributed by AAA-Medical Expense Rider, Miami, Florida.
Submitted by Dr. Roy Graves, Winter Park, Florida.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Remington bronze 'Coming thru the Rye,' P.J. Mene
bronze soldier with brace of five dogs.  Dated 1860.  Box&mdash;,
Pebble Beach&mdash;.&rdquo;  [From a classified advertisement in the
Monterey Penninsula Herald, July 5, 1984.  Submitted by
Clifford L. Wolf, Pacific Grove, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Your safety and the security of your personal property are
of the upmost concern to those of us who welcome you as our
guest.&rdquo;  [From a card in the rooms at the Holiday Inn, Dublin,
Georgia.  Submitted by Jennifer J. Goode, Atlanta, Georgia.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Antony wondered what exactly he had done when he had
joined the household on his father's death at the age of 13.&rdquo;
[From *The Bloody Book of Law*, p. 24, by Sara Woods.  Submitted
by Si Goodwin, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Origins of English Words: A Discursive Dictionary of Indo-European Roots*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780801867842/Origins-English-Words-Discursive-Dictionary-0801867843/plp)
Joseph T. Shipley, (The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London, 1984), xxxiii + 636 pp.

In VERBATIM IX, No. 1, Summer 1982, p. 13, I was
obliged to spend sixteen tiresome lines on Shipley's *Dictionary
of Word Origins* (1945), then reprinted.  As if that wasn't
burden enough, America's Oldest University Press (founded
1878: napping in senility?) has now wished on us a far more
pricey enormity.

This book is beyond belief.

Pages 453-636 comprise simply a 2-columned Index of
English Words.  Index to what?  To the alphabetized morass
(1-451) of so called &ldquo;roots&rdquo; under which is found the most
amazing midden of italicized words and isolated syllables
(apparently meant to be Indo-European reconstructions)
and unrelated dates and uncommented citations and barely
relevant anecdotes and accumulated junk that defies
classification.

At first I was affronted on opening the book by the
absence of accents and length marks on the cited linguistic
forms.  Then I realized it really didn't matter.  Let's follow
Shipley-type logic: look up *matter*—one reference is ma II.
This is said to be &ldquo;imitative of a baby's cry, or noise when
suckling.&rdquo;  (I suppose we may agree to this under the condition
that all suckling noises contain a Roman II.)  Here we
find Greek *meter* (no diacritics), as well as Dirac's *antimatter*,
Roman *Maia, mammoth, mamma, mammals*, and
*Mammillaria*, a genus of cacti with &ldquo;nipples.&rdquo;  Nowhere do
we find out HOW these get derived and related.

Let's move on to the entry peter, which we are told
means 'father.'  I thought at first a typesetter had missed his
aim at a schwa in the first syllable and then a proofreader
had nodded.  But we soon see that's too high-grade an error
for this remarkable dungheap.  For we immediately learn
what should raise headlines in Athens: the Greek word is
*peter* (goes with *meter* like his and hers, I guess).  After that
comes Latin and English (yep) *pater*.  If you aren't already
down for the count, note that &ldquo;Roman *Jupiter* is a blend of
Gk *Zeus-peter*.&rdquo;  Then you can go on to such moonshine as
Gk *petros, petroleum*, and &ldquo;Step on the gas!&rdquo;

I think I've already taken enough of your time.  Don't
let them take any of your money.

*[Eric P. Hamp, The University of Chicago]*

### EUREKA: *The Third Man*

Not having played the game and being one who generally
eschews spectator sports, I only recently encountered
the intelligence that there is a sort of back-up position in
cricket called *third man*.  Is it possible, I asked myself, that
the title of Graham Greene's novel is allusive?  None of the
Englishmen I asked had made the connection, but then, I
might have asked the wrong ones...

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary of Modern Colloquial French*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Modern-Colloquial-French-Herail/dp/0415058937) and [*Faux Amis and Key Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/Mistakable-French-Faux-Amis-Key-Words/30953500427/bd)
Ren&eacute; James H&eacute;rail and Edwin A. Lovatt, (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1985), 327pp. and Philip Thody and Howard Evans, (Athlone Press, 1985), 224pp.

The *Dictionary of Modern Colloquial French* has a
page-size about the same as that of VERBATIM, contains 327
pages, and weighs a quarter of a ton.  It is therefore anything
but a pocket-book, unless you are a gamekeeper or have an
eccentric tailor.  You're hardly going to whip it out in a Marseille
*bistro* on hearing a new bit of *argot* while taking your
*ap&egrave;* ('aperitif').  Anyway, it doesn't give *ap&eacute;*, only the more
common *ap&eacute;ro*.

The bulk of the tome means that for practical purposes
it is less likely to be used in conversation than to be consulted
in the study or library for translating colloquial language
that is written rather than spoken.  Accordingly, I tried it out
on a few pages taken at random from Raymond Queneau's
highly *argotique* (and immensely entertaining) *Zazie dans le
m&eacute;tro*, a severe test which it passed very successfully as far
as including the slang words is concerned.

For this the book deserves high marks.  However, what
is odd about it, extremely odd, is the translations into English
(for it is a one-way traffic, French-English only).  On the
first page we are told that *&agrave; table!* means 'Grub's up!'  A few
entries later the example given for the use of *abattage* is *J'ai
pris un vache abbatage du prof*, which apparently means
&ldquo;Teacher gave me one hell of a slating.&rdquo;  The French is fine,
but the English strikes me as very strange.  As Jack Lemmon
says to Tony Curtis after his Cary Grant impersonation in
*Some Like It Hot*, &ldquo;No-bod-y talks like that.&rdquo;

*Accrocher* is to 'have a barney.'  And so on, with a multitude
of old-fashioned words, phrases and expletives such as
By Jove!  By jiminy!  Strewth!  Crumbs!  and Crikey!  This is
all very entertaining, if not intentionally so.  If any francophone
reader gets hold of the book, he or she will be going
about talking like someone out of P. G. Wodehouse, which
should at least add to the gaiety of nations.  A particularly
enjoyable entry is the one for *Acrobate*, 'a cat-burglar, or
character who always lands on his feet.'  As in *Lui faire
faillite?!  N'y comptez pas, c'est un dr&ocirc;le d'acrobate!* which is
rendered into modern colloquial English as 'He'll never be in
Queer Street, he treads the tight-rope of high finance like a
real trooper!'  Apart from anything else, the word is
&ldquo;trouper,&rdquo; which has quite a different meaning.  Likewise
&ldquo;poufter&rdquo; (for homosexual) should be &ldquo;poofter.&rdquo;

On some occasions it is a pity that the authors do not
provide a word-by-word translation.  For example,
*Andouille &agrave; col roul&eacute;* is correctly translated as 'prick, cock,
or penis,' but it would have been helpful to add the literal
translation, which is 'a roll-necked sausage.'

Ren&eacute; James H&eacute;rail is half-French; Edwin A. Lovatt
comes from New Zealand.  Perhaps this explains why the
English slang strikes this English reader as so awkward and
so dated.  Still, there is no need to give them one hell of a
slating for their French, which is just as well since they
teach it at the University of Leeds.

So too do Professor Thody and Howard Evans.  Their
book also has its eccentricities, though in a rather more self-aware
manner.  The free-wheeling approach of *Faux Amis
and Key Words* is indicated by the sub-title: &ldquo;A dictionary-guide
to French language, culture and society through
lookalikes and confusibles.&rdquo;  The well-known false friends
are here, such as *inter&eacute;ssant, d&eacute;ception*, and *important*, as
well as the classic examples of a linguistic *chass&eacute;-crois&eacute;*
('cross-fire') such as the pairs *Secretary of State/Minister of
State* and *Ministre d'Etat/S&eacute;cretaire d'Etat, vicar/curate* and
*cur&eacute;/vicaire, chicory/endive* and *endive/chicor&eacute;e*.

As well as helping students of French to avoid making
mistakes which are to be found even in highly reputable
translations, the book delightfully fulfills its subtitle's promise
of being a guide to French culture, society, and indeed
history.  The digressions are so informative and entertaining
that this is one dictionary that can be enjoyably read
straight through rather than merely consulted when in difficulty.
Many entries are like mini-essays or short stories.  An
example taken almost at random is the one on *rude*, which
does not have its English sense but rather means *coarse* or
*harsh*.  The authors then tell us that when Robert Damiens
(1715-57), a servant who tried to stab Louis XV with a penknife,
having &ldquo;learned that he was to have his right hand
burned off, boiling pitch poured into his wounds, and be
torn apart by horses, he commented—to the horrified admiration
of Diderot—*la journ&eacute;e sera rude*, it's going to be a
hard day.&rdquo;

I highly recommend this instructive, informative, and
entertaining book.

*[Richard Boston, Reading, Berkshire]*

### EUREKA: *Ngaio Marsh*

I seem to have known for a long time that *ngaio*, the
given name of the late Novo-Zelanian author of detective
novels, was a Maori word, but only recently did I learn that
it is the name of a New Zealand shrub or tree, related to the
Australian blueberry tree and the Hawaiian bastard sandalwood,
the wood of which was used for making gunstocks.
Its Hawaiian name is *naio*.  Am I—have I been—missing
some allusive reason for her parents so naming the famous
writer?  Do *ngaios* grow in marshes?  Is there something else
suggested?

*Laurence Urdang*

## Paring Pairs No. 19

The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM.

(a). Is Cambridge U. run by the vice squad?  
(b). Is Hollywood star acting as Christmas reveler?  
(c). Disney septet's East End debtors' song.  
(d). — —, no cheese.  
(e). Broke.  
(f). Patron of jailbirds.  
(g). Solmization artist.  
(h). Tigers, lions, leopards, etc., need the birch.  
(i). Opera(tors) for trams.  
(j). Labyrinth offers corny surprise.  
(k). True Christian love leaves one open-mouthed.  
(l). Everyone accounted for in change-ringing.  
(m). Where are you going?  Into a decline?  
(n). Carriage sweeps all before it.  
(o). She's taken up with hairier fellow.  
(p). Unassailable with a lavender dress on.  
(q). Pantechnicon provides this.  
(r). Harrowing experience.  
(s). Suitor's ordinary squabble.  
(t). Stops in the orchestra for &ldquo;Mary Seton, Mary Beeton, Mary Carmichael, and me.&rdquo;  
(u). Deep in the whisky business.  
(v). Professional write would be prohibitive.  
(w). Possession allows one to view the Buddhist in the spring.  
(x). Boardinghouse sailor has a quartering breeze.  
(y). Citified, suave cowpuncher.  
(z). This team has an evil hold on you.

(1). A.  
(2). All.  
(3). Away.  
(4). Broad.  
(5). Broom.  
(6). Brush.  
(7). Car.  
(8). Cat.  
(9). Cowboy.  
(10). Dicks.  
(11). Do.  
(12). Dough.  
(13). Experience.  
(14). Eye.  
(15). Four.  
(16). Gape.  
(17). Hell.  
(18). Her.  
(19). In.  
(20). Kin.  
(21). Kneads.  
(22). Knick.  
(23). Maize.  
(24). Men.  
(25). Miss.  
(26). Moving.  
(27). New.  
(28). No.  
(29). Oh.  
(30). Plain.  
(31). Pro.  
(32). Razing.  
(33). Re.  
(34). Reach.  
(35). Rule.  
(36). Saint.  
(37). Scribe.  
(38). See.  
(39). Sin.  
(40). Squad.  
(41). Stalls.  
(42). Still.  
(43). Suitor.  
(44). Tiff.  
(45). Told.  
(46). Urbane.  
(47). Violet.  
(48). Vise.  
(49). Waters.  
(50). Whey.  
(51). Wither.  
(52). Zen.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Two winners will be drawn from among the correct
answers, one from those received in Aylesbury, the other
from those received in Essex.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send their
answers to VERBATIM, Box 199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20
1TQ, England; all others should send their answers to
VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT, 06426, U.S.A.  *You need
send only the correct solution, not the answers to all of the
clues.  Please use a postcard*.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 18

(a). Watch for the &ldquo;Man of the Year&rdquo; cover article.  (45, 29) Time Piece.  
(b). Twist fourth (third?) digit.  (53, 16) Wring Finger.  
(c). Prompter affords relief.  (33, 2) Role Aid.  
(d). C, C, C, C, C, C, C.  (38, 36) Seven Seas.  
(e). An augur on the town.  (39, 37) Sight Seer.  
(f). There *is* something in a *vacuum!*  (Don't be too sheepish.) (12, 15) Double Ewe.  
(g). Foggy conditions aboard ship.  (6, 51) Bell Weather.  
(h). Hillumination for Christmas tree in port?  (4, 25) Arbor Lights.  
(i). Comics have trick joints.  (17, 22) Fun Knees.  
(j). (De)pressing golf club.  (34, 21) Sad Iron.  
(k). Too much (in years).  (28, 1) Over Age.  
(l). Head of *Solidarnosc*.  (30, 31) Poll Position.  
(m). &ldquo;Dessert's ready!&rdquo;  (27, 7) Mousse Call.  
(n). Embassy from the Rams?  (26, 5) Mission Aries.  
(o). Source of hydrocephaly.  (19, 50) Head Water.  
(p). Provides cash flow at the orchard.  (3, 48) Apple Turnover.  
(q). Religious bigshot.  (9, 8) Church Cannon.  
(r). Enrol for prison penmanship class.  (11, 35) Con Script.  
(s). What an aggregation!  (42, 47) Sum Total.  
(t). Knight's garment worn over armor.  (40, 10) Sir Coat.  
(u). Surd nocturnal warmonger.  (23, 18) Knight Hawk.  
(v). Siamese expired—just a crazy pattern.  (44, 14) Tie Dyed.  
(w). Record—the other way emphatically.  (32, 13) Right Down.  
(x). Blister is a real drag.  (49, 46) Under Toe.  
(y). Ambisextrous ambidextrous.  (43, 20) Switch Hitter.  
(z). Lie in ambush to test the garland's gravity.  (52, 24) Weigh Lei.

The correct answer is (41) Souffl&eacute;.  The winner was
Andrew F. Downey, Jr., Atlanta, Georgia.  The European
winner of No. 17 was Dr. J.M. Varney, London.

The European winner of No. 16 was Helen Reynolds,
Cambridge.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We've been buried before, but we've never had dirt
thrown in our faces.&rdquo;  [Coach Riley of the Philadelphia Lakers,
as quoted in the *Los Angeles Times*, May 28, 1985.  Submitted
by Jean MacAllister, Beverly Hills.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Counter-revolutionary, as Cuba (6)  
5\. In caress, the French get sloppy (8)  
9\. Unattractive types who get no RSVP's? (10)  
10\. Smart chick curtailed (4)  
11\. Bugs Crosby crony endlessly for dance (5, 3)  
12\. 50 A.D., the German way up (6)  
13\. Move pen (4)  
15\. Viking's crude manners get zero (8)  
18\. Mouth organ lacks a partial tone (8)  
19\. Confiscate receipts (4)  
21\. There's change for the Queen (6)  
23\. Awake like some babes —fighting mad! (2, 2, 4)  
25\. Geisha's first sash in Asian area (4)  
26\. No extra bit can be excessive (10)  
27\. Quick Indians make laws (8)  
28\. Suffer last (6)  

**Down**

2\. African in Durban turban (5)  
3\. Mystery scam with a French snare (9)  
4\. Small insult (6)  
5\. Job for those who've been to the market—or for those preparing to go (8, 7)  
6\. Normal sizes, but they could make us larger (8)   
7\. Even beheaded, Euclid could be clear (5)  
8\. Cook's aid has most of recipe going up in fire (5, 4)  
14\. Carry away ragged torn parts (9)  
16\. Taken out, etc., among adults only (9)  
17\. A stinger can make you most irate (8)  
20\. Likely fluid as bilge, alternatively (6)  
22\. Armed robbery is the bust... (5)  
24\. ...and busted Italian makes the Big House (5)  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...send black and white prints...related to
cruising in a stiffened envelope to...&rdquo; [From the *Cruising
Association Bulletin* (U.K.), September 1984.  Submitted by
Vaughan Meyrick, Welwyn Garden City, England.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Sex abuse leaves parents groping.&rdquo;  [Headline in *The
Morning Call*, Allentown, Pennsylvania, May 21, 1985.
Submitted by Alvin J. Olsen, Zionsville, Pennsylvania.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. ORCHESTRA.  
6\. Cast e.  
9\. EXTROVERT.  
10\. ENACT.  
11\. H-a-lt-er.  
12\. UMBRELLA.  
14\. Young *all ant*isocial.  
16\. Ex-P.E.-1.  
19\. El-der.  
20\. Th-rash-ing.  
21\. Coven-try.  
23\. S-tree-t.  
26\. Don-ut.  
27\. UND-ermine.  
28\. TASTE.  
29\. YAMMERERS.

**Down**

1\. OPEN H-ouse.  
2\. CATALOG.  
3\. Hot*el opening*.  
4\. The-e.  
5\. Al-time-ters.  
6\. CHEERL-ess.  
7\. Small.  
8\. Complex transaction.  
9\. CANTERBURY.  
15\. LORGNETTE.  
17\. Prime time.  
18\. LIGHTNESS.  
21\. C-ade-T.  
22\. Ve-nus.  
24\. TERSE.  
25\. Edam.  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v12n2_Autumn_1985)