--- 
title: "VOL XII, No 3 [Winter, 1986]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Polysemania, Semantic Taint, and Related Conditions
*John Ellison Kahn, London*

*pol&middot;y&middot;se&middot;ma&middot;ni&middot;a* (&#92;?&#92;polisi&#92;?&#92;meinia) n [POLYSEMY + MANIA;
syncope of *polysemimania:* compare *mineralogy*] (1985) an
abnormal awareness of possible ambiguity; an uncontrollable
tendency to bring to mind the inappropriate or unintended
sense of a word in any context.

A traveling companion looks up from her book—a
collection of science-fiction stories—and says &ldquo;It's a
dead giveaway, this one: the lead character's name is Hilda
... don't you see?—Hitler.&rdquo;  A word- and hormone-intoxicated
friend during my adolescence (&ldquo;I wonder who
that friend could be&rdquo;—Ogden Nash) constantly trades tenuous
*double entendres* with his fellow schoolboys (&ldquo;There's
something I want to put to that Gloria.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Yes, it's time you
got something straight between the two of you.&rdquo;) to the
point where ordinary conversation becomes impossible
(*hor*mone!  *con*versation! be*comes*!) In its extreme form, the
overingenious poet or crossword puzzler is afflicted by a hysterical
muteness, having arrived at the mad (and obvious)
intuition that almost any utterance is susceptible of a faulty
interpretation.  (And the microbiologist ended by starving
himself, knowing what he knew, and unable to trust the
purity of any food offered to him.)

Like neurosis, polysemania afflicts us all to some
degree; the occasional registering of an unintended pun
might almost be taken as a proof, or at least a condition, of
our semantic competence (just as various mild neuroses are
the lot, and the proof, of our Western humanness, Freud
suggested).  But only those whose neuroses are fairly disabling
need be thought of as neurotics, and only those whose
powers of communication and comprehension are seriously
impaired by polysemy need be regarded as polysemaniacs.
(In both conditions, the problem, of course, is deciding on
the cut-off point.)

Polysemania is not new.  Hamlet and Othello were victims
of it in their way.  Pathological punsters have no doubt
always plagued polite society, and willful verbal misunderstandings
have always ruined human relationships.  The history
of linguistic taboo even reveals a mild kind of mass
polysemania: the discontinuation of *&amacr;dl*, 'illness,' in Old
English (to be replaced by the euphemism *disease*) through a
clash with *adela*, 'dirt,' was not the work of some individual
polysemaniac; similarly, the 20th-century decline, noted by
Bloomfield, in the use of *cock* in American English to refer
to a male chicken points to a nationwide awareness of and
embarrassment at the awkward dual meaning of the word.

Polysemania does, however, seem to be more widespread
today than in former times.  There are several reasons
for this.  Perhaps there is, for a start, simply more polysemy
about of the relevant kind: new metaphorical senses,
through the process of &ldquo;radiation,&rdquo; are continually accumulating.
And there is perhaps more semantic sensitivity, too
(which is not to deny that there is also greater insensitivity
nowadays than formerly).  The fashion for self-scrutiny and
self-improvement perhaps prompts middle-class speakers to
reflect more carefully on the words they use and hear.  The
media have taken to showing a greater interest in language
than in the past: the newspaper columns of William Safire
or Philip Howard, for instance, or the various series of BBC
radio programs on language—examining current usage and
monitoring abuses—have sharpened the lay educated
public's linguistic alertness.  Finally, modern philosophical,
linguistic, and literary methods of analysis (as these have filtered
into secondary and higher education) encourage an
intense concentration on individual words—their several
kinds of ambiguity, the amount of scrutiny they seem to
demand.

But you cannot encourage a sensitivity to words without
risking a hypersensitivity.  The overingenious readings of
Empson and occasionally of Leavis stem partly from a
semantic overloading of the words in a text—the attribution
of a 20th-century meaning, for instance, to a word in a
17th-century poem.  More of this in a moment.  Overheated
word-consciousness is a particularly favorable environment
for various other linguistic conditions: polysemy proper,
connotation, &ldquo;semantic taint,&rdquo; &ldquo;idio-connotation,&rdquo; and
so on.

Connotation seems to gain strength in the hothouse of a
word-conscious mind.  The honorific/pejorative associations
of a word tend to intensify.  This is true of both universal
connotations (*stingy* = bad; *thrifty* = good) and optional
connotations (*parsimonious* = good or bad, according to the
context, or to your own feelings about the word and the
world; similarly *conservative*, *genteel*, *muckraker:* you may
regard these terms favorably or unfavorably, but the
chances are that your regard is a fairly strongly felt one).

It is true, too, of &ldquo;idio-connotation&rdquo;—the unique set of
associations that a word has for an individual user—its
semantic fingerprint, so to speak.  Proust's place-names provide
a standard example.  An example of my own: in my
family, a common term of endearment is *Petunia* (based on
*pet?*), and I cannot hear the word *petunia* &ldquo;purely,&rdquo; even
when it is spoken by a florist.  One last example: when I was
eight or nine, I read the following definition on a sweet
wrapper: &ldquo;A damsel is a little plum.&rdquo;  (The joke, such as it is,
had to be explained to me by my father.)  To this day, I cannot
divest the word *damson* or the word *plum* of a slightly
saucy overtone.

The modern word-conscious mind is a good breeding-ground
too for &ldquo;suggestibles,&rdquo; as they have been called.  The
word *fatuous* has a suggestible: *fat*.  Polysemaniacs cannot
read or hear the word *fatuous* without conjuring up some
image or other of fatness, possibly a paunchy wise-guy at a
party.  Near-homonymy generates and sustains obvious suggestibles
for such words as *titter* and *hoary*, and even farfetched
&ldquo;idio-suggestibles&rdquo;: *pith*, for instance (as a result of a
joke about lisping); or *prognathous* for *prognosis*.

When a word acquires a distinctive coloring in any of
these various ways, it can be said to suffer &ldquo;semantic taint.&rdquo;
(This does not imply deterioration—witness *petunia*—
though the taint usually does take that form.)  The words
*appeasement* and *pacification*, in the wake of Munich and
Cambodia, have acquired distinctly unfavorable connotations.
It would be a very ignorant or a very audacious
speaker who used *appeasement* in a quite neutral and literal
way today.  *Appeasement* and even *pacification* have probably
gone further than just acquiring new connotations and
have acquired new denotations too.  It is in fact polysemy
that is the major cause of semantic taint.  *Gay* and *queer* are
more clear-cut examples.  Their relatively recently acquired
denotations have strongly tainted, though not quite yet fully
tabooed out of existence the use of the words in their earlier
senses.  No up-to-date language-user could unselfconsciously
speak or write the words *gay* and *queer* in their old acceptations.
Not so much through fear of being misunderstood as
through fear of raising an inappropriate laugh.  Traditionalists
may continue in defiance to parade the word *gay* forthrightly
in its older sense (though attested in British
underworld slang as long ago as 1935, *gay* in the sense of
'homosexual' became widely established only in the late
1960s and early 70s), but in their decrying of the new sense
and its &ldquo;annexation&rdquo; of the word they are in effect admitting
its firm hold.  Or consider the modern use of *pathetic* in British
English, 'inadequate, feeble, useless,' which is now
almost certainly more frequent than the older sense of
'arousing sympathy; pitiful.'  It would be unwise, in Britain
at least, to write of &ldquo;the prima ballerina's pathetic performance
in *Swan Lake*&rdquo; if what you are intending is a eulogy.

Though the turnover of the primary meanings of words
is greater today than in past times, it remains a turnover of
dominance rather than of existence.  A primary sense may be
overshadowed and subordinated, but it is likely to persist for
a long time.  *Surprise* in the sense of 'to see or attack unexpectedly;
to catch unawares' survives, though the more
modern sense of 'to astonish, shock, or amaze' had probably
gained the ascendancy as long ago as the early 18th century.
(Similarly, *jealous*, *intercourse*, *luxuriously*.)  Not that all
dethroned senses survive, of course; the displaced senses of
*disease* and *crafty*, for instance, have died out, but that was
the work of generations if not centuries.  (Similarly, *obsequious*,
*silly*, *admirable*, *undertaker*, *edify*, *quaint*, *quick*, *curious*,
*sad*, *lewd*, *cunning*, *shrewd*.)

The &ldquo;survival&rdquo; of a sense is a tricky notion, however.  A
dislodged sense may survive merely in people's passive rather
than active vocabularies.  Educated speakers would understand
(though not without being distracted) the phrase
&ldquo;friendly intercourse between the nations,&rdquo; but they would
be unlikely to initiate it in ordinary conversation.  Some
words, even though &ldquo;tainted,&rdquo; do remain in the active repertoire,
since there is no convenient synonym.  Balls, to take
the most obvious example.  Circumlocution is sometimes possible:
&ldquo;I'll meet you at the courts, and get some tennis-balls
on the way.&rdquo;  But not consistently: you cannot repeatedly
complain that &ldquo;Our tennis-balls keep disappearing&rdquo;; at some
point you have to speak simply of &ldquo;our balls.&rdquo;  The middlingly
sensitive man will after a time stop noticing the
notional ambiguity; the polysemaniac will be pulled up
short every time and have to grit his teeth and wait for the
distraction to fade.

What remedy?  &ldquo;Try not to think of an elephant&rdquo; goes
the children's joke.  Try likewise not to be distracted: for the
polysemaniac, prurient puns never lose their gloss, their
incapacitating distractiveness.  Further examples: *diaphragm*,
*come*, *fairy*, *grope*, *hole*, *period*, *piles*, *pill*, *prick*,
*screw*, *stool*, *streak*, *tart*, *tool*—all tainted, all indispensable.

To a greater or lesser degree, many tainted terms are
dispensed with nowadays.  In some cases, the loss is a small
one, since the word in its old or unprovocative sense may be
old-fashioned anyway and easily substitutable: bondage,
curse (&ldquo; 'The curse is come upon me,' cried/The lady of
Shalott&rdquo;), *ejaculate*, *erection*, *gay* and *intercourse* again,
*make love* (&ldquo;Emma found, on being escorted and followed
into the second carriage by Mr. Eiton, that the door was to
be lawfully shut on them, and that they were to have a t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te
drive ... scarcely had they passed the sweep-gate
and joined the other carriage, than she found her subject cut
up—her hand seized—her attention demanded, and Mr.
Elton actually making violent love to her&rdquo;), *lover*, *motion*,
*prophylactic*, *seduce* (though A. L. Rowse, just a few years
ago, wrote in the *TLS* of &ldquo;the half-wild cat I am engaged in
seducing at present.&rdquo;)

With other shunned expressions, however, the loss is
clearly an impoverishment.  It would be very risky in British
English to use *back passage* in its literal sense.  The following
sentence, from *The Yearbook of the British Pirandello Society*,
1981, is almost certain to elicit a snigger: &ldquo;Also, in the
finale, the audience see the aunt, Lena, touching La
Demente for the first time, but it's behind the pane, in the
back passage.&rdquo;  So too with *pick up*, *jerk off* (&ldquo;She watched
Rena back the yellow Mini into the main stream of traffic
and jerk off to the right.  Then she let out a low sigh.&rdquo;—
A. N. Wilson, *The Healing Art*), and so on.

Note that semantic taint is not always sexual or scatological
in origin.  Taint can be transmitted by political
associations (*fellow traveler*, *solidarity*, *comrade*), modern
history (*holocaust*, *Watergate*, *Lebanon*), sociology (*chauvinist*,
*WASP*, *certifiable*), entertainment (*python*, *Tom
Jones*), science (*transplant*, *plastic*—&ldquo;God's plastic arm&rdquo;), or
mockery or puristic disapproval (vogue words and modern
clich&eacute;s such as *ongoing situation*, *adrenalin*, and *parameter*,
and &ldquo;misuses&rdquo; such as *aggravate*, *hopefully*, *psychological
moment*, and *viable*).

How disabling is semantic taint, really?  The fact is, it
seldom generates fully paralyzing polysemania.  Empsonians
do manage to continue reading, even after undertaking their
exhaustive analyses of single words within a poem or play.
Perhaps some natural immune-system comes into operation
to counteract semantic taint.  When the commonest linguistic
microorganisms—*make*, *thing*, *pull*, *blow*, *rear*—acquire
bawdy meanings, then some filter or antibody must be at
work if linguistic life and sanity are to be preserved.  Or
rather, some controlling mechanism: the virus is not
destroyed but kept in check.  It is as though one goes through
life with a mild fever.  One copes.  One accepts one's hopelessly
anachronistic readings of old texts, but puts them to
one side: &ldquo;A man who exposes himself when he is intoxicated,
has not the art of getting drunk&rdquo; (Boswell, quoting
Johnson).

>I have heard that hysterical women say  
They are sick of the palette and fiddle-bow,  
Of poets that are always gay ...  
All things fall and are built again,  
And those that build them again are gay.  
—W. B. Yeats, &ldquo;Lapis Lazuli.&rdquo;  

>You did not come.  
And marching Time drew on, and wore me numb.  
—Thomas Hardy, &ldquo;A Broken Appointment.&rdquo;

The modern senses of *gay* and *come* must not be allowed to
affect one's final reading of such lines, even though they will
almost inevitably enter one's consciousness and impinge on
one's first reading.

A few corollaries and qualifications:

First, alongside semantic taint, there seems to be a
reverse process, though it is quite rare.  In certain contexts in
certain dialects, the words *bugger* and *shit*, for instance,
may undergo decontamination, as it were: &ldquo;He's an energetic
little bugger, that youngster of yours&rdquo;; &ldquo;Hey shit, man,
look at that car move!&rdquo;  More subtly, terms originating as
metaphors may through frequent use come to lose their
metaphorical feel: just as *abysmal* no longer evokes the idea
of an abyss, so perhaps *virgin snow* no longer evokes the idea
of a virgin.

Second, British and American English differ in semantic
taint.  Some expressions that are tainted for North Americans—*rubber*,
notably—are free of taint for most British
speakers.  And vice versa: *back passage* (again), *bog, on the
job*, *sod*, *spanking*, *stuff*.  (Compare the differing standard
interpretations of *to knock up* or *to keep your pecker up* in
British English and American English.)

Third, some words seem to remain surprisingly resistant
to taint.  In *conversation*, for example, it is the
centuries-old sexual association rather than the standard
sense that has been subordinated.  (Contrast *intercourse*.) So
too with *know*.  More recent stalwarts include *fruit, hump,
nuts, purge, skin, and aides*.  Or so it seems to me.  But this
might just be my idio-connotation, or lack of it.  A proper
survey is needed to ascertain the truth of the matter here.

Fourth—accordingly—research is necessary.  A few
pointers, then, by way of conclusion, for some adventurous
doctoral student in search of a dissertation: try to draw up a
comparative service list of various tainted words decade by
decade this century; to what extent has come, for instance,
declined in recent years, and been replaced by arrive where
appropriate?; trace the fluctuations in popularity of such
given names as *Lou, John, Adolph* (and *Hilda?*) over the
years; devise tests (along the lines of The *Measurement of
Meaning* by Osgood et al.) for measuring semantic taint,
and propose ways of incorporating the results of such tests
into standard English dictionaries; compare the 27 stylistic
values—*poetic, facetious, laudatory, vulgar*, and so on-used
in A. S. Hornby's *Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary
of Current English*.

Two examples, finally, of the kind of material that
might be used in testing a subject's &ldquo;distraction-index&rdquo; in the
course of such research.  Try assessing in yourself the
&ldquo;purity&rdquo; of your response to the humor of the following joke,
and to the datedness (or simple badness) of the lines of
poetry:

>&ldquo;How can you put up a sign saying 'Beware of the
Dog?'—that dog of yours doesn't even have any teeth
left...&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;That's true, but if he ever gets his jaws around your
ankle, he can give you a really nasty suck.&rdquo;
>
>Her beauty smooth'd earth's furrow'd face!
>
>She gave me tokens three:—
>
>A look, a word of her winsome mouth,  
And a wild raspberry.
>
>—Francis Thompson, &ldquo;Daisy.&rdquo;

***

*Footnotes*

1\.  See pp. 32 and 159 respectively.  The informant using *peckerwood*
was born on 10th March 1887 in Kosciusko, Attala County, Mississippi.
No such clues are given for *hoppergrass*, however.

2\.  Even some examples of reversal can be explained as folk etymology.
Thus when *W&icirc;hoppe*, 'hoopoe' becomes *Hopw&icirc;wecken* (see
above), the second element (*-w&icirc;weken*) can be taken to mean
'female,' as Suolahti points out (p. 14).  However, the larger incidence
of 'nonsensical' reversals still suggests that, in transposition,
word-play is the primary motive.

## Patterned Words and Phrases
*Barbara Hunt Lazerson, Illinois State University*

In a *sky-breaking ceremony* that was held in Grand Rapids,
Michigan, in March 1981, a helicopter hovered 318
feet above the ground to mark what was to be the top of a
planned 28-story structure.  In May of the preceding year,
debris from Mount St. Helens, a volcano in Washington
state, had caused a baseball game to be *ashed out*.  *TV
Guide*[^a1] has published a *cop's-eye view* of the program *Hill
Street Blues*; the *Chicago Tribune*[^a2] has published a *man's-eye
view* of Dr. Joyce Brothers' book.  *What Every Woman
Should Know about Men*; and *Today*[^a3] has presented a
*child's-eye view* of being homeless.  Newspaper articles have
dealt with *jayjoggers, jaydriving, jaymarching*, and *joysailing*.
Illegal aliens from Canada have been labeled
*icebacks* and *snowbacks*.  Johnny Carson has jokingly
referred to illegal aliens from outer space as *spacebacks*.
Desmond Wilson, who for six years was a star of the TV sitcom
*Sanford* and *Son*, has declared that he is a *Johnny*
*Jesus-seed* because he is now a full-time evangelist who
plants his religious seeds and goes on.  These terms, all of
which have appeared in the media in recent years, fill one
with a sense of lexical d&eacute;j&agrave; vu; and rightly so, for they were
patterned after *ground-breaking ceremony*, *rained out*,
*bird's-eye view, jaywalkers, jaywalking, joyriding, wetbacks*,
and *Johnny Appleseed*, respectively.  As *The Second
Barnhart Dictionary of New English*[^a4] has pointed out, a patterned
form &ldquo;is distinctive because it might never have been
coined had a previous form or pattern of forms not existed to
serve as the blueprint for its creation.&rdquo;  The mechanism
underlying this phenomenon is illustrated by a statement
made by movie critic Neal Gabler on *Sneak Previews*[^a5] 
regarding the movie *The Lord of the Flies*: &ldquo;They call some
books a good read.  Well, this movie is a good watch.&rdquo;  A farrago
of patterned forms is discussed below.  When such
information is available, an earliest-use date, which usually
appears in parentheses after the word, is provided for those
terms that have been accepted by lexicographers as a permanent
part of the language.  Unless otherwise specified, this
date is from *Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary*
(1983).

According to *Suffixes and Other Word-Final Elements
of English,* [^a6] *-buster* is &ldquo;a noun and a noun-forming word-final
element, derived from the verb *bust* 'burst, break' and
*-er* ['a person who does or performs an action'], used in combination
meaning 'a person or thing that breaks or breaks
up something' named by the combining root: *sodbuster*,
*broncobuster*, *bellybuster*.&rdquo;  Lexicographers have listed several
words ending in *-buster*.  *Webster's Ninth* has recorded
as main entries *broncobuster* (1887) 'one who breaks wild
horses to the saddle'; *trustbuster* (1903) 'one who seeks to
break up business trusts; *specif:* a federal official who prosecutes
trusts under the antitrust laws'; *sodbuster* (ca. 1918)
'one (as a farmer or a plow) that breaks the sod'; *gangbuster*
(1940) 'one engaged in the aggressive breakup of organized
criminal gangs' (the radio show that was apparently the
source of this term was first broadcast in 1936); *blockbuster*
(1942), a term that began its lexical life during World War
II as the label for the 8,000-pound bombs dropped by the
RAF, so called because one bomb could destroy an entire
city block.  *Barnhart's Second* has recorded *fuzzbuster* (1977)
'an electronic device for detecting radar,' from *fuzz*, slang
for *police* + -*buster*, so called because the device makes
police radar ineffective, and *silo buster* (1977) 'a nuclear
missile designed to destroy enemy silos to prevent a retaliatory
attack.' *9,000 Words*[^a7] has recorded *chartbusters* (no
date) 'one that is a best seller; *esp:* a best-selling phonograph
record.'  While this list of terms is incomplete because not
every *-buster* word created between 1887, the date given for
*broncobuster*, and 1983, the year *Webster's Ninth* and *9,000
Words* were published, is included in &ldquo;the&rdquo; dictionary, the
list is undoubtedly accurate in suggesting that for nearly a
century compounds ending in *-buster* were produced only
intermittently.  However, this changed dramatically in 1984
with the advent of the movie *Ghostbusters*.  This mega-hit
had been preceded by months of media hype that featured
the international symbol for prohibition (a circle with a
diagonal line cutting it in half) imposed upon a stylized picture
of a ghost.  This popular comedy about ghost exterminators
served as the impetus for the creation of a plethora of
neologisms.  The baker's dozen that follow are but a sample:
*backache busters*, exercises designed to reduce or eliminate
back pain; *bug busters*, a humorous label for specialists who
rid software of bugs and a trendy term for techniques that
will rid the house of bugs; *clich&eacute;busters*, an epithet for that
group of language guardians known as the Unicorn Hunters
who included *-busters* in their 10th annual list of words and
phrases to be banished from the English language; *dust busters*,
a support group that helps women deal with housework;
*fake Apple busters*, those who try to rid the market of
foreign-made clones of the Apple computer; *funbusters*, an
epithet given to the police in a central Illinois college town
because of their efforts to control beer-drinking parties; *holiday
stress-busters*, suggestions for reducing holiday-related
stress; *nailbiter busters*, artificial nails that keep you from
biting your natural nails; *Reaganbusters*, a group of students
who tried to keep President Reagan from being re-elected;
*thugbuster*, an epithet for Bernhard Goetz, who shot four
teen-agers on a New York subway; *troll busters*, a label for
those who harass vagrants in Santa Cruz, California, where
vagrants are known as trolls; *waistbusters*, exercises
designed to reduce one's waist; *weed busters*, what a lawncare
company called itself in an advertisement that promised
the elimination of dandelions, thistles, and other weeds.
It is highly likely that this word-generating phenomenon
will subside long before *Ghostbusters* is relegated to the late,
late show.  Be that as it may, the &ldquo;neologorrhea&rdquo; stimulated
by this movie has been of such a magnitude that *The 1985
World Book Year Book*[^a8] has commented on it: &ldquo;Ghostbusters
... became the most successful comedy ever released in
the United States.  The term *busters* became part of American
pop culture, appearing in advertising for insecticides
(*Roachbusters*), cigarette warnings (*Smokebusters*), and
other products.&rdquo;  *USA Today*[^a9] has labeled this lexical phenomenon
*buster-mania* and the resultant neologisms
*busterisms*.

It has taken sixty-five years for only a handful of *collar*
terms to be added to the language, and semantic restrictions
make it highly unlikely that such adjectives will ever proliferate
in the way *-buster* terms have.  The *&ldquo;ur-term&rdquo;* was
*white-collar* (1920), a label for those who hold jobs that do
not require them to wear protective clothing.  *White-collar*
was followed by three other adjectives, each of which was
based upon the color of the work clothes allegedly worn by
people in a particular branch of the workforce: *blue-collar*
(1946), a label for those who do manual labor; *gray-collar*
(1968[^a10]), a label for those who repair television sets, washing
machines, and similar equipment; *pink-collar* (1977), a
label for those in jobs that traditionally have been held by
women.  The latest addition to this list of &ldquo;chromatic&rdquo; collar
terms is *gold-collar*, a word too new to be included in even
the most recently published dictionary.  *Gold-collar* was
introduced by Robert E. Kelley in his book *The Gold-Collar
Worker* (Addison-Wesley, 1985) as a label for that new
breed of workers—lawyers, computer programmers, stock
analysts, community planners, scientists, researchers,
editors, and engineers—who engage in complex problem-solving.
In this case, *gold* alludes not to the color of a work
uniform, but to the elite status of these cream-of-the-crop
workers who are so valuable that they have mobility in even
a tight job market.  *Collar* terms based upon features other
than color have also appeared in recent years.  Ralph Whitehead,
a University of Massachusetts professor, has coined
*new-collar* to label that third of the baby-boom generation
who are what he calls the &ldquo;workhorses of the service community.&rdquo;
These *new-collar* workers, who are employed as
clerks, keypunch operators, insurance agents, teachers,
nurses, and secretaries, are under 45 and have family
incomes of between $20,000 and $40,000.  *Small-collar* was
used by *Time*[^a11] to refer to youngsters who sell seeds in order
to earn money.  This undoubtedly will prove to be a nonce
term.  By way of contrast, *steel-collar*, which dates from
approximately 1982,[^a12] shows signs of becoming a permanent
part of the language; for robots &ldquo;who&rdquo; have been called
*steel-collar workers* and a *steel-collar workforce*, appear to
be the wave of the future where industry is concerned.
Robots have also been referred to as *iron-collar workers*, but
I doubt that *iron-collar* will be able to compete successfully
with *steel-collar*.

*Culture shock* (ca. 1960) entered the language approximately
a quarter of a century ago as the name for the confusion
and anxiety that can affect a person who is suddenly
exposed to an alien culture without adequate preparation.
In the intervening years, Americans have been shocked by a
variety of things that have been given labels by the media.
For example, squeezing one's overweight body into a formfitting
dress results in *size shock*; coping with the demands of
an infant gives new parents *baby shock*; being required to
select a personal computer from the myriad that are available
produces a condition known variously as *computer
shock, personal computer shock*, and *option shock*; and
viewing the numerous tragedies—e.g., the hostage crisis in
Beirut—presented on TV results in *tube shock*.  However,
inflation has been by far the greatest source of *shock terms*;
for journalists have created names for the distress resulting
from the high price of cars (*sticker shock*), college degrees
(*sheepskin shock*), electricity (*meter shock, electricity
shock*), utilities in general (*rate shock*), petroleum (*oil
shock*), mortgages (*mortgage payment shock*, *payment
shock*), interest on the use of credit cards (*credit shock*), and
bills in general (*bill shock*).  But it is *future shock*, Alvin
Toffler's label for the physical and psychological distress
resulting from one's inability to cope with rapid social and
technological change, that has become the most widely used
of all *shock* terms.  In fact, *future shock*, which Toffler introduced
in a 1965 magazine article,[^a13] became a national
buzzword when his book by that name was published in
1970.  Since then, *past shock* and *present shock*, which, as
used in the media, mean essentially the same thing as *future
shock*, have been created to fill the lexical gaps in the time
dimension suggested by Toffler's term.  Other neologisms
based upon *future shock* have been created by replacing
*shock* with similar sounding words: *future schlock*, a generic
term for the new junk foods that will soon be on the market;
*future shuck*, a derogatory term for the prognostications
made by futurists; *future frock*, a dress soon to be worn by
the fashion-conscious; *future shack*, the maintenance-free
home of the future.  By simply adding *-s* to *future*, one journalist
created *futures shock*, a label for the consternation
that swept through the commodity futures industry in the
spring of 1985 when it was learned that the customers of
Volume Investors Corp., a member of the Commodity
Exchange, might lose about $3.5 million as a result of that
firm's collapse.  Finally, cartoonist Thaves, who draws
*Frank* and *Ernest*, has replaced both *future* and *shock* with
sound-alike words to create *Feature Schlock*, the name of an
imaginary documentary about the making of a TV miniseries.

A whodunit is a mystery novel, play, or motion picture
that challenges the reader or viewer to figure out who committed
a crime, usually a murder.  *Whodunit* (1930) is an
interesting term from a patterning perspective because it
consists of three words, all of which have been changed,
either singly or in parts, to produce new triadic nouns.
*Barnhart's Second* lists *whydunit* (1971), which it defines as
'a mystery novel, play, or motion picture which deals primarily
with the motivation for the crime.'  Similar terms
that have appeared in the media in recent years are *who'll-do-it,
whatsawit, whodunwhat*, and *howdunit*.  The mix-and-match
quality of these five progeny suggests that the
patterning potential of whodunit is far from exhausted.

Some borrowed phrases that still retain their foreign
quality have generated phrases patterned after them.  *Pi&egrave;ce
de r&eacute;sistance* (1839) has produced the sound-alike *pi&egrave;ce de
residence*, an eye-catching designation for a magnificent
lakefront residence in the Chicago area.  From *tour de force*
(1805) has come *tour de farce*, a &ldquo;punny&rdquo; label for the NBC-TV
contemporary comedy, *Saturday Night Live*.  *Soup du
jour* (ca. 1945) has given us *scoop du jour*, a humorous term
for an exclusive news story, and *sloop du jour*, which is what
cartoonist Thaves has called a sailboat that is used as a daily
ferry.

Even an acronym can produce patterned progeny, as
*Yuppie* (*Young Urban Professional* + -*pie*) has demonstrated.
This vogue term, which may have been influenced
by *Yippie* (the label for a person belonging to Youth
*International Party*, a hippie organization) has stimulated
wordsmiths to create a plethora of similar acronyms that
almost invariably have been used in a tongue-in-cheek
manner: *Buppie* = *Black Urban Professional*; *Grumpie* =
*Grownup Mature Person*; *Cuppie* = *Gay Urban Professional*;
*Juppie* = *Japanese Urban Professional*; *Mummy*
= *Mature Upwardly Mobile Mommy*; *Muppie* = *Mature
Urban Professional* (a Yuppie who has reached the age of
40); *Puppie* = *Pregnant Urban Professional*; *Scampie* =
Societally Conscious, Affluent, *Mature Parent*; *Schleppy* =
*Screwed-up, Haggard, Lackluster*, *Ex*hausted *Person*;
*Yappie* = *Young Aspiring Professional; Yechie* = *Young
Elite Chicagoan; Yubbie* = *Young Urban Breadwinner;
Yucky* = *Yammering Urban Curmudgeon; Yuffie* =
*Young Urban Failure; Yummie* = *Young Urban Mafioso;
Yummy* = *Young Upwardly Mobile Mommy; Yumpy* =
*Young Upwardly Mobile Papa* or *Young Upwardly Mobile
Professional*.  Additionally, *Yuppie* has resulted in the creation
of *yuplash* 'a strong, negative reaction against the Yuppie
concept,' patterned after *backlash* (ca. 1957[^a14]); *yupscale*,
after *upscale* (1972); *Yupper West Side*, after *Upper West
Side*; and *onward* and *yupward*, after *onward* and *upward*.

Rhyming and opposition are the ready handmaidens of
patterning.  Rhyming has produced colorful terms such as
*sky &agrave; la mode*—a skyscraper condominium that provides as a
&ldquo;topping&rdquo; the luxury of being close to shops, restaurants,
and theaters—patterned after *pie &agrave; la mode* (1880s[^a15]); *Bourbon
Cowboy*—the title of a potential movie about drunken
cowboys—patterned after *Urban Cowboy*, which was the
title of a 1980 movie; and *slime time*—an undesirable time
slot for a TV show—patterned after *prime time* (1958).
Opposition has produced antonyms for words and phrases
that have been in the language for several centuries as well
as for terms of such recent origin that they are almost neologisms
themselves: *brand-new* (1570) > *brand-old*; *old-wives'
tale* (1656) > *new wives' tale*; *malpractice* (1671) >
*malhealth*, what one physician recommended patients be
charged with when they violate the orders of their doctors;
*fair-weather friends* (1736) > *foul-weather friends; G-men*
(1917) > *G-women; upward mobility* (1949) > *downward
mobility; Moral Majority* (1979[^a16]) > *Immoral Majority* and
the double antonym, *Immoral Minority; user-friendly* (ca.1)  > *user-unfriendly* and the even-more-negative *user-hostile*.

Patterning is the sine qua non for the punster.  One need
look only as far as the adjective *born-again* (1967) to see that
this is so.  This term, which *Barnhart's Second* defines in the
figurative sense as 'marked by a rebirth or renewal (as of
interest, freshness, or youth); resurgent,' served as the inspiration
for the following three puns.  A used-clothes store in
Decatur, Illinois, is named *Worn Again* and bills itself as the
place &ldquo;for clothes too good to be through.&rdquo;  Punster Edward
Stevenson has declared that &ldquo;back-to-the-soil advocates
[are] barn-again farmers.&rdquo;  An eye-catching caption above
an article that raised the question of whether Bjorn Borg
would ever return to tennis queried, &ldquo;Bjorn-again tennis
player?&rdquo;

At first glance, patterning would appear to be the
antithesis of creativity; for the word *pattern* conjures up
images of products such as pictures, dresses, and prefabricated
houses that are all of a kind.  However, as the preceding
examples have shown, patterning is a lexical device that
enables the capable wordsmith to generate neologisms from
familiar terms.  Thus, patterning adds to the flexibility that
is the hallmark of contemporary English.

***

[^a1]: June 20, 1981, p. A-5.

[^a2]: June 13, 1982, sec. 12, p. 1.

[^a3]: NBC-TV, April 9, 1985.

[^a4]: Bronxville: Barnhart, 1980, p. 346.

[^a5]: WILL-TV, Urbana, Illinois, Feb. 18, 1983.

[^a6]: Detroit: Gale Research Company, 1982, p. 224.

[^a7]: Springfield, Mass: Merriam-Webster, 1983, p. 36.

[^a8]: Chicago: World Book, Inc., 1985, p. 405.

[^a9]: July 23, 1985, p. 2B.

[^a10]: *Barnhart's Second*, p. 358.

[^a11]: Oct. 12, 1981, p. 86.

[^a12]: *American Speech*, Vol. 59, p. 68.

[^a13]: &ldquo;The Future as a Way of Life.&rdquo;  Horizon, 1965, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 108-15.

[^a14]: *The Oxford English Dictionary*, Supplement I, p. 177.

[^a15]: Stuart Berg Flexner (*I Hear America Talking*.  New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1976, pp. 68-69.) has stated that *&ldquo;pie &agrave; la mode* ...has been around since the 1880s, but became widely known only after the famous Delmonico's restaurant put it on its menu around the end of World War I.&rdquo;

[^a16]: According to *Newsweek*, Sept. 21, 1981, p. 17, the Moral Majority was established in June 1979.

## When Everything Was Everything
*Joe Queenan, Tarrytown, New York*

On September 27, 1967, *The Consumer's Report on
Banality* listed the expression, &ldquo;Everything is everything,&rdquo;
as the single most popular cliche in the continental
United States, with &ldquo;If you're not part of the solution you're
part of the problem,&rdquo; a close second, and &ldquo;You can be in my
dreams if I can be in yours,&rdquo; a strong third.  By the following
September, only &ldquo;You can be in my dreams ...&rdquo; continued
to appear in the Top Ten (No. 8), while &ldquo;If you're not part
of the solution...&rdquo; had dropped to Number 67, right
behind &ldquo;You can't fight City Hall,&rdquo; and &ldquo;It takes one to
know one,&rdquo; (tied for No. 65).  Incredibly, &ldquo;Everything is
everything,&rdquo; was not even listed in the top three hundred
American clich&eacute;s.  By the spring of 1969, all three phrases
had vanished from the national idiom, a phenomenon which
has recently sparked great interest inside the academic community.
How, specialists would like to know, was it possible
for three inanities of such a spectacularly fatuous nature
simply to drop out of the language like that, as if they had
never existed?  Was it merely a question of overuse?  Or does
the answer lie deeper, perhaps rooted in the dark folds of the
national psyche?

In his provocative work, *Clich&eacute;s To Live By And The
Death Of The Sixties*, Anaxamander O'Flaherty, a necro-ethnolinguist
at the University of Altamont, suggests that
the expression, &ldquo;Everything is everything,&rdquo; succumbed to a
natural death brought on by such factors as over-utilization,
deterioration of relevance, and lack of adaptability to
altered states of reality *vis-&agrave;-vis* the American experience.
Says he:

>It was all right to believe that everything was
everything back in 1967 when everything, in a very real
sense, was everything.  But the escalation of the war,
Bobby Kennedy's assassination, and the Chicago riots
made it increasingly difficult to go on believing that
everything was everything, when it seemed highly
unlikely that 'everything' was much more than
'something.'  By the time Nixon was elected, it was
obvious that 'everything' was 'nothing.'

In *Lowered Expectations And The Politics of Banality*, the
follow-up volume to *Clich&eacute;s*, O'Flaherty suggests that the
expression, &ldquo;Everything is everything,&rdquo; could have survived
in a modified form (say, as &ldquo;Everything ain't what it used to
be&rdquo;) had habitual users of the remark been willing to &ldquo;scale
down their estimate of the quantitative quality of life in
these United States.&rdquo;  Their refusal to do so spelt doom for
the luckless mouthful of twaddle.

Much more sinister doings are suspected in the demise
of the phrase, &ldquo;You can be in my dreams if I can be in
yours.&rdquo;  Wotan Schnitzler, in his absorbing *Beyond The Role
Of The CIA In The Death Of My Favorite Clich&eacute;*, adamantly
maintains that secret federal funding allocated by
the Nixon Administration was used to sabotage the youth
countercultural movement by utterly discrediting its most
revered platitudes.  Citing various memos and receipts which
have come into his possession over the years, Schnitzler contends
that thousands of students at major universities were
paid thirty to forty dollars a week by the government to say,
&ldquo;You can be in my dreams but stay out of my neighborhood,&rdquo;
&ldquo;You can be in my dreams if I can be in your reveries,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;You can be in my dreams if I can be in your
16mm porn-flick.&rdquo;  Yet though evidence of some government
intrigue is irrefutable, Shiloh Sokoloff's thesis, set forth in
*What Johnny Can't Say, Much Less Read*, seems much more
plausible; namely, that the sentence, &ldquo;You can be in my
dreams if I can be in yours,&rdquo; was simply too hard for most
young people to remember.  &ldquo;Chronic drug-abuse ravaged so
many collegiate brain cells that only banal expressions without
a dependent clause could be summoned forth from the
canyons of the mind.  *Ergo*, 'What's happening?', 'Hang
loose,' and 'Like wow.' &rdquo;

To this day, no one knows whatever became of the
phrase, &ldquo;If you're not part of the solution, you're part of the
problem.&rdquo;  As late as March 25, 1969, it was still being heard
in strip joints just outside Fresno, California, yet by the following
Monday, it had disappeared from the vernacular of
the trite, never to be heard again.  &ldquo;Like Henry Hudson,
Amelia Earhart, and a couple of other people whose names I
forget,&rdquo; says Wendy Bakunin, amateur insipidographer, in
her book, *Our Vanishing Culture*, &ldquo;this clich&eacute; seems to have
literally dropped off the face of the earth.  For the love of
Mike.&rdquo;  Bakunin goes on to say that &ldquo;If you're not part of the
Aleutians, you're part of the problem,&rdquo; an Eskimo separatist
rallying cry, may be a derivative form of the expression, but
confesses total ignorance as to the current whereabouts of
the original catch-phrase, a tight little nugget of piffle so
dynamic it was once voted &ldquo;Hackneyism Of The Decade&rdquo; by
the American people.  &ldquo;Everything is everything,&rdquo; on the
other hand, has recently surfaced in certain outlying cantons
of Switzerland, as the phrase, &ldquo;Tout est tout,&rdquo; though an
application for a license to use the clich&eacute; inside France itself
has twice been rejected by the Minister of Ephemera, the
Government obviously fearing a subsequent decline in the
use of &ldquo;C'est la vie,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Plus ca change, plus c'est la m&ecirc;me
chose.&rdquo;

As regards &ldquo;You can be in my dreams...,&rdquo; The
League For The Decriminalization Of Overtly Anti-Social
Behavior last month purchased the legal rights to the triviality,
hoping to rent out the phrase, &ldquo;You can beat in my
dreams if I can beat in yours,&rdquo; to various sadomasochistic
supper clubs.  Given this fact, it seems unlikely that the
famed remark will ever again be heard in its pure, unadulterated
form.

In all this, there is one bright note.  Several weeks ago,
The National Foundation For The Preservation of Endangered
Banality authorized funding to look after shopworn
expressions and, where necessary, see that they receive a
decent burial, thus sparing them the indignity of outright
purging from the American idiom.  Furthermore, a Cliche
Hall of Fame will soon be erected in Peoria, Illinois, and
here will be stored valuable tape recordings of the country's
most treasured platitudes being uttered by their inventors
(where possible) as well as by those who helped make them
famous.  Someday soon, if all goes well, the great cliches of
the 1960s will be brought home to their final resting place;
and then, if only for a short time, everything will once again
be everything.  Which would, at the very least, be right on.

## Playing Words with Games
*Stephen Hirschberg, Elmsford, New York*

It was a more relaxed age: before political leaders were
portrayed as &ldquo;huddling&rdquo; with their advisors, &ldquo;putting
the ball into their opponents' courts,&rdquo; &ldquo;playing hardball,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;going to bat for&rdquo; their friends; before we all could be
&ldquo;Monday morning quarterbacks.&rdquo;  It was the epoch of nonathletic
games, when the &ldquo;dead man's hand&rdquo; was common
knowledge, and &ldquo;earned-run average,&rdquo; &ldquo;yards-per-carry,&rdquo;
&ldquo;aerobics&rdquo; and &ldquo;jogging shoes&rdquo; were colorless features on a
far horizon.

In the millennia between the dice-and-board amusements
of ancient Egypt and the ascendancy of spectator
sports in the last century, most games for the populace
required no particular physical prowess.  Their consequent
public favor advanced the idiom of card, dice, and board
pastimes through metaphor to game-unrelated slang and
standard language.

Like the dinosaurs, some games have become extinct,
known only by their fossilized etymons.  Lurch, which had
its heyday in the 16th century, is said to have resembled
backgammon; its only relic, the phrase *leave in the lurch*—
'discomfit,' by greatly outscoring one's opponent.  Once the
most celebrated card game of the American West, *faro* is
now an endangered species.  It leaves as its spoor *breaking
even*—by betting on a card in equal amounts to win and
to lose.

Since uniform laws are essential to all games, Edmond
Hoyle's definitive volumes of rules met considerable public
appreciation.  His *Short Treatise on Whist* appeared in 1742;
by the end of the next century his name was to rule books
what Webster's was to dictionaries, and *according to Hoyle*
signified correctness.

>I cannot believe that God would choose to play dice
with the world.  —Albert Einstein

Dicing dates from the Stone Age, when sheep knucklebones,
astragali, were the primordial &ldquo;rolling bones.&rdquo;  With
dice extensively employed by the ancients for both play and
prognostication, &ldquo;lacta alea est&rdquo; may have been a catch
phrase among the Romans, even before the time of Julius
Caesar.  Modern use of *the die is cast* on crossing a personal
Rubicon is yet further removed from the gaming sense,
given the rarity today of single-die gambling.  Cheating may
occur in most games of chance—it is so likely that it is in the
*dice*.  One technique of dice cheating is to weight one side of
the cubes.  Thus, unfair, one-sided arguments may *load* the
*dice*, and a respondent may be placed at a disadvantage
when asked a *loaded* question.  The terminology of craps is
used to express life's peaks and valleys: shooting *crap*—'taking
excessive risks'; on a *roll*—'repeated success'; *cropping
out* (making a losing throw)—'failure.' *No dice!*—the call
made upon an incorrect throw which must therefore be
repeated—means 'futile' adjectivally, 'Deal's off!' exclamatorily.
A life in disorder is *at sixes and sevens*, the result of
hazarding one's fortune on figurative throws of the dice.  In
its original form—*to set on cinque and sice*—the phrase
alluded to the die's two highest numbers, the lucky five and
six; alliteration then dominated accuracy of translation from
French.

> The chess-board is the world....  —Thomas Huxley

Perhaps because banter during play is frowned upon,
chess has contributed relatively little colorful jargon to English.
Its objective, *checkmate* (from the Persian *shah mat*—
'the king is dead'), has become synonymous with complete
defeat.  One of the few acceptable utterances during the
game, &ldquo;check&rdquo; (alerting the opponent to an attack on his
king) extended its meaning in the 14th to 18th centuries to
'attack, repulse, restraint and control' (the bank *check* having
developed originally for verification and control of forgery;
the *check-list* and *check-mark* as means of certifying
accuracy).  The field of play, the checkerboard, with its
alternation of light and dark, engendered the *check* pattern
(of textiles), the game of *checkers*, and *checkered* ('inconstant,'
as in a *checkered career*).  A no-win, no-lose position
can be described as the deadlock draw, *stalemate*.  A gambit
is a chess opening in which sacrifices are made to gain positional
advantage; outside the game it is now taken to mean
'any opening strategy or remark.'  The gambit sacrifice is
usually a chessman of lowest value, a *pawn*, which by the
16th century denoted a person used to further another's
objectives.

> They laugh that win.  —Shakespeare (*Othello*)

Not only do they laugh; triumphant gamesters verbally
dance about their prostrate opposition with terms of victory
accepted beyond the domain of games.  The opponent may
be defeated by a large margin—*schneidered* ('having been
prevented from making any points at gin rummy'), or
'driven into debt'—put *in the hole* ('given a minus score').
According to the game authority, John Scarne, the image
derives from the practice of indicating a negative score by
drawing a ring around it.  The loser may be 'outwitted'—
*euchred* (prevented from winning the necessary three tricks
at euchre), or 'thwarted'—*snookered* (his direct shot having
been blocked in the game of snooker pool).  In Kelly pool, a
snooker variant, he can be placed in a hazardous position,
*behind the eight-ball*, the striking of which incurs a penalty.
Under such pressure he may 'blunder'—*miscue*.

Or, a winner may celebrate with a simple exclamation
of victory—*Bingo!*

As expected, a trailing player wants to 'reverse the situation'
and *turn the tables*.  &ldquo;Tables&rdquo; was a name for backgammon
in the Middle Ages.  The phrase evokes an image of
a conjurer's patter and sleight of hand, with an extraordinarily
inattentive opponent, allowing the perpetrator, undetected,
to rotate the board and begin playing his adversary's
pieces.

>&ldquo;Who cares for you?&rdquo;  said Alice... &ldquo;You're nothing
but a pack of cards!&rdquo; —Lewis Carroll

Card players, it must be admitted, are generally on
friendlier terms with their equipment than was Alice with
the Queen of Hearts and her court.  (Those addled souls who
talk to cards *before* falling down a rabbit-hole might be
characterized as *not playing with a full deck*.) Outcomes
'within the range of possibility' are *in the cards*, with 'success'
expressible as *playing one's cards right or strengthening
one's hand*, and 'defeat' as *playing into the hands of* others.
In most games, an ace is the desirable, highest-ranked card
of a suit, having ascended from its earlier use—designating
the one-pip, lowest value, hence bad luck face of a die.

>Empoisoned of thyn owene folk thou were; thy *sys*
[six] fortune hath turned into *as* [ace]...
>
>—Chaucer: *The Monk's Tale*
from *The Canterbury Tales*.

During World War I the meaning extended to a crack
fighter pilot, and afterward to one who excels in any field.

The gambler discontented by the caprices of Dame Fortune
may have a 'secret winning plan'—an *ace up his sleeve*.
No well-fitted cardsharp lacks a piece of equipment for
sequestering desirable cards until they become useful.  The
name and function of this mechanical device suggested the
label for a 'person who delays payment or cooperation'—a
*hold-out*.

In their colorful stacks, chips are visually-appealing
tokens of the cash they represent.  The gambler prefers being
*in the chips*—'wealthy.'  One 'makes a contribution'—'adding
to the pot'—by *chipping in*; having so done, 'the consequences
are irrevocable'—the *chips* are down.  With ten
times the value of white chips, *blue chips* are 'highly-rated
assets.'  (The term survives despite the emergence of yellow
chips, worth twenty-five white ones, to satisfy modern high-rollers.)
The old gambler never dies: he *cashes in his chips*,
maybe so he can &ldquo;buy the farm.&rdquo;

>Martin, if dirt were trumps, what hands you would
hold! —Charles Lamb, quoted by Leigh Hunt

For centuries, players of the trump games, from euchre
to contract bridge, have taken disproportionate pleasure in
capturing opponents' non-trump high cards with the lowliest
of a trump suit.  (Are they enjoying the allegorical victory
of Common Man over Tyranny?  Or do they merely like to
see opponents squirm?)  Consequently, any *trump* is a 'key
resource,' and a *trump card* a 'telling argument.'  If possible,
however, one must 'emulate the leader' by *following suit*.  A
*long suit* can be a 'powerful asset,' even with play at notrump.

>The buck stops here.  —Harry S. Truman

Virtually every aspect of poker play is represented by
terms assimilated into common parlance.  One wishing to
'participate' may say *&ldquo;Deal me in.*&rdquo;  Each player then has to
*ante up*—'pay his share into the pot.'  (*Pot*, or *kitty*, thence
denoted any common fund of individuals' contributions.
The kitty—a diminutive from the Middle Dutch *kitte* 'jug,'
and thus a &ldquo;small pot&rdquo;—originally had a more restricted
meaning: it was a pool composed of a part of each player's
winnings, used to pay the expenses of the game.)  'Low limit
betting' (later, any small-scale transaction) is penny ante.  In
the early days of the game, the *buck*—a '*pocket knife*'—was
passed around to designate the player whose turn it was to
bet; to shift responsibility (*up to* the next player) was to *pass
the buck*.  &ldquo;Up to,&rdquo; indicating 'incumbent on,' is also of
poker origin.  If a participant 'puts all he has in the pot'—
*taps out* ('goes broke' in non-poker circles)—he can continue
to play the hand, but cannot bet further.

Deception is the heart of poker: in its early days the
game was often called &ldquo;bluff.&rdquo;  Disguise begins with the
inscrutable *poker face*: &ldquo;...the countenance should not
betray the nature of the hand,&rdquo; advised the 1885 *Encyclopaedia
Britannica*.  In most variants of stud poker, players
are dealt four cards face-up, and one or three face-down
(hole cards).  One showing four cards of a suit (but not holding
the fifth needed for a flush) may bluff his way to winning
the pot, but if opponents demand that he support his
boast he will be exposed as a pretentious fake as the cards
are revealed when the issue is forced to a conclusion: in
other words, if they *call his bluff* the *fourflusher* must *put
his cards on the table at the showdown*.  Of course, a bettor
may not be bluffing: there may be a hidden asset—an *ace* in
*the hole*.  The hands are closed in draw poker.  Each player
has options to discard part of his holding in exchange for
new cards or to *stand pat*, 'declining a change.'  The successful
player cannot let the opposition see his cards: strategy is
kept secret by *playing close to the vest* and taking care not to
*tip one's hand*.

One way to increase the size of the stakes in draw poker
is requiring that every player ante, but prohibiting anyone
from opening the betting without a pair of jacks or better.
The *jackpot* so created increases if no one opens, as additional
hands are dealt and new antes contributed.  'Any large
pool of funds' (such as a slot machine's payoff) could thus be
called a *jackpot*.  The winner or anyone so enjoying sudden
great success *hits the jackpot*.

*The dead man's hand?*  According to legend, it was the
holding of Wild Bill Hickok when he was shot in the back at
a poker game in Deadwood City, Dakota Territory; contrary
to his custom, he was sitting with his back to the door.
The *dead man's hand* is two pairs—aces and eights—which,
for reasons clear (to Wild Bill, anyway), is considered bad
luck.

## Mapping the Words or How I Justified My Sneck
*Rosemary Courtney, Newmarket, Ontario*

In my youth, I almost worked on the *Linguistic Atlas of
England*.  To explain how (and why &ldquo;almost&rdquo;) I must
provide some academic background.

All my life I have been a devotee of words as words.  I
preferred language to literature, to the consternation of my
teachers, especially one.  Herself a *comer-in* from London,
she disapproved of this language buff's language and
mocked my Yorkshire accent (the same as everyone else's),
making me say &ldquo;batter&rdquo; instead of my native &ldquo;butter&rdquo; with
the rounded /u/ of *look*.  Until then, like everyone else in the
world, I had no idea I had an accent.

True, I said sneck for &ldquo;latch&rdquo; and would say, &ldquo;You've
closed the door but not snecked it&rdquo;; I called the local stream
a *beck, an alley a ghinnel*, and cow-dung at the local farm
*muck* (rhyming with *look*); I shortened *the* to *t*', as in &ldquo;I'm
going to t' shops,&rdquo; and even used *thee* and *thou*, but only
with my Quaker friend, for I knew that the second person
singular had died out among *eddicated* people.  But now I
was condemned for not *talkin' posh*, and rapidly acquired a
Received Standard English (RSE) vowel in *butter*.  For the
rest, I felt entitled to my native tongue.

So when I enrolled in Leeds University's English Language
scheme (designed by J.R.R. Tolkien, the previous
professor), I were right glad to find—I mean rejoiced to discover
(I was becoming bilingual)—that the present professor,
Harold Orton, not only respected the local speech but
was anxious to record all the dialects of English before they
vanished under the pernicious influence of the BBC and my
teacher.  I became a keen student of his phonology classes
under the watchful eye of Tolkien's portrait; of Old and
Middle English; and of phonetics under no less than Peter
MacCarthy, whose Listening Lab was sound-proofed with
eggboxes.  I was *cock-a-hoop* when money arrived to finance
the Linguistic Atlas, with students like myself trained to
work in &ldquo;the field.&rdquo;  I thought this was an anthropological
term until I discovered that it was too often literal.

Beginners did their field-work for a B. A. thesis, then
graduated to Ph.D. research, which would be published in
the Atlas.  We gathered data from informants according to a
questionnaire devised by Orton and his colleague, Eugen
Dieth of Zurich; then analyzed the phonemes, tracing them
back to Middle English.  The words and pronunciations were
mapped onto locations in the Atlas.  Our model was the first
Ph.D. student, Stanley Ellis, so dedicated that he lived in a
caravan trailer in &ldquo;the field&rdquo; (literally), conversing with his
informants in exactly their own dialect and not that of the
village next door.  We envied him his ear and admired his
dedication.  He was our Henry Higgins.

For my B. A., I was invited to record the town dialect
of Leeds itself, for which I was mercifully provided with
informants, thus saving months of labor tracing old people
who had never moved, were illiterate, and preferably isolated
from RSE.  My first informant was a 75-year-old lady
still working as a *char* ('cleaning woman') and living in the
house where she was born.  While I scribbled phonetics, she
*mashed* ('brewed') the tea and then *teemed* ('poured') it,
before asking me to help *side* ('clear') the table and *sneck* the
door.  Ahl my &ldquo;sneck&rdquo; was not &ldquo;bad accent&rdquo; but &ldquo;pure&rdquo; dialect
!  She spoke of her *bairns* ('children') who were often
*badly* ('ill') with something *smittlin*' ('infectious'), or were
*gawmless* ('stupid').  Aye, she was a *right smashin*' informant;
her only drawback was that she stank.

My next informants were a group of retired miners in
their eighties, congregating in a council shelter on a desolate
stretch of gravel known euphemistically as Hunslet Moor.
Hunslet is south of the river Aire, so across the isogloss, and I
sounded like a *comer-in* speaking in my broadest Leeds-north-of-the-river.
Oh, for Stanley's talent for mimicry!
They were unfailingly cooperative, erring rather on the side
of enthusiasm than reticence; but they were a pack of liars
and teasers.  What fun it was to take the mickey out of the
naive &ldquo;lass frum t' college,&rdquo; forcing her to elaborate on
roundabout questions designed to elicit rude words like
*fart*.  They didn't even give me a new word for *fart*.  They did
say *gawky* and *golliker* for 'left-handed,' and the Old English
*cockstride* for 'astride,' but these were in the *English
Dialect Dictionary* (*EDD*).  Their chief contribution was in
pronunciation.

Leeds vowels are mixed because it lies just south of
another isogloss, the river Wharfe, which divided the North
and North Midland dialects of Middle English.  My miners,
innocent of their linguistic ancestry and oblivious of their
accent, produced classic divided usage: of words in *-ight*,
*right* was pronounced &ldquo;rate&rdquo; or &ldquo;reet,&rdquo; frightened became
&ldquo;freetened,&rdquo; but *sight* was &ldquo;site&rdquo;; *ea* words from Middle
English long *e* included *clean*, *beans*, and *eaves* as in RSE,
but also &ldquo;scahms&rdquo; for *seams* and even &ldquo;paze&rdquo; for *peas*.  *Coal*
was &ldquo;coil&rdquo; but *foal* &ldquo;fohl&rdquo;; *about* was &ldquo;abaht&rdquo; as expected—
and they called each other *thee*.

It had its uses, this acquaintance with antique forms of
speech: I could converse with the natives.  Even children.  On
my way home from a particularly embarrassing session in
Hunslet, I passed a tiny grubby child sitting on his step
beside my feet.  &ldquo;Weeah ta bahn?&rdquo;  he challenged.  Without
breaking stride to translate from early Middle English
(before the /d/ was added to his last word) I replied, &ldquo;Nay,
Ah'm bahn to t'shops.&rdquo;  He had asked me where I was going,
or in his ancient words, &ldquo;Where art thou bound?&rdquo;

I chose the next informants myself, where I had played
in t' *muck* as a child: at a farm 300 years old, in the family
for generations, with no radio and only one literate person,
and far from town.  As an old friend, I could get them to
answer the rural questions which my char and my miners
couldn't do.  Off I trudged (*traipsed* in &ldquo;dialect&rdquo;) along the
familiar dirt track, to ask my farmers their words for rude
parts of a cow.  They used a lot of rude words: 'rabbit droppings'
were *turds*, the 'butt end of a *shaff*' (sheaf) the *arse
end*; but curiously, only a dead cow had an *udder:* a live one
had a *bag* with four *paps*, unless &ldquo;she were a three-papped
'un, wi' one dud.&rdquo;  Her vagina (I blushed) was simply *passage*,
of greatest interest when she was *bullin*' ('on heat'),
*pickin*' ('slipping') a calf, or *a-gate calvin*' ('in labor').  On
her way to market, her udder was distended because the
farmer had been *beggin' em up* ('stocking') to make her
more saleable.  My ears sang: this was not in *EDD!* Nor was
the *stirk* she bore, whether bullock or wy ('heifer').  I was in
uncharted territory, where words had no spelling: I wrote
them in phonetics, even in my thesis, and invent their spellings
here (*u* is always the vowel in *look*).  The cow yielded
treasures like milk: even her milk yield was a new word,
meal, her 'cloven hoof' a *sluven foot* and her 'forelock' a
*toppin*'; when she was 'hornless' she was *polly*, and when
she was 'butting' other cows she was *aypin*' (hiping?).

The sheep were dialectal too, being *mawky* when
'plagued by ticks,' and *rigweltin*' when 'overturned.' But
the pigs were prizewinners: a 'female' was a *ghilt*, a 'runt' a
*greck*, and a 'snout' a *gruwin*—all hitherto unrecorded
words.

Professor Orton went wild.  I was to make audio recordings
for the lab.  Here was a tape recorder (vast bulky
reel-to-reel, circa 1945) and an autocycle to carry it on—a
bicycle with an engine, uneasy in either role.  I traipsed back
up the dirt track with my equipment.  But time had passed.
It was one thing to trot through sand in summer, quite
another to *lug* (Shakespeare's word, and mine) a heavy
Machine on a recalcitrant Bike through mud ruts and across
sodden fields.  The Bike, torn between its roles, kept breaking
down and having to be pushed through the ruts, while I
*starved* (OE *steorfan*, 'to die') wi' cold.  My farmers were
*proper flummoxed* ('very disconcerted') by The Machine and
took three weeks to be &ldquo;conditioned&rdquo; to it.  But I got my
recordings.

Lugging them back to the lab, I summoned H.O. to a
demonstration of my tapes, and *shoved* the plug in its *oil*
('hole').  The Machine *bedled* ('bellowed'), farted smoke
from its *arse end*, and died.  I burst into tears, horrified at
costing The Project so much of its precious budget.  H.O.,
gentleman as ever and very embarrassed, patted me kindly
and forgave me.  Praise be, the recordings were unharmed.
And my data complete.

Pregnant with data, I settled into the long labor of
*bornin*' my thesis.  Each word was written on a &ldquo;slip&rdquo; of
paper, which was then assigned to a pile according to consonant
or stressed vowel, prior to comparison with Middle
English.  After six months, I had piles of little piles all over a
huge table.  *Fagged out* by the work, and *moithered* by the
heat, like a *daft twit* I opened a window.  A mini-tornado
swept everything off the table, demolishing half a year's
work in half a second.  This time I *cussed* (was growing up).

My thesis did get finished and accepted.  I was a &ldquo;Bachelor&rdquo;
of Arts, although by now a married woman.  I was
summoned to the lab and offered a Ph.D. working on the
Linguistic Atlas of England.

Oh no, I thought.  Not more &ldquo;field&rdquo; work.  Not more
smelly old ladies and dirty old men.  Not traipsing up tracks
to flummoxed farmers.  Not benighted bikes, malevolent
machines and medieval infants.  Not trailers in tractor yards,
slippery slips, and treacherous tornadoes.  Much as I loved
words, I needed no more.  I had justified my use of *sneck* by
proving it to be authentic dialect.  Enough, already.  In
short, I hadn't the *guts*.  How could I refuse without offending
my gentle mentor?

I became pregnant.  Not with data, but with my first
*bairn* (I had the guts for that).  No *lady-in-waiting* [*sic*]
should traipse through mud or lug machinery, no mother
raise *childer* in a trailer, no husband follow his wife into
&ldquo;the field.&rdquo; I &ldquo;deferred&rdquo; my Ph.D.—as it turned out, for
thirty years.

*The Linguistic Atlas of England*, on which I so nearly
worked, was finished, and published, as my chidren grew
up and just before Harold Orton's death.  He saw his great
work completed, and passed his mantle to Stanley Ellis.  I
can no longer hear Leeds-south-of-the-river from Leeds-north-of-the-river
(no Henrietta Higgins, I) but I can tell
Toronto from Calgary and Ottawa Valley from New Brunswick.
I sound-proof my basements with eggboxes.  And I still
say *sneck*.

## The Lofty and/or Assumptive We
*Donald Drury, Long Beach, California*

This discussion is not concerned with the genuinely collective
first-person-plural of good fellowship and
equality, but the far more common *we* of authority, unwarranted
assumptions, elitism, and co-optation.  Definitions of
*we* in unabridged and &ldquo;college&rdquo; dictionaries generally mention
the &ldquo;royal we&rdquo; and the &ldquo;editorial we,&rdquo; then stop after
barely scratching the surface.  Many other special varieties
deserve—indeed, cry out for—comparable recognition.
What most of these have in common is the bland assumption
that others concur in whatever the speaker is about to assert:
&ldquo;We all know (recognize, understand, agree) that....&rdquo;  I
shall arbitrarily presuppose that &ldquo;we&rdquo; will all agree with the
classification which follows.

Beginning at a tender age, most of us were subjected to
the *parental we* (also employed by big sisters, grandparents,
babysitters, and others acting *in loco parentis*): &ldquo;We're
going to have our pablum (cod-liver oil, broccoli) now,
aren't we, dear?&rdquo;  &ldquo;We'd better get ready for our music lesson
(dental appointment, visit to Aunt Agatha)....&rdquo;
&ldquo;Now we'd better start cleaning our room (doing homework,
mowing the lawn)....&rdquo;

Long after escaping the *parental we*, one way or
another, many of us continue to be patronized by the *clinical
we* of physicians, dentists, nurses, and allied practitioners.
It often goes something like this: &ldquo;We're going to have
our shot (enema, blood-letting, root-canal work) now,
aren't we?&rdquo;  What rankles here is the obviously unequal
degree of participation &ldquo;we&rdquo; have in such exercises: somebody
else inflicts the pain and *you* receive it.

At its worst (as employed, say, by Mrs.  Proudie of
Barchester), the *spousal we* is perhaps the most formidable
of these pre-emptive pronouns.  But even in less extreme
cases, one marriage partner or the other may sometimes
assume that the two hearts that beat as one are also two
minds with but a single opinion.  Thus a husband at a cocktail
party who is exhibiting undue interest in some refulgent
blonde is abruptly propelled toward the door by a smoldering
wife who explains to the hostess: &ldquo;Sorry we have to leave
now—Fred is getting tired and we have to be up early
tomorrow.&rdquo;  Similarly, a husband whose wife seems about to
entertain the assembled company by go-go dancing on the
piano may announce: &ldquo;We really have to get back to the
children.  We promised the babysitter we wouldn't be late
tonight.&rdquo;  And many married readers can very likely recall
more routine manifestations of the *spousal we* to which the
co-opted spouse responds, in silent or vocal astonishment,
&ldquo;We do?&rdquo;

The *exclusivist we* ranges from the noble or at least
pardonably proud to the merely snobbish.  At its best it represents
the bond of mutual risk, shared suffering, or the ultimate
comradeship in the face of death.  Recall the cohorts of
Henry V, about to battle the French at Agincourt:

>We few, we happy few, we band of brothers...  
And gentlemen in England now abed  
Shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here,  
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks  
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's Day  

and the eloquent epitaph of the small band of warriors annihilated
in the rearguard action at Thermopylae: &ldquo;Stranger,
tell the Spartans that we behaved as they would wish us to,
and are buried here.&rdquo;[^c1] Then there is the U.S. Marine Corps
recruiting slogan: &ldquo;We're looking for a few good men.&rdquo;  But
too often the *exclusivist we* is an arrant appeal to the apartness,
elitism, or intolerance of caste, class, race, or creed, as
in Kipling's &ldquo;We and They&rdquo;:

>All of the people like us are We,  
And everyone else is They.

Though similar in some respects to the preceding variety,
the *confederate we* emphasizes the common cause of its
participants rather than excluding the outsiders.  It is the we
of loyal companions through thick and thin: the Three Musketeers,
Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, the signers of the
*Declaration of Independence*.  Jefferson concluded that document
with this lofty rhetoric: &ldquo;And for the support of this
Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our
Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred Honor.&rdquo;  Rather more
pungently (as if playing realistic Sancho to Jefferson's
romantic Quixote), Benjamin Franklin remarked to John
Hancock, &ldquo;We must all hang together, else we shall all hang
separately.&rdquo;  Indeed, the idealistic *confederate we* shades off
to the *conspiratorial we*: &ldquo;Don't try anything funny.  We're
in this together, you know.&rdquo;  Not uncommonly, alas, there
can be a sudden collapse of those supposedly unbreakable
ties—when the noble sentiments of comradeship give way to
the *sauve-qui-peut* reflex.  Consider, for example, the old
gag about the Lone Ranger and his trusty sidekick when
they find themselves surrounded by hostile and well-armed
redskins:

>LONE RANGER: What'll we do, Tonto?  
TONTO: What do you mean we, white man?

The permutations of *we* have by no means been
exhausted.  One might go on (at the risk, to be sure, of
inducing ennui) to explore such possible variations as the
*corporate we*, the *connoisseurial we*, and so on.  But let us
conclude, instead, by examining anew the editorial and the
royal *we*.

There is some disagreement among lexical authorities
about these long-established varieties.  According to one dictionary,
&ldquo;We is used for the singular *I* by kings and other
sovereigns, and by editors and other writers to keep an
impersonal character or to avoid the egotistical sound of a
repeated *I*.&rdquo;  Another dictionary says that *we* is &ldquo;sometimes
used for *I* by a monarch or by an editor who purports to
speak for a publication.&rdquo;  Still another observes only that *we*
is used by &ldquo;a monarch, author, editor, judge, etc. in referring
to himself.&rdquo;  If *we* is used by some writers to avoid the
egotistical effect of *I*, in the hands of others it takes on an
appalling archness or the lip-smacking overtones of utter
self-satisfaction.  And an interesting sub-variety of the editorial
*we* was identified in a *Los Angeles Times* article of
March 27, 1985, on the recent crisis at West 43rd Street—
the sale of the *New Yorker* to the Newhouse publications
empire: &ldquo;In the high-tech world of magazines, the New
Yorker, proprietary heir to the *omniscient we* [emphasis
added], remains a proud anachronism.&rdquo;

Finally, there is the entry in *Brewer's Dictionary of
Phrase and Fable* (Revised Edition) on the sniffy bit of royal
disdain usually attributed to Queen Victoria: &ldquo;We are not
amused.&rdquo;  Brewer's offers this indignant comment: &ldquo;There is
no record of her ever having used the royal 'we' in other
than official proclamations; nor is the spirit of the words in
keeping with Queen Victoria's conversation or character.&rdquo;

Aye, aye, sir.  Or, if you prefer—*oui, oui!*

***

[^c1]:  As paraphrased by William Golding in *The Hot Gates*.

### EUREKA: *Memorandum*

To: All those who have been struggling to come up with a
word to describe the relationship between unmarried
couples living together, the man in the relationship,
the woman, etc.

From: Laurence Urdang.

Source: *The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia*, The
Century Co., 1889.

*tally* 1...To live tally, to live together as man and wife
without marriage.  [Prov. Eng.]

*tallyman...4.*  A man who lives with a woman without
marriage.  [Prov. Eng.]

*tally-woman...2.*  A woman who lives tally.  [Prov. Eng.]


#### EPISTOLA {Michael Gorman}

Ms. Graham's *Speaking English* [XII, 1] contains a quotation
from what she describes as &ldquo;a genuine Greek-English
phrase book.&rdquo;  It is, in fact, from the immortal Fonseca's
Portuguese-English phrase book as described in my &ldquo;English
as She is Spoke&rdquo; [VII, 4].

*[Michael Gorman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Library]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

Alma Denny's discussion of &ldquo;one-letter-mayhem&rdquo;
[XI,2]—the havoc wrought by a minor misspelling—
reminds me of a double example that a friend swears he saw
in a newspaper some years ago:

East German defecator, disguised as nun, fouls guards
and flees to West.

Clearly another incident in the catalogue of Cold War
confrontations.

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary of Contemporary Slang*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780330284127/Dictionary-Contemporary-Slang-Green-Jonathon-0330284126/plp)
Jonathon Green, (Pan Books, 1984), ix + 323.

Being the most colorful side of language, slang offers
temptations to the unwary amateur.  It is immediately
apparent from even the most cursory glance that this book
was not written by an amateur.  It is a bit curious, though:
on the one hand, its scope is international, and even the
most naive reader must be aware of the breadth that such
coverage implies; on the other hand, possibly at the behest
of the publisher, who felt it necessary to limit the compass of
the book, the entries are short—too short for my taste.  For,
while it is likely that some people may use such a dictionary
solely as they would a small dictionary of general English—
that is, in order to discover the meaning of a word or expression—dictionaries
of slang always seem to me to have a
great deal more to say about language and, particularly,
about the useful array of rhetorical devices available to a
speaker, many of which are more colorfully (if not often better)
displayed in slang.  In placing constraints on the length
of each entry, the art of slang has been badly served, much
as one might have to be satisfied by a black-and-white print
of a Turner or Van Gogh which exhibits only the form but
none of the color of the original.  Many who have turned to
the lexicography of slang have applied too heavy an academic
hand to its discussion, analysis, and presentation, and
that, too, reduces the dimensions of this most interesting
aspect of language.

Lest my criticism be taken amiss, I hasten to add that
Green has done well within his brief brief: it is lamentable
that his skills could not have been employed to produce a
larger, looser, more flexible work.

The entries are arranged in strict alphabetical order,
words, expressions and all.  In most cases, senses, which may
be numbered where there is more than one under an entry,
are given attributions, the sources of which are listed at the
back of the book.  I can understand the omission of Farmer
& Henley's *Dictionary of Slang and Colloquial English*, for
it is interesting and useful mainly as an archaic relic.  But
Mencken's *American Language* is missing, which is cause for
concern.  There are nineteen works by P. G. Wodehouse,
eight by Tom Wolfe, and seven by Charles Bukowski—yes,
Charles Bukowski.  It goes without saying (but I shall succumb
to the inevitable), but one could hardly compare even
nineteen novels by Wodehouse with either of the slang dictionaries—*Partridge*
or *Wentworth &amp; Flexner*—as a source
for entries.

Many of the entries are labeled as to where they are
used, but some are not.  E.g., &ldquo;bottle v. to collect money
from a busker's audience&rdquo;: why should the editor assume
that buskers are known universally and, even if they are,
that slang terms associated with their activities are likewise
familiar?  Close scrutiny reveals the results of occasional
carelessness, e.g., bounce (in the 'check' sense) is defined
only transitively, while its use in the U.S. is often intransitive;
button one's lip is the wrong form for the entry, which
should be button someone's lip or button your lip (as it can
only rarely be reflexive); crack up is in, but not crack up to
be 'emerge as, turn out to be'; &ldquo;suck v. 3. to be worthless,
pointless&rdquo; is not adequately covered.

There are many entries here that have not appeared in
other dictionaries of slang, partly because they are too new,
partly because they have not been picked up by other editors
(perhaps because they did not consider them to be slang).
Some are surely nonce uses, coming from TV shows, some
might have been made up by the scriptwriters.  For example,
is there any evidence that anyone except the actor on
Thames TV's *Minder* (not seen in the U.S., but one of the
best of British programs) ever said *Lucozade* for 'spade'
(= 'black person')?  I don't know.  All in all, the evidence for
any given entry is one citation, and that is too little to allow
us to believe that some of the terms are in &ldquo;general&rdquo; use.

In sum, the *DOCS* looks very much like a (slang) lexicographer's
citation file—or the beginnings of one.  That
does not diminish its interestingness nor its usefulness to students
of slang.  But the &ldquo;definitions&rdquo; read more like the sort
of gist definitions that a lexicographer might write in his
notebook than the carefully drawn, disambiguated definitions
he is likely to write for a dictionary that is to be published.
The problem is that an entry that the author has
found in one novel or other single source lies between the
entries that have been established in the language for scores
or even hundreds of years, and there is no way for the reader
to distinguish them.  As Green points out in his Introduction,
he has done &ldquo;as much as possible in the time available,&rdquo;
however we are to interpret that.

The *DOCS* is good and it is interesting, but it might
best have been given a title like, &ldquo;Slang—A Lexicographer's
Notebook.&rdquo;

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Fair of Speech: The Uses of Euphemism*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Fair-Speech-Uses-Euphemism-Edited-Enright/316158620/bd)
D.J. Enright, ed., (Oxford University Press, 1985), 222pp. 

It seems almost impossible to open the mail these days
without finding a book on euphemisms.  Why this sudden
preoccupation with the subject?  As readers of these reviews
are aware, I am no aficionado of the genre, though I hasten
to add that the present book is a collection of good, interesting,
and often amusing essays on euphemisms, in contrast to
the dictionary format followed by others, which I cannot
readily see the point of.  The only serious failing of the work
at hand is the total absence of an index, an execrable fault
which reduces the usefulness of the work, once read.

In the event, I am becoming increasingly confused by
the modern interpretation of *euphemism*.  I have always
understood it to refer to a word or expression of apparently
harmless, decorous connotation used in place of one that is
for some reason unpleasant or taboo.  Thus, *pass on, go west*,
and dozens of others, for *die; move the bowels* for either
(technical) *defecate* or (vulgar) *shit*, and so forth.  In other
words, a euphemism must always be used as a substitute for
something better left unsaid (or unwritten) for any of a
number of reasons.  Calling a spade a spade is not the name
of the game.

What we find, however, is that compilers of dictionaries
of euphemisms and writers of articles on the topic have
begun to include in the class almost any kind of metaphor,
whether substituted for something unpleasant or something
entirely innocuous.  Admittedly, it is difficult at times to distinguish
between the nocuous and the innocuous, for one
may not always be aware of contemporary sentiments.
Today, for instance, we have no compunction about using
the word *leg*, though I know (from reading)—and presume
it common knowledge—that the Victorians did.  Thus we
also have *inexpressibles* and *unmentionables* for *trousers* or
*breeches*, as Robert Burchfield reports in his essay in this
book, &ldquo;An Outline History of Euphemisms in English.&rdquo;  But
how can one be certain that, as Burchfield writes, *well-carriaged*
is a euphemism for *having large breasts, let him
do just what he pleased* for *succumb to a seducer*, and so on?
It seems to me that in order to identify a euphemism, we
must know the author's purpose, and I find it curious that
those who comment on euphemisms choose to ignore the
author's poetic (or other licentious) intent in employing
paraphrastic subleties.  I should scarcely call *for Chrissake* a
euphemism, though it is cited by Burchfleld as such: it is a
spelt form of the rapid colloquial *for Christ's sake* and nothing
more.

Some of the euphemisms cited by Burchfield for, say,
*prostitute* have their origin in slang.  Slang can only rarely
said to be euphemistic: rather, it often tends to be a secret
language, inventing terms which, as they &ldquo;leak out&rdquo; to the
general public and are adopted by them, are replaced; in
addition, users of slang like to keep their lingo fresh, uncluttered
by yesterday's clich&eacute;s, and stale stereotypes are quickly
rejected in favor of more up-to-date metaphors.  I cite examples
from Burchfield's article only for convenience, not to
pick a nit with him personally, for, as I see it, all collectors
of euphemisms interpret the class too broadly.  They tend to
find euphemisms under the bed.  Taking that literally, they
are likely to call *chamberpot* a euphemism for *pisspot* or
*shitpot*; but is that really so?  Aren't *pisspot* and *shitpot*
merely made-up, alternate forms?  Is there any evidence for
their existence (outside the present context)?  There is plenty
of evidence, on the other hand, for *chamberpot*.  Which
makes me wonder if all words or expressions for marginal or
taboo functions or objects are to be deemed euphemisms just
because the euphemologist can concoct otherwise nonexistent
rude counterparts for them.

Jasper Griffin has contributed an interesting piece,
&ldquo;Euphemisms in Greece and Rome,&rdquo; which contains hints of
problems that encroach on considering euphemisms as a
class from another angle—propaganda.  If the upper class in
Greece and Rome called themselves *boni* 'the good men' or
*aristoi* 'the best men,' are those euphemisms or just propaganda?
What of *Eupatridae* 'those with good fathers,' as the
Athenian nobles referred to themselves?  To be sure, the
genres overlap, as in naming the MX missile, a destructive
weapon, *The Peacekeeper*; this example, among others,
appears in Robert M. Adams's article, &ldquo;Soft Soap and the
Nitty-Gritty.&rdquo;

Some of these points are (at least) suggested in &ldquo;Sex and
Euphemism,&rdquo; by Joseph Epstein.  Following his citation of a
passage from *Homecoming*, by Floyd Dell, in which sexual
activities are referred to obliquely and subtlely, through
paraphrase and suggestion, Epstein writes:

>Does such a passage seem hopelessly old-fashioned—it
was written in 1933—corny, prudish?  At the risk of
sounding an old-fashioned, corny prude, I must confess
that it doesn't seem any of those things to me.  What I
rather like about it is the room it leaves to the
imagination....  It could not, I am confident, be
improved by additional detail recounting every
chronicle of the crotch, saga of the sack.

There is insufficient space to comment on each of the
other eleven essays in this book.  They are all interesting and
deal with the subject and its peripheries in more or less
adroit fashion.  I find this prose treatment of the elusive,
allusive euphemism preferable to the dictionary approach
because it offers the reader useful comment at a length stylistically
proscribed by the customary glossarial treatment,
regardless of how loosely it may be interpreted.  What
remains unresolved at the end is the question suggested at
the beginning: What is a euphemism?

*Laurence Urdang*

### EUREKA: *Nine Tailors*

I recently came across the proverbial expression, *Nine
tailors make a man*.  Is this some oblique reference to *Clothes
make the man?*  What of the title of Dorothy L. Sayers's detective
novel, *The Nine Tailors?*

I believe that I have sorted things out.

1\.  With the help of a leading expert on paroemiology, Mr.
Emanuel Strauss, of Redhill, in Surrey, I have been led to
various sources relating to *Nine tailors make a man*.  The
*OED*, for instance, reveals that &ldquo;In proverbial and allusive
phrases, [tailor is used] often implying disparagement and
ridicule.&rdquo;  The citations that follow are a mixed bag:

>1605 SHAKS.  *Lear* II. ii. 60, *Kent*.  A Taylor made thee.
*Cor*.  Thou art a strange fellow, a Taylor make a man?
1607 DEKKER *Northward Hoe* II, i, They say three
Taylors go to the making up of a man, but Ime sure I
had foure Taylors and a halfe went into the making of
me thus....  1651 CLEVELAND *Poems* 23 Like to nine
Taylors, who if rightly spell'd, Into one man, are
monosyllabled.  1663 BUTLER *Hud*.  I. II. 22 Compos'd of
many Ingredient Valors Just like the manhood of nine
Taylors.  1819 SCOTT *Let*. 26 July in Lockhart, They say
it takes nine tailors to make a man—apparently, one is
sufficient to ruin him.  1908 H. B. WALTERS in *Church
Bells* 96 'Nine tailors make a man,' is *said* to be really,
'nine tellers,' 'tellers' being the strokes for male, female,
or child, in a funeral knell or passing bell.  3&times;3 for
male.  [In Dorset these strokes are said to be called
tailors: *Acad*.  II. Feb. 1899, 190/1.]

The one omitted at the ellipsis, preceding CLEVELAND, is:

>1625 B. JONSON *Staple of N*.  I, i Believe it, sir, That
clothes do much upon the wit,... and thence comes
your proverb, the Tailor makes the man.

It doesn't seem to belong with the rest; indeed, it seems to
have to do with *Clothes make the man*, and I can discern
nothing disparaging in the citation; moreover, the entire
thing seems a non sequitur.

In *A Shakespeare Word-Book*, Routledge 1908, John
Foster offers (in part), following a passage from *A Midsummer
Night's Dream*, II, i, 54:

>The term tailor is locally employed for a *bungler*, a
*botcher*, or a *clumsy fellow*, and these meanings have
been suggested in the passage quoted.  But as, according
to the old saying, it takes nine tailors to make a man,
might there not be some allusion to Puck's *size?*  Hence
the expression may be equivalent to *mannikin!  dwarf!
mite!  urchin!  elf!*

From this gallimaufry of Gongorisms, I sort out the following,
with Mr. Strauss's help:

>(a)  Tailors were considered worthless fellows who were
likely to steal cloth from the bolts given to them by customers.
>
>(b)  *Nine tailors make a man* (note—not *the* man) means
that because tailors are worth so little (and are a cowardly
lot, besides), it would require nine of them to make up
one &ldquo;real&rdquo; man—though why nine and not seven or eleven
remains a mystery.

1\.  The use of nine tailors in the Sayers title very likely comes
from the *teller* use for bell.  This seems to be borne out by a
citation under *teller* in the *OED:*

>b.  A thing that makes known or announces.
>
>...1877 *N.&amp;Q*. 5th Ser. VII, 164/1 At Frisby and
elsewhere these tolls [for the dead] are called 'tellers'.
1898 TYACK *Bk. about Bells* 1.8 The use of bells as tellers
of the passing time.  1909 DEEDES & WALTERS *Ch. Bells
Essex* 149 We now come to the uses of the tellers,—for
which the normal custom is 3 &times; 3 strokes for a man, 3 &times; 2
for a woman, including children, usually both
beginning and end of tolling.

*The Nine Tailors* were bells in Sayers's novel, and I am
reasonably sure that, had I been able to lay my hands on a
copy of it, I would have found there the sort of documentation
she was in the habit of providing.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Facts on File Dictionary of First Names*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/everymans-dictionary-of-first-names-everymans-reference-library_leslie-dunkling_william-gosling/1651192/#edition=1613345&idiq=10880387)
Leslie Dunkling and William Gosling, (Facts on File, 1986), xiv + 305pp.

[Published in England by Dent in 1983 as *Everyman's Dictionary of First Names*]

The study of names is called onomastics.  More than 30
years ago, enthusiastic individuals interested in place names,
literary names, and personal names formed the American
Name Society.  The organization now has two regular publications
(*Names* and *ANS Newsletter*), and several hundred
members as well as affiliated societies with their own publications.

As their joint contribution to onomastics, Dunkling and
Gosling have focused on first names.  Why are first names
important?  Why should there be a book on them?  And, if
they are important, why is this book an improvement on
those we already have?  These are some of the questions that
have to be answered.

Probably, the major reason for most people to be interested
in names is for naming babies.  While it is perhaps true
that a number of parents who choose a name do so because
they like its sound or for some personal association, there are
many who give the naming process considerable thought.
Parents are concerned, and appropriately so, that the new
members of the family bear first names that are in harmony
with family traditions, ideals, aspirations, ethnicity, and
surname and that are, at the same time, acceptable in
American/British culture.  These parents sometimes want to
know about the original meaning of the name, its ethnicity,
and the famous people who bore that name.  For them a
good reference book may be helpful.

A second group of individuals interested in names are
those who are concerned with how a name (especially their
own) affects others.  In the last hundred years there has been
a considerable body of research evidence accumulated
which indicates that clear stereotypes do exist for many
names.  These stereotypes can affect how an individual is
perceived and treated.  Imagine what a *Wilbur* or a *Hortense*
or a *Phoebe* would be like.  Or, suppose that there is a
new staff member in your office: Would you prefer to work
with a *Stanley* or a *Michael?* a *Bertha* or a *Susan?*  Not only
do we perceive and treat other individuals differently
because of their names, but our self-perceptions can also be
affected.  It is apparently true that when some individuals
with unpopular (or perceived as unpopular) names finally
change their names, they have a better self-perception: for
example, a *Clarence* shifting to *Michael* and then later
admitting how much of a wimp he felt he was when he was
called *Clarence*.  In addition to being interested in the
stereotype associated with a name, many people are interested
in how popular it is, whether it is relatively common
or infrequent, or whether it is relatively stable or coming
into or going out of style.  In general, the scientific literature
seems to indicate that men prefer relatively common names;
women, less common.  And women's names seem to peak in
popularity more quickly.  *George* and *Ann* are currently way
down in popularity in the United States compared to their
standing in 1925.  Another concern for researching a name is
to identify its origin in terms of nationality or meaning.
What is the origin of *Michael* and *Jennifer*, two of our most
popular recent names?  [*Michael* < Hebrew 'Who is like
God'; *Jennifer* < Welsh 'fair,' from *Guinevere*, King
Arthur's queen.]  Another aspect of interest is the identity of
famous people who have held the name.  *Mitzi* is associated
with *Mitzi Gaynor; Jacqueline* with *Jackie Kennedy* or *Jacqueline
Cochrane; Jason* with *Jason Robards; Gary* with
*Gary Cooper*.

A third group interested in names includes writers, people
who are creating stories set in different periods or
epochs.  It is to their advantage to use names that are historically
accurate.  Sir Philip Sydney first used the name *Pamela*
in 1590, so if one were writing a novel set before that date or
even a bit later, the name would be an anachronism.

These are some of the reasons why people are interested
in first names.  Now, before going further, mention must be
made of some standard references on first names.  The first
really modern reference book on names is that of Charlotte
Yonge, *History of Christian Names* (1863).  Revised in 1884,
it is still in print.  Her approach, which emphasizes original
meanings of names, appeals to philologists.  More recent is
Elizabeth Withycombe's *Oxford Dictionary of English
Christian Names* (1945) which is now in its third edition.
Withycombe made careful accounts of name usage in medieval
English records but was less interested in recent name
usage.  George Stewart's *American Given Names* (1979) is
excellent, especially on names in the United States, but it is
disappointing in the relatively few names covered.  Finally,
there is the recent work by Rabbi Alfred Kolatch (1984),
*The Complete Dictionary of Hebrew and English First
Names*.  This has wide coverage of names and gives excellent
derivations for those of Hebrew origin; but is not as strong
in names of European origin.  While all of these references
have their strengths, they also have weaknesses which
Dunkling and Gosling sought to address.  Let us now look at
the backgrounds of the authors.

Leslie Dunkling is a BBC producer.  His fascination
with names has produced several previous books on names:
*English House Names* (1971), *The Guinness Book of Names*
(1974), *Scottish Christian Names* (1978) and *First Names
First* (1977).  The late William Gosling was a classical
scholar at Wadham College, Oxford, and an authority on
17th- and 18th-century Christian names.

What Dunkling and Gosling have focused on, which is
different from what other scholars have concentrated on, is
the *usage* of names.  These investigators obviously put a tremendous
amount of effort into identifying just how much a
specific name was used, consulting parish registers from
1600 on in England, Indexes of the Registrars General of
England, Scotland, and Ireland over a period of time, university
graduation lists in Australia, Canada, and the United
States, and other sources, including some specifically for
blacks.  Thus, we can have some assurance that when
Dunkling and Gosling write about the usage of a name, popular
or not, in an ascending or descending cycle of usage,
they have some basis for their statement.

A second aim of Dunkling and Gosling was to go, insofar
as possible, to the original meaning of the name in its
original language.  The bibliography lists eighty-five entries,
many of which are non-English.

The main section of *Dictionary of First Names* has
4,500 main entries in alphabetical order.  However, a given
entry may mention several more names, so the total number
of names is more than 10,000.  Thus, under *John*, there is
*Jon, Jack, Johnson, Jones, Jenkins, Jackson, Hancock, Ian,
Iain*, and feminine forms like *Jane, Jean, Johanna, Shiona*,
etc.  One useful improvement over many name dictionaries is
that there is just one section of names instead of two sections,
one for men, another for women.

Each entry includes the gender usage, linguistic/ethnic
origin, and in many cases stories, legends, myths, or famous
people associated with the name, how the name was introduced,
its current popularity, and its use within group(s).
Thus, we find the name *Elizabeth* [< Hebrew *Elisheva* 'oath
of God'] was borne by Aaron's wife (Exodus 6:23) and by
the mother of John the Baptist, (Luke 1:60), two saints, and
two queens of England.  The popularity of the name is
declining (in Britain) in this century.  Those who are interested
in the patterns of popularity of specific names throughout
the English-speaking world should consult Dunkling's
*First Names First*.  For the name *Daniel*, there is an appropriate
etymology [ < Hebrew 'God is my judge'] from the
Old Testament, followed by a discussion of how little the
name was used until 1955, then how it hit a peak in the
1970s.  Mention is made of the influence of Daniel Boone
(1735-1820) and that of two films (1950, 1956) and a television
series (begun in 1964) based on his life.

For many of the entries, diminutives and pet forms are
given, as *Bill, Billy*, and *Will*.  For some names, where there
might be a problem, pronunciations are given.  Variant
spellings are also included.  Thus *Eileen* can show up as
*Eilean, Eilleen, Ilean, Ileene, Ilene*, and, in a Scottish form,
as *Aileen*.  For names that do not appear among the entries,
the authors are sympathetic: in the Introduction they give
some good suggestions on how to go about tracking down a
name.

Finally, literary references are given for a number of
names.  *Jasper* is cited for a Dickens character in *The Old
Curiosity Shop; Helen* for some famous lines in Marlowe's
*Dr. Faustus*.

Concluding the book is a series of tables of the 50 most
popular names over several selected years, from 1925-1981,
for boys and girls, for England and Wales, and for the
United States.

An overall assessment of Dunkling and Gosling would
have to conclude that this is clearly the most valuable book
available on first names.  The authors have done as much as
anyone could reasonably do to bring together such a vast
amount of rich material.  They have achieved their goals of
dealing with aspects of names concerning etymology, meaning,
introduction, popularity, usage, and literary reference.
Those who have enjoyed John Ciardi's *A Browser's Dictionary*
will probably enjoy browsing through this volume's stories
about names.  *The Facts on File Dictionary of First
Names* is a tremendous contribution and belongs in personal,
university, and public libraries—wherever there is
need for a reference source on names.

*[Edwin D. Lawson, State University College, Fredonia, New York]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

''The Illerate But Arrogant American.''  [Headline for
Sylvia Porter's column in *The Warren Times Observer*,
Warren, Pennsylvania, May 17, 1985.  Submitted by Bill
Hill, Warren.]

## Mark Twain and the English Language
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

If 1984 was the year of George Orwell, 1985 is certainly
the year of Mark Twain.  In this year of chronological
confluences, we mark the centennial anniversary of the
American publication of *The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn*, the sesquicentennial of the birth of its author, Mark
Twain, and the seventy-fifth anniversary of his death.

Samuel Langhorne Clemens was born in the small village
of Florida, Missouri, on November 30, 1835.  As a barefoot
boy sitting on the banks of the Mississippi River, he
watched stern-wheeler boats churning the muddy waters,
and he heard the crewmen measuring the depth of the river
by calling out to the captain, &ldquo;By the mark, five; by the
mark, four.&rdquo;  When the river bottom was only two fathoms
down, he would hear the lusty cry: &ldquo;By the mark, twain.&rdquo;
Long after he left the Mississippi, and after various careers
as a riverboat pilot, prospector, and printer, Sam Clemens,
now a journalist, contributed an article to the *Nevada Territorial
Enterprise* on February 3, 1863, and signed it with a
new name—Mark Twain.

In 1876, Twain published *The Adventures of Tom Sawyer*,
a novel that reached back into his Missouri childhood.
Later that year, in a casual letter written to William Dean
Howells, Twain mentioned that he had begun &ldquo;another
boy's book—more to be at work than anything else.  I've
written four hundred pages of it—therefore, it is nearly half
done.  It is Huckleberry Finn's Autobiography.  I like it only
tolerably well, as far as I have got, and may possibly pigeonhole
it or burn the manuscript when it is done.&rdquo;

Fortunately, Twain did not destroy his text, and on
February 18, 1885, 30,000 copies of *The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn* were released in America.  The novel
turned out to be Twain's masterpiece, and it changed the
direction of American letters.  Ernest Hemingway spoke for
generations of twentieth-century American writers when he
said, &ldquo;All modern American literature comes from one book
by Mark Twain called *Huckleberry Finn*.&rdquo;

&ldquo;You don't know about me, without you have read a
book by the name of 'The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,' but
that ain't no matter.&rdquo;  With this sentence Mark Twain not
only began his greatest novel, but uttered a clarion call for a
new way of writing.  In *The Adventures of Huckleberry
Finn*, Twain became the first important American writer to
capture the freshness and vitality of our spoken idiom in
narrative as well as dialogue.  In *Huckleberry Finn* America
found a voice to sing of itself.

The man who wrote &ldquo;It is better to keep your mouth
shut and appear stupid than to open it and remove all
doubt&rdquo; and &ldquo;The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated&rdquo;
also had a lot to say about the American language that
he, more than any other writer, helped to shape.  As we
commemorate the sesquicentennial of his birth and the centennial
of his finest novel, we reflect on Mark Twain's words
about words, language, and writing:

>&bull; *On American English, compared with British English:*
The property has gone into the hands of a joint stock company,
and we own the bulk of the shares.
>
>&bull; *On choosing words:* The difference between the
almost right word and the right word is really a large matter—'tis
the difference between the lightning-bug and the
lightning.
>
>&bull; *More on &ldquo;the right word&rdquo;:* A powerful agent is the
right word; it lights the reader's way and makes it plain.  A
close approximation to it will answer, and much traveling is
done in a well-enough fashion by its help, but we do not
welcome it and rejoice in it as we do when *the* right word
blazes out on us.  Whenever we come upon one of these
intensely right words in a book or a newspaper, the resulting
effect is physical as well as spiritual, and electrically
prompt.  It tingles exquisitely around through the walls of
the mouth and tastes as tart and crisp and good as the
autumn butter that creams the sumac berry.
>
>&bull; *On style* (in a letter to a twelve-year-old boy): I notice
that you use plain, simple language, short words, and brief
sentences.  That is the way to write English—it is the modern
way and the best way.  Stick to it; and don't let fluff and
flowers and verbosity creep in.
>
>When you catch an adjective, kill it.  No, I don't mean
utterly, but kill most of them—then the rest will be valuable.
They weaken when they are close together.  They give
strength when they are wide apart.
>
>&bull; *On the first-person plural pronoun:* Only presidents,
editors, and people with tapeworms have the right to use the
editorial 'we.'
>
>&bull; *On clich&eacute;s:* What a good thing Adam had.  When he
said a good thing, he knew nobody had said it before.
>
>&bull; *On grammar:* Perfect grammar—persistent, continuous,
sustained—is the fourth dimension, so to speak.  Many
have sought it, but none has found it....  I know grammar
by ear only, not by note, not by rules.  A generation ago I
knew the rules—knew them by heart, word for word,
though not their meanings—and I still know one of them:
the one which says—which says—but never mind, it will
come back to me presently.
>
>&bull; *On spelling:* I don't see any use in having a uniform
and arbitrary way of spelling words.  We might as well make
all clothing alike and cook all dishes alike.  Sameness is tiresome;
variety is pleasure.  *Kow* spelled with a large *K* is just
as good as with a small *c*.  It is better.  It gives the imagination
a broader field, a wider scope.
>
>&bull; *On simplified spelling:* Simplified spelling is all right,
but, like chastity, you can carry it too far.
>
>&bull; *On the classics:* A classic is something that everyone
wants to have read and nobody wants to read.
>
>&bull; *On reading:* The man who does not read good books
has no advantage over the man who can't read them.
>
>&bull; *On dictionaries:* A Dictionary is the most awe-inspiring
of all books; it knows so much....  It has gone around
the sun, and spied out everything and lit it up.
>
>&bull; *On speaking:* It usually takes more than three weeks
to prepare a good impromptu speech.
>
>&bull; *On being a writer:* I have always been able to gain my
living without doing any work; for the writing of books and
magazine matter was always play, not work.  I enjoyed it; it
was merely billiards to me.

On April 20, 1910—the night before Twain's death—
Halley's Comet shone in the skies.  Just a year before, Twain
had said to a friend: &ldquo;I came in with Halley's Comet in 1. It is coming again next year, and I expect to go out
with it.  It will be the greatest disappointment of my life if I
don't go with Halley's Comet.  The Almighty has said, no
doubt, 'Now here go those two unaccountable frauds; they
came in together, they must go out together.'  Oh!  I am looking
forward to that.&rdquo;  In December of this year, Halley's
Comet will once again begin its journey across our heavens—a
brilliant reminder of the birth, life, and death of
Mark Twain, who was, in the words of William Dean How-ells,
&ldquo;sole, incomparable, the Lincoln of our literature.&rdquo;

## English English: *Take Care*
*Philip Howard*

&ldquo;Take care,&rdquo; people say to me all the time, as a term of
informal farewell.  Over the past ten years &ldquo;Take care,&rdquo;
meaning 'So long, goodbye, see you around, I look forward
to our next merry meeting,' has become an irritating vogue
phrase.  I think that it is a trendy Southern British invention
rather than an import from across the Atlantic or up from
the Antipodes.  You are always telling us that Brits are
obsessed with class, in the same way that Americans are
obsessed with celebrity and money.  Guilty, if you say so,
M'Luds.  I suspect that the valedictory locution &ldquo;Take care&rdquo;
is a bit lower-middle class if not downright Non-U, as Alan
Ross and Nancy Mitford divided the lexicon.  It is the sort of
thing that golfers or publishers' reps say to each other.  It
seems a gloomy piece of advice on which to part from an
acquaintance.  I doubt whether it is very good or very British
advice.  We cannot go through life as carefully as porcupines
making love.  It would be too boring.  Hippoclides is the
hero.  You remember Hippoclides.  Sporting boy, competing
for the hand of a rich heiress.  At the party to select the
groom, he ordered the flute-player to play a dance, and &ldquo;he
danced, probably so as to please himself,&rdquo; and ended up
standing on his head waggling his legs in the air.  Rich, old,
intended daddy-in-law remarked coldly: &ldquo;Hippoclides, you
have danced away your marriage.&rdquo;  The boy replied:
&ldquo;Hippoclides doesn't care.&rdquo;  You can read about it, if you
want, in *Herodotus* vi, 128.  No good saying to Hippoclides:
&ldquo;Take care.&rdquo;

>*What is life, if full of care,*  
*We have no time to stand and stare?*

I shiver and grit my teeth when somebody says &ldquo;Take care&rdquo;
to me.  But I can see that there is a problem of sorts.  The
Brits are becoming as concerned as the Americans not to
sound cold, so they cannot say &ldquo;Goodbye.&rdquo;  *Farewell* is
archaic and a bit final.

>*Fare thee well, and if for ever,*  
*Then for ever fare thee well*.

*Au revoir* is charming, but foreign.  *Ciao* is twee.  So is *Hasta
la vista*.  *Adi&oacute;s* is twee and pretentious.  &ldquo;Be good&rdquo; is archaic
and chummy.  I dare say that there is no solution to the
problem.  I tend to say &ldquo;Go well,&rdquo; which I can see is silly.
But at least it is not as offensively silly as &ldquo;Take care.&rdquo;  I dare
say that there is a piece to be done about the tribal taboos in
the matter of saying goodbye.

In the United Kingdom we used to say &ldquo;Cheerio&rdquo; or
&ldquo;Cheero&rdquo; or &ldquo;Cheery-ho.&rdquo;  They all sound quite antique
now, and are dated by the best authorities to the First
World War.  But you can find references in the poets from
Betjeman on about beefy ATS (female soldiers) without
their hats shooting the bridge at Henley,

>*And cherrioh and cheeri-bye*  
*Across the waste of waters die*.

to Don Marquis with,

>*its cheerio*  
*my deario that*  
*pulls a lady through*.

We must not become paranoid about this; but I reckon
that there is a distinction to be observed in the class use of
&ldquo;Cheerio&rdquo; and associated words.  &ldquo;Cheerio&rdquo; is the Non-U,
sergeants' mess form.  Crusty old colonels use the more aristocratic
forms &ldquo;Cheer-o&rdquo; or &ldquo;Cheer-ho.&rdquo;  Either way, the
word is quite whiskery.  You would be surprised to hear it
from somebody too young to have fought in the last war.
&ldquo;Cheerio&rdquo; as an upper-class adjective is not so much whiskery
as dead.  It was defined agreeably by Dorothy Sayers in
*Clouds of Witness* (1926): &ldquo; 'He seemed particularly
cheerio'..., said the Hon.  Freddy....  The Hon.  Freddy,
appealed to, said he thought it meant more than just cheerful,
more merry and bright, you know.&rdquo;  I do not believe any
Brit, however old and silly and Hon., could use the word
that way today, unless inside inverted commas, being deliberately
quaint.

But everybody says &ldquo;Cheers.&rdquo;  It used to be an exclamation
before dipping into a pint or some other alcoholic
drink.  It has now been adapted widely outside the pub.  In
British English &ldquo;Cheers&rdquo; means &ldquo;Thank you.&rdquo;  If somebody
in the supermarket gives you your change, or somebody in
the corridor stands aside to let you by, you might well say,
&ldquo;Cheers.&rdquo;  The putty word also means &ldquo;Sorry.&rdquo;  If you bump
into somebody in the supermarket or corridor, you might
well say &ldquo;Cheers.&rdquo;  It is decidedly Non-U.  It is a fashion.  It
will not last for ever.  Meanwhile, Cheers: Take care.

## The Strange and Quarky Language of Physics
*Richard F. Bauerle, Ohio Wesleyan University*

Did Euclid &ldquo;alone look on Beauty bare&rdquo;?  Edna St. Vincent
Millay's view has often been quoted and accepted.  But
now, thanks to the efforts of modern scientists, one cannot
be sure.  Theoretical physicists now claim that they, too,
have discovered beauty bare.  And it's not some Euclidean
mathematical form, but a type of &ldquo;quark.&rdquo;  Their claim was
heralded in *The Scientific American* [July 1983] by a headline,
&ldquo;Particles with Naked Beauty,&rdquo; subtitled, &ldquo;The beauty
of the new composite particles is accordingly exposed.&rdquo;

John Keats's famous line about beauty also seems vulnerable
to the inroads of particle physicists.  His well-known
affirmation, &ldquo;Beauty is truth, truth beauty&rdquo; is not their
view.  To them truth and beauty are related, but not so intimately.
They see truth as the &ldquo;top&rdquo; quark, beauty the
&ldquo;bottom.&rdquo;

Among the linguistic innovators in physics, Murray
Gell-Mann seems to be the most imaginative and productive.
He is perhaps best known for borrowing the word
*quark* from James Joyce's *Finnegans Wake* (&ldquo;Three quarks
for Muster Mark&rdquo;) and giving it a radically new meaning.
He chose the &ldquo;silly-sounding&rdquo; name, he says, to stay away
from &ldquo;pretentious scientific terminology&rdquo; [*Atlantic Monthly*,
August 1984].

There seem to be six quarks: *down, up, strange, charm,
beauty*, and *truth*.  (Gell-Mann named the first three.)  All six
are what he and others in the field call &ldquo;flavors.&rdquo;  But flavors
also come in &ldquo;colors.&rdquo;  Recently, another pioneer in subatomic
theory, Sheldon Glashow, has begun thinking and
writing about &ldquo;the smelly force&rdquo; [*Atlantic Monthly*, August
1984].  If its existence is confirmed by further research, it
will become the fifth of the elemental forces in the universe,
joining the four already accepted by theoretical physicists—
gravity, electromagnetism, weak force, and strong force.

After flavors, colors, and smells, can touches and
sounds be far behind?  Perhaps future issues of *Physics Today*
will bring the answer.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Semiotics, An Introductory Anthology*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/semiotics-introductory-anthology/author/robert-innis/)
Robert E. Innis, ed., (Indiana University Press, 1985), xvi + 331pp.

It is not our custom to review scholarly works in the
pages of VERBATIM, and no exception is to be made here.
However, this excellent anthology of essays by Peirce, Eco,
Langer, L&eacute;vi-Strauss, Barthes, Sebeok, and others, accompanied
by Innis's helpful commentaries, will provide the
reader interested in semiotics with a basic introduction to
the subject that is understandable and manipulable.
[Available from Indiana University Press, Tenth & Morton
Streets, Bloomington, IN 47405 U.S.A.]

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Origins of Sea Terms*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780913372319/Origins-Sea-Terms-John-Rogers-0913372315/plp)
John G. Rogers, (Mystic Seaport Museum, 1984), xv + 215pp.

This dictionary has many engaging qualities: it is readable
and interesting and clearly reflects its author's affection
both for his subject and for the work of compiling the material.
Particularly useful is the Subject Classification Index.
There is also a Bibliography which, though apparently
extensive, reveals the sources of some of the book's shortcomings:
on the one hand serious omissions (e.g., the books by
Hiscock, who probably wrote the best works available on
modern sailboat cruising); on the other, reliance on some
sources that reveal somewhat dubious work by etymologists
(e.g., Partridge's *Origins*).  As a dictionary, it emerges as a
fairly good book, though it contains only about 1100 entries;
as a source for &ldquo;origins of sea terms,&rdquo; it could have been better,
for many of the etymologies are speculative.  That is not
always Rogers's fault.  Although many terms one might
expect to find are lacking, those omissions may be attributed
to the highly personal nature of the book, borne out by the
author's informal asides (e.g., &ldquo;Here's one for you!&rdquo;).

As an etymologist, Rogers is—albeit confessedly—an
amateur.  For instance, it is hard to understand what is
meant by his comment, at *aloft*, &ldquo;This word is one of the
surprisingly few that seems to have originated in English,&rdquo; a
naive remark at best.  In other cases (e.g., *boot top*) no etymology
is given.  Elsewhere (and prevalently) confusing or
misleading information is given (e.g., [at *brail*] &ldquo;Earlier
spelled brale, it came from Old French, *braile*, belt.&rdquo;): Is
the inference to be that the modern English word *brail* was
borrowed from Old French in the fifteenth century?  If so,
that makes little sense, for one thing because the period generally
consigned to Old French does not stretch beyond the
thirteenth century.  One is given to wonder how Rogers used
his sources, for in this particular instance he shows that he
gleaned information (mainly, I imagine) from *Middle English
Sea Terms* and the *Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology*
(Onions).  It is hard to see how he could have interpreted
either in such a way as to yield his result.  It would
appear from other etymologies he records that Rogers copied
from his sources those origins he most fancied as being interesting:
as no linguist appears among the list of his acknowledgments,
one must assume that he had little professional
help in that quarter.

More's the pity, for, informal and attractive though it
is, *Origins of Sea Terms* cannot be recommended for its
scholarship.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Craft of Lyric Writing*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/the-craft-of-lyric-writing_sheila-davis/248955/#edition=5546598&idiq=51966722)
Sheila Davis, (Writer's Digest Books, 1985), 350 pp.

&ldquo;A lyric is not a poem,&rdquo; contends Sheila Davis in one of
the chapter headings of her useful and informative book.  &ldquo;It
is merely an unfinished product, half a potential song.&rdquo;  Not
that some poems cannot be set to music: Shakespeare,
Goethe, and Baudelaire attest to such adaptability; but the
result, she makes clear, is an art song, not a pop song.  The
words to pop songs—evocative or provocative, but above all
instantly comprehensible—is what this practical how-to-do-it
volume is about.

Davis draws her pedagogical examples from all eras of
the American popular song.  In her analysis of song forms,
she notes that lyrics are attached to melodies which, with
individual variations, fall into permutations of two or occasionally
three sections, of which some formulas have been
with us since the 1800s.  She discusses AAA (&ldquo;By The Time I
Get To Phoenix&rdquo;), AB (&ldquo;Oh!  Suzanna&rdquo;), AABA (&ldquo;Ol' Man
River&rdquo;), ABAB (&ldquo;Swanee&rdquo;), and ABAC (&ldquo;Days Of Wine and
Roses&rdquo;).

The lyricist works within the limitations of these forms
along with the demands of several additional considerations.
There must be an immediate appeal.  Elegant craftsmanship
there may be, but the success of a pop song depends on the
essential &ldquo;hook&rdquo;—a phrase, concept, or rhyme which, like
the proverbial plank on the mule's head, grabs the listener's
attention.  Moreover, words must complement the melody
emotionally, although occasional irony is possible when an
ostensibly cheerful lyric is belied by a sad melody.  Furthermore,
lyrics must be singable, with the needs of voice production
and ease of pronunciation ever borne in mind.
When the pressure of writing to a deadline is considered
along with all of these professional requirements, one must
feel deep respect for the masters of such an exacting discipline.

It is to the author's credit that she gives the songwriters
of the present era their due and does not confine her discussion
to the gems of Lorenz Hart, Cole Porter, and Ira Gershwin.
In truth, contemporary writers such as Paul Simon and
Bob Dylan present emotions and concepts unthinkable in
terms of older norms.  The writers of today come in various
stripes, of course.  There are those who continue in the tradition
of the earlier show and film score craftsmen—Stephen
Sondheim and Marilyn & Alan Bergman come to mind
immediately—and those whose orientation is to the age of
rock music.  The latter, who have so greatly expanded the
subject matter and emotional range of pop songs, are also,
unfortunately, responsible for a perceptible decline in the
craft in terms of exact rhyming.  It is true that great poetry
of the past is filled with substitutes for exact rhyme, but one
suspects that the rock-oriented writers are not prepared to
offer Milton's use of consonance (*food-stood*) and assonance
(*meet-seen*) in *Paradise Lost* as justification for their sins.
Davis sadly admits that simple ineptitude is more likely to
be at the root of the prevalence of false rhymes.  She catalogues
these, in addition to consonance and assonance, as
pararhyme (*nine-noon*), unstressed (*given-heaven*), augmented
(*harbor-starboard*), and, particularly popular with
present-day writers, diminished (*ground-town*).  After
enough hearings, lyrics such as &ldquo;You've been running
around, All over town&rdquo; seem less offensive to our ears; our
standards have become lowered.

For readers of VERBATIM, at any rate, examples of classic
full rhyme from the golden age of musical comedy are, as
always, inspiring.  The inspiration of Porter, Hart, Ira
Gershwin, P.G. Wodehouse, Oscar Hammerstein, Yip
Harburg, and the rest was indubitably W.S. Gilbert.

From &ldquo;The Sorcerer&rdquo; (1877), a paean to a dealer in
magic and spells:

>For he can prophesy  
With a wink of his eye  
Peep with security  
Into futurity  
Sum up your history  
Clear up a mystery  
Humour proclivity  
For a nativity,  
With mirrors so magical  
Tetrapods tragical  
Bogies spectacular  
Answers oracular  
Facts astronomical  
Solemn or comical.  
And if you want it, he  
Makes a reduction  
in taking a quantity...  
Then if you plan it, he  
Changes organity,  
With an urbanity  
Full of Satanity  
Vexes humanity  
With an inanity  
Total to vanity  
Driving your foes  
to the verge of insanity.

Consider Hart's &ldquo;Mountain Greenery&rdquo; (1926), and
note, by the way, that the lyric came after the melody had
been written, as was the usual form of Hart's collaboration
with Richard Rodgers:

>*Verse:* On the first of May  
It is moving day.  
Spring is here, so blow your job,  
Throw your job away.  
Now's the time to trust  
To your wanderlust.  
In the city's dust you wait.  
Must you wait?  
Just you wait.  
>
>*Chorus:* In a mountain greenery  
Where God paints the scenery,  
Just two crazy people together.  
While you love your lover, let  
Blue skies be your coverlet;  
When it rains, we'll laugh at the weather.  
And if you're good  
I'll search for wood,  
So you can cook  
While I stand looking.  
Beans could get no keener reCeption in a beanery.  
Bless our mountain greenery home.

The Gershwins also commonly collaborated on a music-first
basis, but in all such procedures there must have
been considerable give-and-take on both sides.  A melody can
be altered up to a point in order to accommodate a syllable
or two, and a lyric for a specific stage purpose may well be
the stimulus for the composer.  In any case, as Sammy Cahn
responded to the eternal query as to which comes first,
&ldquo;First comes the phone call.&rdquo;

All of these matters are set forth in clear prose by the
author, whose course at The Songwriters Guild in New York
City is the basis for this book.  Her presentation is complete
and highly recommended.

*[Dick Hyman, New York City]*

### EUREKA: *Droste, Dutch Girl, et al.*

Many years ago, I came across a word that I have since
lost—everyone has had a similar experience, I am sure.  It
referred to that special kind of drawing in which something
in the drawing contains a picture of that thing, which, in
turn, contains a picture of itself, and so on (presumably, ad
infinitesimum).  Though not common, examples can be seen
in obvious places, like the Droste cocoa boxes, where the box
the boy and girl are holding has on it a picture of a Droste
Cocoa box showing a boy and girl holding a box, which
...you get the idea.  It is also represented on the Old
Dutch cleanser box.  (What connection may there be
between the Dutch and this sort of representation?)
Another, albeit fleeting, manifestation is often seen on television
as when, for example, a newscaster is shown seated
before a monitor that shows him seated before a monitor
that shows....  For decades I have been searching for the
word, asking people, writing to *English Notes and Queries*
and other journals that tolerate such trivia, combing dictionaries,
and so forth.  Being a lexicographer, hence
exposed (at least) to a great many words, many weird, many
wonderful, it is odd that I have not encountered the word
again.  From that failure I have concluded that the term
originally met with must have been a nonce coinage.  I seem
to recall its consisting of Greek elements.

Everyone will be much relieved, then, to learn that I
have found a word which, if it is not the one I lost so long
ago, may well serve the purpose.  *Nucleoline*, probably well
known to zoologists and botanists (Where were you when I
needed you?) means 'of or pertaining to a nucleolinus.'  A
*nucleolinus* is the nucleus of a nucleolus, and a *nucleolus* is
the nucleus of a nucleus.  Thus, though I readily acknowledge
that the term may not be perfectly descriptive of the
phenomenon, it should serve well till another comes along.
At least it is established in the language.  Therefore, to sum
up, an added sense of *nucleoline* is 'of, pertaining to, or
characterizing a pictorial representation in which an object
appears that contains a representation of itself, which, in
turn, contains a representation of itself, and so on, in infinite
regression.'  Free use is hereby accorded to all lexicographers,
though they could undoubtedly improve on this
wording.  (And, just to forestall irrelevant correspondence on
the subject, *infinite regression* and *infinitely regressive* don't
work as well.)

*Laurence Urdang*

## Paring Pairs No. 20

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM*.

(a). Often overturned.  
(b). Warm woman up in the gorse.  
(c). Pop addict uses this to make it last.  
(d). Norden WWII device in Gilead.  
(e). Lake Mead.  
(f). Trade in caviar for British ballpoint.  
(g). Find tranquillity in Italian town.  
(h). Once past the bee, he is lost.  
(i). Scatterbrained air delivery of Earl Gray. cy man in protracted salaam.  
(k). Hedge about its use in pork sausage.  
(l). Thanks again and goodbye.  
(m). Waterproof Mexican leader's vacation home?  
(n). More mature than black.  
(o). Ruminating skinny regent.  
(p). Dissuade the man from keeping it clean.  
(q). Before Xote made an ass of himself.  
(r). Will horse delay king of beasts by knocking 'ell out of him?  
(s). What record London mousetrap holds.  
(t). Who could blame the little devils for getting it together?  
(u). It is not a capital idea to put down a lawsuit.  
(v). Reversible traitor.  
(w). Flat eight has been rented.  
(x). Slight upset by man of the cloth.  
(y). Thriving business leaving town is worrisome.  
(z). According to the Rev. Spooner, illicit is still the word for one who panhandles for robber's gold.

(1). At.  
(2). Balm.  
(3). Beggar.  
(4). Berry.  
(5). Bow.  
(6). Buy.  
(7). Case.  
(8). Coat.  
(9). Coke.  
(10). Concern.  
(11). Damn.  
(12). Deter.  
(13). Don.  
(14). Elder.  
(15). Fly.  
(16). Gent.  
(17). Going.  
(18). Ground.  
(19). Heat.  
(20). Her.  
(21). Hog.  
(22). Imp.  
(23). Is.  
(24). Key.  
(25). King.  
(26). Leaf.  
(27). Let.  
(28). Lion.  
(29). Long.  
(30). Loot.  
(31). Lower.   
(32). Mind.  
(33). Mini.  
(34). New.  
(35). Pisa.  
(36). Playing.  
(37). Poncho.  
(38). Roe.  
(39). Sea.  
(40). Sight.  
(41). Site.  
(42). Spoon.  
(43). Stall.  
(44). Stir.  
(45). Ta.  
(46). Tea.  
(47). Thin.  
(48). Turn.  
(49). Unity.  
(50). Villa.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Two winners will be drawn from among the correct
answers, one from those received in Aylesbury, the other
from those received in Essex.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send their
answers to VERBATIM, Box 199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20
1TQ, England; all others should send their answers to
VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT, 06426, U.S.A.  *You need
send only the correct solution, not the answers to all of the
clues.  Please use a postcard*.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 19

(a). Is Cambridge U. run by the vice squad?  (39, 10) Sin Dicks.  
(b). Is Hollywood star acting as Christmas reveler?  (25,35) Miss Rule.  
(c). Disney septet's East End debtors' song.  (14,29) Eye Oh.  
(d). — —, no cheese.  (28,50) No Whey.  
(e). Broke.  (21,12) Kneads Dough.  
(f). Patron of jailbirds.  (36,22) Saint Knick.  
(g). Solmization artist.  (11,33) Do Re.  
(h). Tigers, lions, leopards, etc., need the birch.  (8,20) Cat Kin.  
(i). Opera(tors) for trams.  (7,24) Car Men.  
(j). Labyrinth offers corny surprise.  (1,23) A Maize.  
(k). True Christian love leaves one open-mouthed.  (1,16) A Gape.  
(l). Everyone accounted for in change-ringing.  (2,45) All Told.  
(m). Where are you going?  Into a decline?  (51,3) Wither Away.  
(n). Carriage sweeps all before it.  (27,5) New Broom.  
(o). She's taken up with hairier fellow.  (18,43) Her Suitor.  
(p). Unassailable with a lavender dress on.  (19,47) In Violet.  
(q). Pantechnicon provides this.  (26,13) Moving Experience.  
(r). Harrowing experience.  (32,17) Razing Hell.  
(s). Suitor's ordinary squabble.  (30,44) Plain Tiff.  
(t). Stops in the orchestra for &ldquo;Mary Seton, Mary Beeton, Mary Carmichael, and me.&rdquo;  (15,41) Four Stalls.  
(u). Deep in the whisky business.  (42,49) Still Waters.  
(v). Professional write would be prohibitive.  (31,37) Pro Scribe.  
(w). Possession allows one to view the Buddhist in the spring.  (38,52) See Zen.  
(x). Boardinghouse sailor has a quartering breeze.  (4,34) Broad Reach.  
(y). Citified, suave cowpuncher.  (46,9) Urbane Cowboy.  
(z). This team has an evil hold on you.  (48,40) Vice Squad.

The correct answer is (6) Brush.  The winner was Elaine
R. Ford, Metairie, Louisiana.

The European winner of No. 17 was Dr. J.M. Varney,
London, and of No. 18 was Sandy Lyons, Cambridge.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Recherch&eacute; French article: ''Wild Luaus'' (7)  
2\. Rubber rings belonged to the lady (7)  
3\. Porter, and right sharp! (5)  
4\.  Island cocktail (9)  
5\.  Took in sail for turbulent feeder (6)  
6\.  Disheveled mime late for dinner hour (8)  
7\.  Needed in German city: Spanish aunt with Latin (9)  
8\.  Distribute thin paper minus lead (5)  
9\.  Pacino follows ''Taxi'' plot (5)  
10\. Boniface in North has retainer (9)  
11\. Quiet before Twisted Sister's remains (8)  
12\. Dozing, please shake (6)  
13\. Game left liar in 2H and  
14\. NT (9)  
15\. Locations are something to see, we hear (5)  
16\. Gets used to being around Democrat, lasts (7)  
17\. Deal ends in ''Pig!... Ripoff!'' (7)

**Down**

1\. In trouble, a repute gets shaky (2,1,4)  
2\. Don't employ so many to no avail (7)  
3\. Topless Mom's sis is free (5)  
4\. 50-ampere bulb (4)  
5\. Place for Alice W. on the German estate (10)  
6\. Mickey Mouse's young age (5-4)  
7\. Journal notes watchmen beheaded (7)  
8\. Honest, it's in raisin cereal (7)  
13\. Small ones use martini stirred (10)  
15\. Negating one upset, in full ire (9)  
17\. Telegram about wire service showing skill (7)  
18\. Smashed rubble low- grade, as Jabberwock might have said (7)  
20\. Folded entreaty to Kennedy (7)  
21\. Rough sport, i.e., making comeback (7)  
24\. Cafe Matsushita features dish (5)  
25\. ''Goddess'' is repeated (4)


#### EPISTOLA {Judith Tetzlaff}

Anent the recent article on oxymorons [XI, 4], I submit
the following addenda to the list:

>Adult children  
Holy war  
Cherry tart  
Industrial park  
plastic glasses (or plastic silverware)

And my current, unfavorite, b&ecirc;tes noires:

>computer literacy (!)  
personal computer.

*[Judith Tetzlaff, Skokie, Illinois]*

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. ABACUS.  
5\. Care-le-ss.  
9\. Uninviting.  
10\. Chic(k).  
11\. Bunny Hop(e).  
12\. L-AD-der.  
13\. Stir.  
15\. N-o-RSEMAN.  
18\. Harmonic(a).  
19\. Take.  
21\. ESTHER.  
23\. Up in arms.  
25\. G-obi.  
26\. EXORBITANT.  
27\. Stat-Utes.  
28\. Endure.

**Down**

2\. DurBAN TUrban.  
3\. Con-un-drum.  
4\. Slight.  
5\. Clipping Coupons.  
6\. REGULARS.  
7\. L-UC-id.  
8\. S-pice r-ack.  
14\. TRANSPORT.  
16\. e X-t RA c TED.  
17\. ANGRIEST.  
20\. fLuId As BiLgE.  
22\. HEIST.  
23\. MANOR.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v12n3_Winter_1986)