--- 
title: "VOL XIII, No 4 [Spring, 1986]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Folk Etymology on Campus
*Richard Veit, University of North Carolina, Wilmington*

Of the constant stream of new words entering our
language, most are introduced deliberately, to
fill perceived needs.  Foreign words imported by journalists
(such as *contra, jihad, or ayatollah*) soon find a
home in the national vocabulary.  Other lexical additions
are crafted from old words by combination, or
blending (*Reagan + economics = Reaganomics, tele
vision + evangelist = televangelist*), or by abbreviation
(*narcotics officer* shortened to *narc, professor* to
*prof*), or as acronyms (*yuppy or yuppie* derived
whimsically from *young urban professional*).  Still
other new words are simply coined, invented afresh
(*aspertame, Xerox, Tercel*.)

But not all lexical change is so orderly and deliberate.
Blunders and misperceptions play no small part
in shaping our language.  Since language is passed on
through use—from speaker to speaker and from writer
to writer—each time language is put into play, an
opportunity for error arises.  And while the vast majority
of communication occurs without significant misunderstanding,
every now and then one speaker or
reader misperceives some word, and a mutation
results.  In a very few of these instances, the mutation
takes hold and thrives, passing from user to user until
the original form of the word is quite driven from the
language, with few speakers being aware that a
change has occurred.

This process, known as *folk etymology,* is most
likely to succeed when the new form appears more apt
or plausible to users than the old one.  Our modern
word *penthouse,* for example, has changed significantly
from its Middle English form *pentis,* which
contained no suggestion of *house.*  The original form
derived instead from the Latin *appendix,* meaning
'appendage,' an appropriate term for a crude shed
added as an afterthought against the side or on the
roof of a larger building.  But as the *pentis* became
used more for habitation, it is easy to see how people
misperceived what they were hearing as &ldquo;pent*house*.&rdquo;
The new form made sense, it caught on, and the original
*pentis* soon lost all currency.

Folk etymology involves perceiving an unfamiliar
word as having a more familiar form.  Such changes
occur most frequently among illiterate folk, because
speech is more easily misperceived than writing and
more likely to take root, as nonreaders have no permanent
written form to compare their speech with.
Other examples include *crayfish* from earlier *crevis,
hangnail* from Old English *angn&aelig;gl* *(ang* meaning
'painful,' as in the modern *anguish*), and *Pennsylvania
Dutch* (people who are not Dutch but *Deutsch,* or
German).

But just as the ear can deceive, so also can the
eye.  How else could the pronunciation &ldquo;chaise lounge&rdquo;
come about but by readers glancing at the unfamiliar
French import *chaise longue* and unintentionally moving
the *u* to a more comfortable position?  The process
was taken a step further by one of my freshman composition
students who described a &ldquo;Shay's lounge&rdquo; in
a paper.  His novel version invloved both an ear and an
eye mutation.

The oddities and inconsistencies of our spelling
system have led to many similar blunders.  Probably
most of us as we were growing up added separate
words to our personal lexicons from written and oral
experience without realizing that both belonged to the
same item.  It came as a surprise to me in high school
to have it pointed out that the &ldquo;duh-bree&rdquo; I had often
heard was one and the same with the written word
*debris* that I had been pronouncing &ldquo;deb-riss&rdquo; in my
mind and, on this occasion, out loud.  A friend from
South Carolina was well into adulthood before she
realized that &ldquo;arsh potatoes&rdquo; her mother served during
her childhood were the same as the &ldquo;Irish potatoes&rdquo;
she now bought in the supermarket.

Freshman writers with scant reading experience
sometimes create novel spellings from their unfamiliarity
with the etymology of words they have heard.
Witness the student who wrote of his plans to marry
his &ldquo;feonsay.&rdquo;  Another writing about the evils of drugs
warned against becoming a &ldquo;dopadic.&rdquo;  The boss of
another student always sat in his &ldquo;nitch.&rdquo;  A description
of one student's college dorm room included
among its furniture a &ldquo;chesterdroors.&rdquo;  What consists
of five units of meaning (called *morphemes* by linguists)
in the minds of sophisticated speakers (*chest* +
*of* + *draw* + *er* + *s*) is apparently but a single unanalyzed
unit in this student's mind.

Amusing as they are, these phonetic spellings are
not true examples of folk etymology, since they do not
involve conversion to more familiar forms.  When a
real example does come along in student writing, it
provides a welcome diversion for teachers from the
tedium of reading themes.  One frequent occurrence is
*upmost,* as in*of the upmost importance*.  *Upmost* certainly
makes more sense than *utmost;* how is a student
to know that the *ut* derives from the Old English form
for *out?*  The frequent appearance of *upmost* in student
papers makes me suspect it stands a reasonable chance
of ousting *utmost* as the dominant form in years to
come.

A truly original example of folk etymology in a
paper is especially welcome, like a lump of gold that
suddenly appears in a prospector's pan.  When one stu
dent complained of a &ldquo;metalsome&rdquo; friend, might she
have felt that the person had altogether too much
brass?  Or when another criticized some &ldquo;outradious&rdquo;
behavior he had observed, was he in fact demonstrating
considerable etymological sophistication?  After all,
isn't the literal meaning of eccentricity behavior that
occurs outside the radius of a given circle?

If the student who coined outradious was sophisticated,
what about the one who condemned the
&ldquo;sufistocated&rdquo; ways of hoity-toity sorority girls?  The
image that came to my mind was of society suffocating
her by ramming the fist of convention down her
throat.  When a like-minded classmate complained of
the &ldquo;clicky&rdquo; ways of school snobs, was she representing
the sounds of derision such people make toward their
inferiors?  Was another showing just how much the
world has gone to the dogs when she wrote, &ldquo;It's a
doggy-dog world&rdquo;?  And when in an exam another
gave the name of a play he had heard of as &ldquo;Edipus
Wrecks,&rdquo; wasn't he giving a reasonable plot summary?

An example of a misperception of the eye
occurred when a student referred to the &ldquo;cruxifiction.&rdquo;
The error surely occurred when he transposed the x
and c he recalled when he last encountered the word
in print (perhaps when he read The Passover Plot?).

Because the process of folk etymology is generally
confined to illiterate cultures, we might expect that
universal education would have banished it from the
modern world.  My experience with college freshmen
has demonstrated to the contrary that it is still very
much with us.  Perhaps, however, it is largely
restricted these days to student writing.  If so, the
world has little to fear that folk etymology outside the
university will ever, in the words of one student,
&ldquo;reach academic proportions.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Osborne chased it around the back of the net, dug the
puck off the sideboards and fired a pass to Poddubny, who
beat Buffalo goaltender Tom Barrasso between the legs.&rdquo;
[From an AP story in the *Danbury News-Times*, November
13, 1986.  Submitted by Ed Rosenberg, Danbury, Connecticut.
Anyone would be a tender goalie after that.  Did
Barrasso get his surname from playing without his pants?]


#### EPISTOLA {Basil Wentworth}

In your comments on the distribution in the OBITER
DICTA column [XII,2] you could have added Edward's
first lines in Gilbert &amp; Sullivan's Trial by Jury.
It takes rare courage for an American to sing:

>Is this the court of the Exchequer?  
Be firm, be firm, my pecker.

In Australia, the verb to root has connotations
that require the expression to be accompanied by
winks and nudges.  And when an Australian says that
he is bushed, he means that he is 'lost,' as if in the
&ldquo;bush.&rdquo;

*[Basil Wentworth, Bloomington, Indiana]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Dedication and commencement of Ecumenical Stud
Groups on the theme 'Growing Together.' &rdquo; [From a church
newsletter, Greater Manchester, England.  Submitted by
John Ferguson, Birmingham.]

## The Deep Structure of Breakfast Cereals
*Steve Bonner, Rockville, Maryland*

The study of homonyms is a basic staple of linguistic
research.  But to deal with the semantics
of homonyms properly requires that we also think
along psychological lines.  A word which Noah Webster
or the *Oxford English Dictionary* might regard as
having several equally valid meanings may in fact
have a preferred meaning for any given individual.
For example, the word *base* would immediately conjure
up a very specific meaning for a military person
and yet quite another for a researcher in chemistry.  In
fact, the word also has specialized meanings in mathematics,
electrical engineering, cosmetics, and art, to
name a few more.  While using such a word in a technical
publication might present no obstacles to understanding,
problems may arise when attempting to
communicate with a larger audience.

We all keep foremost in our minds those words
and ideas which are of the greatest use to us in our
own studies.  When we encounter a word for which we
have a meaning readily available, we eagerly jump at
the chance to place the word in that context.  Very
often our first attempt to do this fails, and we spend a
few fractions of a second rummaging around to find
the meaning that was intended.  So a numismatist
might wonder whether a carton of mint ice cream was
made in Denver or Philadelphia.  Or a gardener might
object if you offered to put a touch of lime in his
drink.

What is happening here is a form of word association.
But the usual responses are circumvented by our
specialized vocabularies.  The response to &ldquo;color&rdquo;
might normally be &ldquo;red.&rdquo;  But a physicist might provide
the word &ldquo;charm.&rdquo;  (Subatomic particles are said
to have properties such as color, charm, and strangeness.)
These reactions need not to be at the conscious
level.  But where such a word association exists, our
overall perception of the information presented is
biased.

It is easy to imagine situations in which ambiguities
caused by the careless use of homonyms can be
exaggerated even further by our own preconditioning.
An example of such an ambiguity is the war-time
newspaper headline: SAVE METAL, WASTE PAPER.  Anyone
reading this can see the dual meaning, since everyone
is equally familiar with the terms *paper* and *waste
paper*.  But if we encounter expressions which carry
special meaning in our own occupations, we may find
ambiguity more readily than other readers.  Continuing
with newspaper headlines, consider the following
samples.  Each headline is followed by the type of specialist
who might have the alternative interpretation:

>STUDENT BODY FOUND UPSTANDING (mortician)  
STAFF TREBLED, NOTES DIRECTOR (musician)  
INMATE SCALES CELL WALL (biologist)  
SUBJECT FOLLOWS ACTION IN INTERROGATION (linguist)  
SPEAKER COMPLETES LECTURE CIRCUIT DESPITE
RESISTANCE (elec engineer)  
RADICAL REACTION STOPPED BY PRECIPITATION (chem
engineer)  
HEARING AIDED BY SILENCE OF JURORS (audiologist)

So completely do our fields of study occupy our
thoughts, one might easily imagine a linguist absentmindedly
considering the deep structure in the sentences
of the back of a box of breakfast cereal.  (Probably
a box of &ldquo;Chomskies.&rdquo;  You know—the ones that retain
their meaning even in milk.)

Even in situations where a word may not have
distinct, homonymic forms, the very presence of the
word may reveal the background and point of view of
the author.  A computer scientist may find himself
&ldquo;generating&rdquo; and &ldquo;interfacing&rdquo; in places where one
might normally expect to &ldquo;create&rdquo; and &ldquo;talk.&rdquo;  A mathematician
would much rather describe something as
&ldquo;nontrivial&rdquo; than &ldquo;difficult.&rdquo;  And the only people who
ever &ldquo;allege&rdquo; anything are journalists.  The rest of us
just &ldquo;say&rdquo; things.

Let me present an absurd story which illustrates
how views of the world might differ with occupation.
An astronomer, a physicist, and a mathematician are
walking along a path when they spot a black sheep
ahead of them.  The astronomer concludes, &ldquo;All sheep
are black.&rdquo;  The physicist, accustomed to taking precise
measurements of objects smaller than galaxies, insists
merely that &ldquo;Some sheep are black.&rdquo;  The mathematician,
unwilling to take anything for granted, replies
that &ldquo;There exists a sheep, at least one side of which is
black.&rdquo;

The rigors in terminology honed by years of training
also preclude the imprecise use of certain words.
Such &ldquo;sacred&rdquo; words receive special attention.  A
mathematician would never use the world &ldquo;infinite&rdquo;
unless this were truly the case.  The number of grains
of sand on a beach must therefore be finite.  Another
person might use the phrase &ldquo;infinite diversity&rdquo; or
&ldquo;infinitely more.&rdquo;  But since the study of the infinite is
so central to all fields of mathematics, the word is not
bandied about lightly.  Similar taboos exist with the
following words:

>virtual (computer science, optics)  
work/energy (physics)  
epoch (geology, celestial mechanics)  
random (statistics)

As the number of new areas of specialization continues
to increase, so too will the frequency of specialized
words.  Some of these terms, such as *clone* and
*software*, are finding their way into everyday usage.  It
seems likely that a much larger number of them will
not be usable outside of their specialized fields.  In the
cases where these words are homonyms for existing
words there will be the possibility of ambiguity.  It will
be interesting to see which of our commonplace words
become sources of confusion.

## I, Madam?  I'm Adam (and other inconsequential verbal trivia)
*Sydney Abbey, Ottawa, Canada*

Let's not jump at conclusions.  The above title is
not, repeat, *not* a palindrome, that prey of so
many word-butchers (word-botchers, spoonerized
bird-watchers?).  No, it is an entirely new kind of
word-botchery.  It is an example of what I call a
&ldquo;diliteral,&rdquo; although professional linguists will probably
think of a better term.  One can easily imagine situations
which could lead to the use of the following
additional examples:

>Edited it.  
Hot shots.  
Her washer was.  
Was Ted wasted?  
Mark the remark, there.  
Sentry's entry.  
Attendances at ten dances.

We may now have entered an entirely new happy
hunting ground for word-botchers—if someone else
hasn't thought of it first.  Not having encountered such
prior use in Borgmann's *Language on Vacation,*
Brandreth's *Joy of Lex* or his *More Joy of Lex,* nor in
any other readings, I trus I can claim criginality.

Now, let us broaden our horizons by going beyond
the bounds of English.  Here I must give credit to van
Rooten's *Mot d'Heures: Gousses, Rames* and to
Hulmes's *Morder Guss Reims* for inspiration, but not
for content.

What, for example, has the French word *quatre*in
common with the English word *strong?*  (In what follows,
French words are followed by (F), English
words by (E).)  Well, *quatre* (F) = *four* (E), which in
turn, sound like *fort* (F), which, of course, equals
'strong' (E).  Other examples follow:

>repas (F) = meal (E) / mille (F) = thousand (E)  
dit (F) = says (E) / seize (F) = sixteen (E)  
coulait (F) = sank (E) / cinq (F) = five (E)  
bl&eacute; (F) = wheat (E) / huit (F) = eight (E)  
minerai (F) = ore (E) / or (F) = gold (E)  
poirier (F) = pear tree (E) / perdrix (F) = partridge (E)  
syndicat (F) = trade union (E) / trait d'union
(F) = hyphen (E)

According to some analysts, that is how the partridge
happened to be in a pear tree for those
Twelve Days.

I cannot think of a good name for these bilingual
phenomena, but let's look at them from a somewhat
different angle.  The two middle words in the above
examples depend on homophony.  How about trying a
similar exercise with homography?

This time, we might well ask what *quatre* (F) has in
common with *oven* (E).  The answer is, using the notation
as above, *quatre* (F) = *four* (E) / *four* (F) = *oven*
(E).  Here are a few more examples:

>verser (F) = pour (E) / pour (F) = for (E)  
douleur (F) = pain (E) / pain (F) = bread (E)  
principal (F) = main (E) / main (F) = hand (E)  
sou (F) = cent (E) / cent (F) = hundred (E)  
cr&eacute;che (F) = manger (E) / manger (F) = eat (E)  
le (F) = the (E) / th&eacute; (F) = tea (E)  
emplacement (F) = location (E) / location (F) =
rental (E)

Several of the foregoing comparisons involve what
the French call *les faux amis.*  A &ldquo;better&rdquo; example of
that translation pitfall may be found in the sad case of
the three kittens who fell into deep water while skating
on thin ice—i.e., &ldquo;un, deux, trois cats sank.&rdquo;
Another version might be &ldquo;un de trois cats sank,&rdquo; but
French purists might object to that one.  Perhaps we
shall never know whether all three kittens drowned,
or only one of them.

A little thought might well reveal further examples
of all the foregoing useless information.  Similar cases
are likely discernible in other bilingual combinations—I
just happen to know English and French better
than any other two tongues.  French, being one of
the languages in which pronunciation is not consistently
reflected in spelling (and vice versa), lends itself
readily to punning.  An example?  (You asked for it!):
&ldquo;J'ai soixante-neuf ans, mais quelquefois je me trouve
cent-vingt [read 'sans vin'].&rdquo;

But let us glance into the fertile, if less familiar field
of other languages.  Consider *beer, bi&eacute;re, bier, birra.*
If English, French, German, and Italian can have
such similar words for that beverage, why must Spanish
use *cerveza?*  Other cases: How come that the Japanese
expression for &ldquo;good morning&rdquo; sounds very
much like the name of an industrial mid-western
state?  How come that the Italian expression of &ldquo;My
God&rdquo; sounds much like the Hebrew &ldquo;Who knows?&rdquo;?
(Imagine an Orthodox Italian Jew intoning &ldquo;Who
knows my God?&rdquo;!) How come that the Russian word
for 'shape, form,' when rendered in cursive script,
looks identical to English &ldquo;bug&rdquo;?  Looking at it from
another angle, how does it happen that a man who
would refer to himself as *Deutsch* is called *German* by
the English, *Allemand* by the French, *Tedesco* by the
Italians, and something like *Nemyenetz* by the Russians?

Yes, playing around with language(s) can be fascinating,
at least amusing.  It would be interesting to see
more of such material in the pages of VERBATIM.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This past June an unidentified local priest was barred
from a state prison when he tried to lead a celebration of
[the] Mass with a small vile of red wine.&rdquo;  [From *Institutions,
Etc.* November, 1984, Vol. 7, No. 11.  Submitted by
Judi Chamberlin, Somerville, Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;As a homeowner, you know the value of your trees and
shrubs in terms of atheistics and monetary replacement
costs.&rdquo;  [A letter from a tree service company.  Submitted by
Henry C. Maguire, Killingworth, Connecticut.]


### OBITER DICTA: *Doublets*
*Anthony A. Allen, London*

Early in his studies the beginner in English etymology
is sure to encounter the fascinating and
instructive class of word-pairs commonly known as
doublets; in fact they offer an easy avenue of approach
to that science.  Broadly defined, a doublet is a pair of
cognate words, almost always of Latin or Greco-Latin
origin, of which one (here always placed second)
retains a form close to the source, while the other has
diverged by having passed through Old and Middle
French and thence into Middle and Modern English—
though French is occasionally by-passed.  The two
words may differ in as little as one letter (*cage: cave*),
or, at the other extreme and exceptionally, in all (*coy:
quiet*).  One of the pair has sometimes become archaic
or obsolete.  The source-word, hereafter called the
original, may be purely technical (botanical, medical,
etc.).  In certain cases, the derived word has in the
course of its history split into two, so that there are
then three associated words.

Although the members of a doublet may have
moved apart very little in meaning (as *frail: fragile*),
more often—through specialization or other changes
of use over the centuries—the semantic link between
them is almost if not quite severed.  As a rule it is the
original that keeps more or less closely to its ancient
meaning, the derivative having moved away from it.
However, the reverse is sometimes true, as in the case
of *chamber, pestle, ray, reason,* and *vow;* here the
original is now specialized, the older or more general
sense being retained by the derivative.

The list that follows, based on jotting made as the
words came to mind, aims simply at giving a wide
spectrum of examples.  A number of interesting specimens
must have escaped the net; erudite readers may
care to supply some of them.  Anything approaching
completeness would however be both tedious and
impractical, for there are all manner of &ldquo;borderline&rdquo;
cases and others that are unsatisfactory for various
reasons, and on the whole better excluded.

>(a) venge: vindicate               
abridge: abbreviate                
adjudge: adjudicate                
amiable: amicable                  
assemble: assimilate               
attitude: aptitude                 
bedlam: Bethlehem                  
bishop: episcopal                  
cage: cave                         
caitiff: captive                   
cattle: chattel: capital           
challenge: calumny                 
chamber: camera                    
champion: campion                  
chance: cadence                    
change: cambium                    
channel: canal                     
chivalry: cavalry                  
clerk: cleric                      
commodore: commander               
conceit: concept                   
conjoint: conjunct                 
costume: custom: consuetude        
count: compute                     
court: cohort                      
coy: quiet                         
cull: collect                      
declension: declination            
diamond: adamant                   
dress: direct (*vb.*)              
employ: imply: implicate           
entirety: integrity                
fancy: fantasy (or ph-)            
fashion: faction                   
fealty: fidelity                   
feat: fact                         
frail: fragile                     
glamour: grammer                   
hermit: eremite                    
hotel: hostel: hospital            
isolate: insulate  
lesson: lection ('a reading')  
lodge: lobby  
loyal: legal  
mean (*adj.*): median  
migraine: hemicrania  
naive: native  
noise: nausea  
nowel (*obs.*): Noel: natal (viz., day)  
ointment[^a1]: unguent  
palsy: paralysis  
parcel: particle  
parlous: perilous: periculous  
pestle: pistil  
pity: piety  
poignant: pungent  
poison: potion  
preach: predicate  
priest: presbyter  
proctor: procurator  
prove: probe  
proxy: procuracy (*obs.*)  
raisin: raceme  
ransom: redemption  
ray: radius  
reason: ration  
reply: replicate  
rickets: rachitis  
round: rotund  
royal: regal  
sample: example  
sexton: sacristan  
shrift: script  
sordid: swarthy  
spices: species  
strai(gh)t: strict  
sure: secure  
treason: tradition  
treatable: tradition  
vow: vote  
vowel: vocal (viz., sound, letter)

***

[^a1]: The -*ment* suffix arises from a popular Latin refashioning as *unguimentum* of the classical *unguentum.*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;See where the Pilgrims landed by bus.&rdquo;  [Billboard
along the Mass. Pike near Boston.  Submitted by Larry
Ockene, Newtonville, Massachusetts.]

## Acery and Asery

In response to &ldquo;Akeries and Eaneries&rdquo; [XIII, 1],
my junior-high students and I created a matching
game.  Not incidentally, the students attend Jefferson
Junior High School and Oakland Junior High School,
both in Columbia, Missouri; the students participate
in a program for precocious children.  We started with
&ldquo;space&rdquo; and thus titled our game &ldquo;Acery and Asery.&rdquo;
All the terms are aligned with &ldquo;spacery,&rdquo; a rather
appropriate term for teenagers.

1\.  A province for zits or the god, Janus                      
2\.  A lawyer's pursuit or four six-packs of Diet Coke                                                           
3\.  An expectant father's waiting room or the gait of a horse  
4\.  A group of Elmer Fudd-like joggers                         
5\.  A home for plastic surgeons                                
6\.  A language for horses                                        
7\.  A teenager's mouth or the holding of pants                 
8\.  A school for drums                                         
9\.  An avocation for teenagers                                 
10\.  A bodyguard in a can           

a.  Facery  
b.  Wacery  
c.  Neighcery  
d.  Casery   
e.  Pacery  
f.  Macery  
g.  Re-facery   
h.  Basery  
i.  Bracery  
j.  Embracery

*ANSWERS*

>1.  a   
>2.  d  
>3.  e
>4.  b
>5.  g 
>6.  c
>7.  i
>8.  h
>9.  j
>10.  f

*[Dexter Schraer, Columbia Public Schools, Columbia, Missouri]*


### OBITER DICTA: *John Doe in Iberia*
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York City*

In both Spain and Portugal the equivalent of John
Doe is *Fulano,* or *Fulano de tal.*  The same name
comes up if we want to say any *Tom, Dick or Harry,*
which is rendered in Spanish as *Fulano, Zutano y
Mengano*; and in Portuguese as *Fulano, Beltrano e
Sicrano.*  Why the difference?  Perhaps a reader can
tell us.

The Portuguese sometimes provide Senhor Fulano
with one or more addenda to his name: *dos Anz&oacute;is,*
('of the hooks,' meaning 'traps or tricks') or *dos Anz&oacute;is
Carapuca,* adding a word meaning a cowl or hood, or
an innuendo.

Finally, one Mr. Anybody can be besmirched
with a Portuguese agnomen *dos Grudes,* which means
'of the goos,' or sticky messes.  Poor fellow!  He's better
off as just plain *Fulano*.

## &ldquo;Into Noah's Ark&rdquo;
*Edgar Humphreys, Gwynedd, North Wales*

Whether there exists a comprehensive list of
place-names which reflect flora and fauna,
with relevant maps of their world-wide distribution,
others may be more well informed.  Characteristics of
various flora and fauna have enriched figures of
speech of all languages whether people are merely living,
for example, *in clover* or simply just being *pig-headed*
and *cocky*.

Bantam, we are told, is a village in Java and said
to be the original home of these small breeds of domestic
fowl.  The word *bantam* itself is not only of geographical
significance but incites one to conjure
images of fast-footed boxers and nimble wrestlers.
Although I can only refer with a certain amount of
authority to place-names in Wales, I should think that
the global percentage of such place-names would be
extremely low.  Apart from Swansea and, indirectly,
Tiger Bay, the more obvious examples in Wales are
*Eryri* (< Welsh 'home of the eagles'), i.e.,  Snowdonia
Mountains, *Epynt* (< W *eb* 'horse,' hynt 'path') a
mountain range in Powys, and *Boncath* (< W 'buzzard'),
a village in Dyfed.  I assure you that there is no
truth in the rumor that certain inhabitants of Cardigan,
Dyfed, prefer to hold marriage ceremonies in
their farmyards so that chickens in attendance may
gobble all the rice thrown during festivities.  Surely it
must have been originally a Scottish tale!  However,
*gob* 'beak' in *gobble* and *shut your gob* appears to be
of Irish origin.

To continue this fowl discussion, I wonder how
many East Enders nowadays are aware of their Cockney
origins (possibly Middle English *cokeney < coken*
'of cocks' + *ey* 'egg') used contemptuously to townsmen.
Since all tax-collectors, bailiffs, and other &ldquo;undesirables&rdquo;
usually lived in towns, country folk would
naturally view them with suspicion and derision.  A
full list of such scornful names for various town and
city dwellers must be extensive.  Equally, country folk
have been called *bumpkins,* even *pumpkins* and
*sheep-shaggers,* amongst other names.

In my neck of the woods, for example, the people
of Bethesda, a slate-quarrying town in Snowdonia, are
often referred to as *How gets* by neighboring rural
communities, in reference to their pidgin English (or
should I say &ldquo;pigeon&rdquo; in this context?).  Natives of
nearby Caernarfon are frequently referred to as *Cofis*
(sing. *Cofi*).  It seems that *covey* is either a 'small flock
of grouse or partridge' or even a 'small group of
people,' but *cove*, former slang for 'fellow or chap' (<
Romany *kova* 'person') seems to be its more likely
etymon.  In respect of *Epynt* referred to earlier, compare
*eb* with Greek *hippos* 'horse,' and *Epona*, Celtic
goddess of horses.  Displaying a mare's head on a
broomhandle on New Year's Eve is still a lively tradition
in certain parts of Wales and considered to be a
remnant of Celtic pagan rites.

The intake of English words into Welsh has been
considerable.  However significant the Tudor impact
may have been on English history, a minority Celtic
language such as Welsh continually progresses with
difficulty to coexist with the powerful forces of a
neighboring international language.  To the contrary,
the English language has not easily embraced any penetration
or influence by the &ldquo;language of Heaven.&rdquo;  Of
the few exceptions, *corgi* (< W *cor* 'small,' *ci* 'dog')
has been generally accepted—and with even more
enthusiasm in royal quarters.  In the dialect of the
Anglicized parts of South Pembrokeshire where *guillemots*
(< F *Guillaume* 'William'—a royal connection?)
thrive on the coast, local English-speaking inhabitants
refer to this bird as an *eligug* which no doubt derives
from its Welsh name *heligog*, literally 'sea-cuckoo.'
One of the standard jokes of South Wales miners is
that the cuckoo's name and song imitate the bird's
immediate response as it flies through the polluted air
of the industrial area, i.e., &ldquo;Coo, bloody coo!&rdquo;  Hard
characters are equally hard with their definitions.
After all, any child could tell you that cuckoos never
have nests because they either live in clocks or are duly
locked up!

Possibly certain species deserve more disrespect
than others.  As a talking point, however, I have yet to
see the significance of a simile such as &ldquo;sick as a parrot&rdquo;
or am I to believe that, in between gulping seeds
and chatter, this bird is in fact more prone to the blues
and other ailments than its fellow cage-birds?  Our old
friend the parrot, nevertheless, may not be as popular
in the future since by now there are &ldquo;parrot-bandit&rdquo;
machines on the market.  For a few coins this mechanical
parrot will chat endlessly without any ill-effects
unless the owner has failed to oil its beak.  Its manufacturers
researched the international market carefully
before any export prototypes were assembled.  Suitable
export versions of parrot-talk were required for various
countries.  I can imagine, if an English parrot were
to be inadvertently exported to the U.S.A. to utter
&ldquo;Who's a pretty boy, then?&rdquo;  New Yorkers might take it
for a gay bird.  In the U.S.A.  I believe the equivalent
parrot-intro is &ldquo;Polly wants a cracker.&rdquo;  In Britain, on
the other hand, since a *cracker* can be a 'well-endowed
female' (*She's a cracker*, etc.), Londoners
might think that the American parrot may very well
be a sex maniac.  So much for the manufacturers'
problems.

Parents should be equally careful with their versions
of the birds and the bees story.  I was quite
amazed to learn from one girl that she was convinced
that *birds* in this context was slang for 'girls' (compare
*broads*) and that *bees* stood for 'b's,' that is, boys.  In a
rather odd way, I suppose that she was right.  At least
she did not think that she would be pregnant if stung
by a bee.  In some peculiar way &ldquo;Buoys&rdquo; and &ldquo;Gulls&rdquo;
toilet signs in sailing clubs always remind me of her.

Some recent publications still maintain that *penguin*
derives from W *pen* 'head' + *gwyn* 'white.'
Ardent Welshmen would no doubt gladly support such
claim but a most blatant misgiving surely is the fact
that penguins are black-headed.  *Pengwyn* is commonly
used in Wales today as in the past as a somewhat
derisive reference to a fair-haired lad (compare
*ginger*).  It certainly cannot be argued that our Antarctic
friends are fair-feathered on top.  Another possibility
would be that, rather than the compound
*pengwyn*, its etymon might have been W *pen* + *gwyn*
'white-headed' (most adjectives follow nouns in
Welsh).  Again this description in Welsh would be confined
to creatures with completely white heads.  Since
the penguin's head is two-toned one could hardly justify
such claim.  Time would be more profitably spent
in examining the possibilities of &ldquo;pin-wing&rdquo; or Latin
*pinguis* 'fat.'  Let it not be forgotten that William
Owen-Pughe, an early Welsh lexicographer, erroneously
attributed the origin of *coffin* to W *cau fi yn*
'shut me in'!

*Antarctic* itself is a rare, contradistinctive place-name
< Gr *anti* 'opposite' + *arkitos,* adjective of
*arktos* 'bear,' i.e., 'opposite the arctic or opposite the
North Pole.'  In *Arctic,* polar, terrestrial, and celestial
*Bear* are significant—or should one say of certain
&ldquo;bearing.&rdquo;  For other and more obvious reasons, Russia
is also referred to as *The Bear.*  In one sense *antarctic*
therefore might well be synonymous with anticommunist.

Vocabulary related to animal toys and pets has
had its own distinctive development and associations.
-*y* and -*ie* are common suffixes of endearment, e.g.,
*piggy* and *doggie.*  Where semantic sanctions (e.g.,
*catty* 'spiteful' and *rabbity* 'rabbit-like') prohibited
adherence to the above basic patterns, suitable alternatives
were sought accompanied by common suffixes,
e.g., *pussy* and *bunny* (< Scots Gaelic *bun* 'scut of a
rabbit'), *puss* being an alternative informal name, and
in the absence of such name in the latter, *bun* simply
highlighted a rabbit's distinctive feature.  It boggles the
mind to note that *puss* is a homonym and an informal
name for a hare (< L *lepus*).  Nightclub bunnies might
be offended if referred to as pets.  Let us say that they
are merely subjects of endearment.  Ironically, &ldquo;tender
name&rdquo; is a cognate anagram of &ldquo;endearment,&rdquo; in the
same way as &ldquo;flirting&rdquo; can be transposed to form &ldquo;trifling,&rdquo;
or at worst, &ldquo;Adolf Hitler&rdquo; to &ldquo; 'Heil,' old fart.&rdquo;
In a recent news item a certain pet rabbit (not a
March hare) kept cool and contented during recent
hot summer days (dog days no doubt) by floating on
its back in a pet pool.  This was delightfully referred to
by the BBC as one way of ensuring that this likable
character from Alabama did not become &ldquo;a hot, cross
bunny&rdquo;—or was it just harebrained!

In one context, most current dictionaries give the
wrong impression that *rabbit* is a native Welsh
word—see *Welsh rarebit* - &ldquo;< W rabbit&rdquo; [*sic*].  It is
true that *a* > *e* occurs in the Anglicized area of Gwent
and East Glamorgan (compare *Cardiff* > *Cediff*).
Hence *rabbit* > *rebbit* was believed to explain *rarebit*.
However, since a Welsh rarebit consists of melted
cheese and toast it is rather confusing here that we
should be thinking at all of rabbits, although pieces of
rabbit meat might have been included with the cheese
in the distant past to constitute its original and now
forgotten ingredients.  Its pronunciation certainly supports
*rebbit* < *rabbit*, although in certain South
Wales English dialects and elsewhere, the second *r* in
*rarebit* could be silent, hence < *rare* + *bit* seems
more plausible: i.e., an exceedingly good snack.  As a
verb, *rabbit* also means to 'confound' (compare
*drabbit* < &ldquo;God rabbit&rdquo;) which probably accounts for
some of the above confusion!

Whatever may be the aquatic habits of Brer Rabbit,
Bugs Bunny, and the overdomesticated variety in
Alabama (&agrave; la bunny), the poodle is a more obvious
puddle-pet (< German *Pudelhund* < *pudeln* 'to
splash' + *Hund* 'dog'), not because of its particular
incontinence as a carpet sprinkler but for its renown
when formerly trained as a water dog.  Tales are also
occasionally told of dogs and birds.  As its names suggests,
a Spaniel was originally a Spanish dog and the
tale of the Cocker Spaniel is more specifically a cock
and dog story.  *Cocker* refers to *cocking*, i.e., 'hunting
woodcocks,' rather than to its fighting qualities or sexual
appetite.  The Canary (< L *canis* 'dog') Islands
were so called because of their large dogs in Roman
times.  However, it was their small, yellow finches of
that name which became more renowned.  There is no
such obscurity to the origin of the equally popular
*budgie* or *budgerigar* (< Aborigine *budgeri* 'good' +
*gar* 'cockatoo').

Someone tried to explain once that *kangaroo* was
the Aborigine equivalent to &ldquo;I don't know.&rdquo;  Pointing
to the marsupial, it was said that one of the earliest
European settlers in Australia asked a native to tell
him the name of this peculiar animal.  Since the native
did not know either, he simply replied &ldquo;Kangaroo.&rdquo;
Unfamiliar as he was the native language, the settler
believed that this was the animal's proper name.  No
doubt, to propagate such theory today would drive
any philologist hopping made.  Abor. *kanga* and *walla*
'to leap' + suffixes -*roo* and -*by* 'animals' are sufficient
to counter any equally less informed proposals
regarding *wallaroo* or *wallaby.*  Like the Titanic, etymological
misconceptions may have been sunk once
and for all, but their death only lasts as long as our
lapse of memory.  They should always be recorded for
posterity, even for the sake of innocent fun.  (Compare
the etymology of *indri*.)

Just in case that there is no such record of the following
teaser for wider circulation, I submit a manuscript
prank which students offered amongst friends.
Preferably it should be given for an aspiring linguist to
decipher:

>DARE DEGO  
FORTI LOREZ IN AROU  
DE ARENT LORIZ DEI ARE TRUX  
FULOW ENS AN GIZ AN DUX.

Some university students, particularly the over-serious
types, have pondered at length to regurgitate
glossaries of Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, and Breton before
quivering with humiliation on realizing that merely a
very rudimentary English pronunciation was sufficient
to cope with &ldquo;hens and geese and ducks.&rdquo;

Cowper's &ldquo;Retirement&rdquo; reminds us that philologists
sometimes &ldquo;...hunt... in the dark&rdquo; and even
&ldquo;...into Noah's Ark.&rdquo;  It can be hoped only that their
plight may never be a swan song.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*If I were king...: Semantics of the Enlgish Subjunctive*](https://www.amazon.com/Semantics-English-Subjunctive-Francis-James/dp/0774802553)
Francis James, (University of British Columbia Press, 1986), vii + 168pp.

Although this is a specialized monograph, it seems
worthy of mention in VERBATIM because so many of
our readers are concerned about the &ldquo;disappearing&rdquo;
subjunctive.  Generally, the book treats the various
manifestations of the subjunctive and traces the forms
back to Middle and Old English.  Except for the
semantic structuring and the transformations (both of
which are mercifully sparse), the discussion is well
written in English—that is, not the usual, obscure
gobbledygook that characterizes most academic
tracts—and &ldquo;real people&rdquo; should be able to read and
understand it easily.  It may reveal more about the
subjunctive than you cared to know, but there are few
alternative readings of a direct, expository nature
available.  Chapter 5, &ldquo;Extensions and Conclusions,&rdquo; is
particularly interesting for it comments on the subjunctive
in French, and it must be acknowledged that
English speakers are more likely to encounter the formal
complexities of the subjunctive in studying a language
like French than in their native tongue.

My only criticism is that I find it curious to note
James's failure to mention the influence of the contractions
'*ll* and '*d* for *shall/will* and *should/would,* respectively,
in his discussion of the latter pairs: I should
think that some coalescence of these forms would be
traceable to the absence of distinction in their contractions.
Also, Curme's *Grammar of the English Language*
in the bibliography has been published by
VERBATIM since 1977 (with new indexes in 1983).

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Nowell Sadlier-Brown}

The excellent and entertaining essay on *Polysemania*,
etc., by John Ellison Kahn [XII,3] was sure to
raise memories of amusing, and sometimes vulgar
instances of an ambiguous reading of literary passages
whose authors were completely innocent of duplicity.

Until Shaw's *Pygmalion,* and in bourgeois British
(including Canadian) society even long after Eliza
Doolittle raised the aristocratic eyebrows of Professor
Higgins and his friends by her &ldquo;Not bloody likely!  I'm
taking a cab,&rdquo; the word *bloody* was not used in polite
company.  Accordingly, when in school we met the
word in certain passages in *Macbeth,* we pupils were
moved to rude giggling, and we noticed that our masters
also could scarcely forbear to smile.

The euphemisms for *bloody* in those days were
*blooming* (mild) or *blasted* (fierce)—and in Canada,
*blamed*—but even some of these caused amusement in
such contexts as Wordsworth's lines:

>And turning from the grave, I met  
Beside the churchyard yet,  
A blooming girl whose hair was wet  
With pearls of morning dew.

And where Thomas Hood has:

>I stood beneath a hollow tree;  
Its blasted hollow blew.  
I thought upon this hollow world,  
And all its hollow crew...

schoolboys would recite &ldquo;I thought upon this blasted
world, and all its blasted crew...&rdquo; if they thought
they could get away with it.

One poem that discreet English-teachers would be
sure to omit from the syllabus, if possible, was Thackeray's
&ldquo;The Cane-Bottom'd Chair.&rdquo;  Poor Thackeray
could never have foreseen that raucous laughter would
follow each reading, in a Canadian classroom, of his
pathetic little poem, especially when the blushing
reader came to the lines:

>We sit here alone but we yet are a pair—  
My Fanny I see in my cane-bottom'd chair.

We had one master who used to read short stories
to his junior classes, and we loved to have him read
Kipling's *Just So Stories* and *Jungle Tales;* we were
probably much older before we understood why we
never heard him read to us &ldquo;How the Camel Got His
Hump&rdquo; and &ldquo;How the Monkey Got His Tail.&rdquo;

*[Nowell Sadlier-Brown, Blind Bay, British Columbia]*


#### EPISTOLA {J.B. Lawrence}

Your review of *Hobson-Jobson* [XIII,1] starts with
an apparent error.  See Kipling's &ldquo;On the City Wall,&rdquo;
the last story in my edition of *Soldiers Three,* for an
account of the &ldquo;mourning for the martyrs Hasan and
Hussain, the heroes of the Mohurrum&rdquo;; &ldquo;the crowd
were howling 'Ya Hasan! Ya Hussain!' and beating
their breasts.&rdquo;  See also the *Encyclopaedia Britannica,*
&ldquo;Hasan and Husain.&rdquo;  The point is that the wails were
as stated above, and not just &ldquo;Ya Hasan!&rdquo; repeated:
there were two martyrs, not just one.

*[J.B. Lawrence, San Bernardino, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Marc A. Schindler}

Here are some of my own suggestions for contrived
counter-examples to some of Mr. Bonner's
&ldquo;impossible&rdquo; terms [XII,2]:

>*agrinasal*—referring to truffle-farming (which is
possibly even *agripocinasal!*);
>
>*micromatrimony*—the usual state of affairs in Las
Vegas;
>
>*hexayummy*—something which owes its
attractive taste to aromatic amino acids, which
are based on the hexacarbon benzene ring; and
>
>*rotunditron*—any automaton designed to service
foyers.

Re &ldquo;Landmarks in Arabic,&rdquo; by N. C. Nahmoud
[XII,2], on the similarities between Arabic and the
Indo-European languages, the author may be interested
in knowing that some research has been done on
possible connections between German, one of the oldest
Indo-European languages, and Arabic's sister-Semitic
language, Hebrew.  One reference would be
the doctoral dissertation by Terry Marvin Blodgett:
&ldquo;Phonological Similarities in Germanic and Hebrew,&rdquo;
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 1981.

*[Marc A. Schindler, Gloucester, Ontario]*


#### EPISTOLA {Edward W. Devlin}

I have just finished reading my first copy of
VERBATIM, and I'm delighted that I shall, with any
luck, be receiving it for the rest of my life.  Without
wasting a moment I'd like to get into the fray.

Frank Abate might, if he has not already done so,
add to his list of linguistic hybrids [XII,2] that bit of
fractured French invented by furniture stores, &ldquo;chaise
lounge&rdquo;—so spelled in ads, and pronounced &ldquo;shayze
lownge&rdquo; in TV commercials.  It is probably written in
the honest belief that it refers to a kind of lounge with
a fancy French word stuck in front of it, to make it
sound prestigious, and that that is the way the French
spell *lounge.*  But it does seem to belong to the pretentious
style of misused French that Mr. Abate has
spotted.

And Richard Lederer [same issue] has probably
included in his list of almost unavoidable solecisms the
increasingly popular misuse of *enormity* to mean 'immensity.'
This presents a slippery slope to the most
careful of word-users.  Those of us who belong (Thank
heaven!) in that select group are apt to give silent
thanks when we hear some public figure use the word
properly.

*[Edward W. Devlin, Westport Point, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {Arthur J. Morgan}

Reporting the recent eruption of Mount Etna,
*The New York Times* [December 26, 1985] contained
the following sentence:

>Mr. Sorge said the twelve injured people had
been taken to a hospital in Linguaglossa, about
ten miles northeast of Etna.

*Linguaglossa!* What a marvelous name for a town
in Sicily!  A veritable Rosetta stone in a country whose
language and origins are both Latin and Greek, since
it means 'tongue' in both senses in both languages.

*[Arthur J. Morgan, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {Bandera Brandt}

About your Spring article by J.B. Smith on
reversed compounds, &ldquo;Laughing Jackass...,&rdquo; allow
me to suggest that his seeing an intentional humor in
their coinage is a projection on the part of the more
sophisticated listener.  If the speaker knew enough
about the language to crack these jokes he wouldn't
use the words to begin with.

In a small South Texas town populated by recent
emigrants from Germany, a woman told my grandmother
that she had been stung by a crackerjacket.  My
aunt, a child at the time, laughed.  The woman
blushed and said, &ldquo;Of course, I know better.  What I
meant to say was 'yellowcracker.' &rdquo; In case the wasp is
regional, I should tell you its usual name is yellow-jacket.

Also, my many Japanese friends in Honolulu uniformly
refer to unsightly things as &ldquo;sore-eyes.&rdquo;

Mexicans here often call the housing studs *four-by-two's,*
and once referred to my greyhounds as
*racehorse dogs.*

My untutored conclusion from all of this is, it is
simply caused by the speaker's unfamiliarity with English.
This is certainly true of the first example I cite.  As
to the others, they make as much sense as most words
in the arbitrary English language.  Smith's *peckerwood*
and *hoppergrass* make more sense to me than the more
usual forms because the verb-derived word precedes
its object, as in the rest of that malady we call English.

*[Bandera Brandt, Poteet, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady}

With respects and apologies to Mr. Reinhold
Aman concerning my letter, I submit that I would not
need dictionaries to explain *conasse;* I quoted Bruant
because he still is an authority in argot; literary words
do change meanings in French, and formerly obscene
words often lose their connotations with age; but argot
words might date (many of them have become obsolete
within my lifetime), however they cannot enlarge
their meaning.  *Conasse* does not, even today, refer to
prostitutes.  Those girls might be &ldquo;dumb broads&rdquo;
(another synonym, along with &ldquo;stupid bitch,&rdquo; quoted
by Mr. Aman) but *conasse* does not refer to their profession,
rather to their I. Q.  I have never heard of Jane
Pratt.  What are her sources, I wonder?

No, I don't think I need a dictionary.  In spite of
my name, I happen to be French.  I spent about forty
years on the Paris stage; I even played that French
musical *La Plume de ma Tante* on Broadway and on a
U. S. tour some 26 years ago; three French novels of
mine were published in Paris in the '50s; I have been a
tenured professor of French at Princeton University
(1965-72) and Scribner's published my advanced
French textbook for colleges in '73 (for all I know it's
still in use).

Of course, I bow to Mr. Aman re *schmock*.  I
wrote &ldquo;I think, probably...&rdquo; and didn't dare affirm
anything.  The sixteen or so Russian words that I managed
to pick up during my short apprenticeship with
the Russian ballet in Paris sixty years ago don't count:
my knowledge of Slavic languages is zero.  I merely
thought (*thought!*) there was a parallel between the
female and the male organ, referring to a stupid person.
Sorry.

I will be eight-three this year, and—may I boast a
little bit?—I am a knight of the French order of Arts
and Letters.  I always read VERBATIM cover to cover,
and I like the paper too much to &ldquo;rectify&rdquo; anything in
which my knowledge is superficial.

*[Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Frank E. Ferguson}

*Hunky Dory*

There is, I believe, some evidence that the term
*hunky dory* came into use in the late 1850s; however,
the dictionaries I have consulted all seem to provide no
clear explanation of its origin.  My wife, who lived
many years in Japan, tells me that its &ldquo;Japanese origin&rdquo;
is taken for granted there.  The story is plausible,
and perhaps even true.  During the years following
Admiral Perry's opening of Japan, many ships stopped
in Japanese ports and the sailors on shore leave
trooped into the town and up into the surrounding
hills looking for entertainment and perhaps companionship
of sorts.  The problem was how to return to the
ship: having negotiated soberly the branching of narrow
streets into narrower passages in the distant
reaches on the outward trip, the return trip in an alcoholic
fog was less certain.  Nonetheless, once one
reached the main street all was well, for that led
straight to the wharf in many of the coastal towns,
and Yokohama in particular.  The street in question is,
of course, *honcho dorii,* or 'main street.'  Wouldn't it
be nice if this bit of etymology could be substantiated
and the proper origin of *hunky dory* be put in our dictionaries.
Perhaps readers can cite furthe evidence.

*[Frank E. Ferguson, Lexington, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert J. Zani}

In the review of Ralph De Sola's book *Abbreviations
Dictionary* [XIII,1] a prison in Texas named
&ldquo;Lovelady&rdquo; is mentioned.  There is no Texas prison
named &ldquo;Lovelady.&rdquo;  Probably, Mr. De Sola was referring
to the Eastham unit, in the Texas prison system,
which has a mailing address of Lovelady, Texas.  The
Eastham unit *is* a maximum security unit, and has
been so for many, many years.  In the past, the clientele
(if you will) of the Eastham unit has been made
up, primarily, of recidivists, many because they are
misogynists.

Hence, the name &ldquo;Lovelady&rdquo; for such a prison
unit would be/is incongruous with the facts, not
including the fact that no such unit *(Lovelady)* exists.

*[Robert J. Zani, Huntsville, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ralph De Sola}

*Lovelady* is used by former inmates to let others
know where they were during a period of months or
years.  *Lovelady* looks better than the &ldquo;Eastham
maximum-security unit.&rdquo;  Former inmates do this
nationwide.  They tell you, for example, they were in
Atlanta, or Leavenworth, or Elmira rather than the
name of some federal penitentiary.

*[Ralph De Sola, San Diego]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jack Nixon}

I enjoyed reading [XII,4] the article entitled &ldquo;*De
mortuis (linguis) nil nisi bonum*,&rdquo; in which David
Soibelman presents a very cogent apology for the persistence
of a &ldquo;dead&rdquo; language, Latin, throughout the
world.  It might interest or amuse him to know that
some ten years ago, when I was living in the remote
town of N'Djamena (until 1973 named Fort Lamy),
Chad, in the depths of Africa, I found and purchased
in the only bookstore there a work bearing the following
words on the cover:

>*FRANCISCA SAGANA*  
*TRISTITIA SALVE*  
*FABVLA AMATORIA E GALLICO*  
*IN LATINVM SERMONEM*  
*CONVERSO AB*  
*ALEXANDRO*  
*LEONARDO*  
*JVLLIARD MCMLXII*

It was, of course, a translation from French into
Latin of Francoise Sagan's first novel, *Bonjour Tristesse*.
Merely the concluding words of the translation
suffice to make one wish that it were still possible to
hear Latin spoken as often as one hears languages
derived from it:

>Demissa voce, per multum tempus reitero nomen.
Mihi nescio quid in sinu excurgit, quod opertis
excipio oculis: TRISTITIA SALVE.

*[Jack Nixon, Lanham, Maryland]*

## The World According to Student Bloopers
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

One of the fringe benefits of being an English or
History teacher is receiving the occasional jewel
of a student blooper in an essay.  I have pasted together
the following &ldquo;history&rdquo; of the world from certifiably
genuine student bloopers collected by teachers
throughout the United States, from eighth grade
through college level.  Read carefully, and you will
learn a lot.

The inhabitants of ancient Egypt were called
mummies.  They lived in the Sarah Dessert and traveled
by Camelot.  The climate of the Sarah is such that
the inhabitants have to live elsewhere, so certain areas
of the dessert are cultivated by irritation.  The Egyptians
built the Pyramids in the shape of a huge triangular
cube.  The Pramids are a range of mountains
between France and Spain.

The Bible is full of interesting caricutures.  In the
first book of the Bible, Guinesses, Adam and Eve were
created from an apple tree.  One of their children,
Cain, once asked, &ldquo;Am I my brother's son?&rdquo;  God asked
Abraham to sacrifice Isaac on Mount Montezuma.
Jacob, son of Isaac, stole his brother's birth mark.
Jacob was a patriarch who brought up his twelve sons
to be patriarchs, but they did not take to it.  One of
Jacob's sons, Joseph, gave refuse to the Israelites.

Pharaoh forced the Hebrew slaves to make bread
without straw.  Moses led them to the Red Sea, where
they made unleavened bread, which is bread made
without any ingredients.  Afterwards, Moses went up
on Mount Cyanide to get the ten commandments.
David was a Hebrew king skilled at playing the liar.
He fought with the Philatelists, a race of people who
lived in Biblical times.  Solomon, one of David's sons,
had 500 wives and 500 porcupines.

Without the Greeks we wouldn't have history.
The Greeks invented three kinds of columns—
Corinthian, Doric, and Ironic.  They also had myths.
A myth is a female moth.  One myth says that the
mother of Achilles dipped him in the River Stynx until
he became intollerable.  Achilles appears in *The Iliad*,
by Homer.  Homer also wrote *The Oddity*, in which
Penelope was the last hardship that Ulysses endured
on his journey.  Actually, Homer was not written by
Homer but by another man of that name.

Socrates was a famous Greek teacher who went
around giving people advice.  They killed him.  Socrates
died from an overdose of wedlock.

In the Olympic Games, Greeks ran races,
jumped, hurled the biscuits, and threw the java.  The
reward to the victor was a coral wreath.  The government
of Athens was democratic because people took
the law into their own hands.  There were no wars in
Greece, as the mountains were so high that they
couldn't climb over to see what their neighbors were
doing.  When they fought with the Persians, the
Greeks were outnumbered because the Persians had
more men.

Eventually, the Ramons conquered the Greeks.
History calls people Romans because they never stayed
in one place for very long.  At Roman banquets, the
guests wore garlics in their hair.  Julius Caesar extinguished
himself on the battlefields of Gaul.  The Ides of
March murdered him because they thought he was
going to be made king.  Nero was a cruel tyranny who
would torture his poor subjects by playing the fiddle to
them.

Then came the Middle Ages.  King Alfred conquered
the Dames, King Arthur lived in the Age of
Shivery, King Harold mustarded his troops before the
Battle of Hastings, Joan of Arc was cannonized by Bernard
Shaw, and victims of the Black Death grew
boobs on their necks.  Finally, Magna Carta provided
that no free man should be hanged twice for the same
offense.

In midevil times most of the people were alliterate.
The greatest writer of the time was Chaucer, who
wrote many poems and verses and also wrote literature.
Another tale tells of William Tell, who shot an
arrow through an apple while standing on his son's
head.

The Renaissance was an age in which more individuals
felt the value of their human being.  Martin
Luther was nailed to the church door at Wittenberg
for selling papal indulgences.  He died a horrible
death, being excommunicated by a bull.  It was the
painter Donatello's interest in the female nude that
made him the father of the Renaissance.  It was an age
of great inventions and discoveries.  Gutenberg
invented the Bible.  Sir Walter Raleigh is a historical
figure because he invented cigarettes.  Another important
invention was the circulation of blood.  Sir Francis
Drake circumcised the world with a 100-foot clipper.

The government of England was a limited mockery.
Henry VIII found walking difficult because he
had an abbess on his knee.  Queen Elizabeth was the
&ldquo;Virgin Queen.&rdquo;  As a queen she was a success.  When
Elizabeth exposed herself before her troops, they all
shouted, &ldquo;hurrah.&rdquo;  Then her navy went out and
defeated the Spanish Armadillo.

The greatest writer of the Renaissance was William
Shakespear.  Shakespear never made much money
and is famous only because of his plays.  He lived at
Windsor with his merry wives, writing tragedies, comedies,
and errors.  In one of Shakespear's famous plays,
Hamlet rations out his situation by relieving himself in
a long soliloquy.  In another, Lady Macbeth tries to
convince Macbeth to kill the King by attacking his
manhood.  Romeo and Juliet are an example of a
heroic couplet.  Writing at the same time as Shakespear
was Miguel Cervantes.  He wrote *Donkey Hote*.
The next great author was John Milton.  Milton wrote
*Paradise Lost*.  Then his wife died and he wrote *Paradise
Regained*.

During the Renaissance America began.  Christopher
Columbus was a great navigator who discovered
America while cursing about the Atlantic.  His ships
were called the Nina, the Pinta, and the Santa Fe.
Later, the Pilgrims crossed the Ocean, and this was
known as Pilgrims Progress.  When they landed at
Plymouth Rock, they were greeted by the Indians,
who came down the hill rolling their war hoops before
them.  The Indian squabs carried porpoises on their
back.  Many of the Indian heroes were killed, along
with their cabooses, which proved very fatal to them.
The winter of 1620 was a hard one for the settlers.
Many people died and many babies were born.  Captain
John Smith was responsible for all this.

One of the causes of the Revolutionary Wars was
the English put tacks in their tea.  Also, the colonists
would send their parcels through the post without
stamps.  During the War, the Red Coats and Paul
Revere was throwing balls over stone walls.  The dogs
were barking and the peacocks crowing.  Finally, the
colonists won the War and no longer had to pay for
taxis.

Delegates from the original thirteen states formed
the Contented Congress.  Thomas Jefferson, a Virgin,
and Benjamin Franklin were two singers of the Declaration
of Independence.  Franklin had gone to Boston
carrying all his clothes in his pocket and a loaf of
bread under each arm.  He invented electricity by rubbing
cats backwards and declared, &ldquo;A horse divided
against itself cannot stand.&rdquo;  Franklin died in 1790 and
is still dead.

George Washington married Martha Curtis and
in due time became the Father of Our Country.  Then
the Constitution of the United States was adopted to
secure domestic hostility.  Under the Constitution the
people enjoyed the right to keep bare arms.

Abraham Lincoln became America's greatest
Precedent.  Lincoln's mother died in infancy, and he
was born in a log cabin which he built with his own
hands.  When Lincoln was President, he wore only a
tall silk hat.  He said, &ldquo;In onion there is strength.&rdquo;
Abraham Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address while
traveling from Washington to Gettysburg on the back
of an envelope.  He also freed the slaves by signing the
Emasculation Proclamation, and the Fourteenth
Amendment gave the ex-Negroes citizenship.  But the
Clue Clux Clan would torcher and lynch the ex-Negroes
and other innocent victims.  It claimed it represented
law and odor.  On the night of April 14, 1865,
Lincoln went to the theater and got shot in his seat by
one of the actors in a moving picture show.  The
believed assinator was John Wilkes Booth, a
supposingly insane actor.  This ruined Booth's career.

Meanwhile in Europe, the enlightenment was a
reasonable time.  Voltare invented electricity and also
wrote a book called *Candy*.  Gravity was invented by
Isaac Walton.  It is chiefly noticeable in the Autumn,
when the apples are falling off the trees.

Bach was the most famous composer in the world,
and so was Handel.  Handel was half German, half
Italian, and half English.  He was very large.  Bach
died from 1750 to the present.  Beethoven wrote music
even though he was deaf.  He was so deaf he wrote
loud music.  He took long walks in the forest even
when everyone was calling for him.  Beethoven expired
in 1827 and later died for this.

France was in a very serious state.  The French
Revolution was accomplished before it happened.  The
Marseillaise was the theme song of the French Revolution,
and it catapulted into Napoleon.  During the
Napoleonic Wars, the crowned heads of Europe were
trembling in their shoes.  Then the Spanish gorillas
came down from the hills and nipped at Napoleon's
flanks.  Napoleon became ill with bladder problems
and was very tense and unrestrained.  He wanted an
heir to inherit his power, but since Josephine was a
baroness, she couldn't bear children.

The sun never set on the British Empire because
the British Empire is in the East and the sun sets in the
West.  Queen Victoria was the longest queen.  She sat
on a thorn for 63 years.  Her reclining years and finally
the end of her life were exemplatory of a great personality.
Her death was the final event which ended her
reign.

The nineteenth century was a time of many great
inventions and thoughts.  The invention of the steamboat
caused a network of rivers to spring up.  Cyrus
McCormick invented the McCormick raper, which did
the work of a hundred men.  Samuel Morse invented a
code of telepathy.  Louis Pasteur discovered a cure for
rabbis.  Charles Darwin was a naturalist who wrote
the *Organ of the Species*.  Madman Curie discovered
radium.  And Karl Marx became one of the Marx
brothers.

The First World War, caused by the assignation
of the Arch-Duck by a surf, ushered in a new error in
the anals of human history.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*New Dictionary of American Slang*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/new-dictionary-american-slang/author/robert-chapman/)
Robert L. Chapman, ed., (Harper &amp; Row, 1986), xxxvi + 485pp. 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Everyone, it seems, takes *Slang* to mean something
different.  One of the most difficult decisions a
lexicographer of a general dictionary faces is when to
label a word or a definition *Slang:* perhaps it should
be labeled *Colloquial, Informal*, or something else;
perhaps it should not be labeled at all.  It is the lexicographer's
job to collect the words and senses in which
they are used by speakers and writers of a language,
and, with the proper resources, that collection can be
effected without too many problems.  Then comes the
task of sorting everything out and the art of writing
definitions that synthesize the senses into a set of definitions
that reflect some cohesiveness of treatment,
consistency, and style.

But whether a word, expression, or sense is to be
labeled *Slang* or something else cannot easily be determined
by research among users of the language: without
exception, I believe, it is the lexicographer who
must make the decision and, as far as I know, there
has never been a survey done among users to ascertain
their opinions.  In any event, the decisions are quite
sophisticated, and users are probably not capable of
making them.  On the other hand, it is extremely difficult
to make consistent decisions.  That doesn't apply
to clear-cut instances, like four-letter words, but it
does apply to thousands of borderline cases, and what
might seem to be slang on Monday morning might
appear to be standard on Friday evening.

I tried to derive a useful definition from Dr.
Chapman's Preface.  *The New Dictionary of American
Slang (NDAS)* is a revision of *The Dictionary of American
Slang (DAS)* by Wentworth and Flexner (published
by T.Y. Crowell, which was bought by Harper
&amp; Row a number of years ago), and reprinted in its
front matter is Stuart B. Flexner's Preface to the *DAS*.
I have read that, too, and while both essays reveal a
great deal about slang and its characteristics, I am not
satisfied that either leaves me with a sufficiently
restrictive notion of the concept to allow me to make
cogent decisions.  Let me take this one step further:
some linguists—quite reasonably, I suppose—take the
attitude that slang is an alternative language, that is,
users of slang (almost) always have or know a standard
word for the slang one they employ.  This is certainly
demonstrably true for many words and expressions.
But if one examines a number of terms in a slang dictionary,
it often seems that there is no alternative way
of saying certain things.  Take, for instance, *crack*, the
relatively recent coinage defined in the *NDAS* as &ldquo;very
pure cocaine intended for smoking rather than inhalation.&rdquo;
(I never knew that: I thought it was a synthetic
cocaine that was much more concentrated, hence
more powerful than the natural stuff.  But that isn't
relevant.)  Is there an alternative to *crack?*  If there is, I
do not know it, and there is no suggestion of one in the
definition.  In the circumstances, if *crack* is the only
(practical) way we have to refer to the substance in
question, can the designation properly be called slang?

Another example is *burp*, the noun and intransitive
verb senses presumably slang for *belch*.  I have no
quarrel with that.  But then comes the transitive sense,
as in *burp the baby*, quite accurately defined as &ldquo;to
cause a baby to belch...&rdquo;; but nobody says &ldquo;I have
to cause the baby to belch,&rdquo; &ldquo;I have to belch the
baby,&rdquo; &ldquo;I have to make the baby belch,&rdquo; or any other
possible variant with *belch, eruct*, or any other word
or phrase I can think of: everyone says *Burp the baby*.
As there seems to be no alternative, does that mean
that only two of the three senses of *burp* are properly
slang, the transitive sense being standard?  I am not
persuaded that the criterion is silly, but the conclusion
is, to be sure, for a lack of consistency in the entry,
occasioned by the omission of the transitive sense,
would be ridiculous.

There is little point in discussing four-letter words
(literally or figuratively)—all are in the *NDAS*, of
course.  As Chapman quite sensibly writes in his Preface,
&ldquo;Yes, children will sneak off into corners with this
book, and find the dirty words, and have dirty
thoughts.  If I believed that our whole culture could be
made the least bit more decent, more respectful, more
harmonious, happier, and mentally healthier by *not*
making a slang dictionary, I might refrain.  But I do
not believe that and have not refrained.&rdquo;  So much for
the prurient prudes in the Bible Belt and in pockets of
California who think that people learn naughty things
from books.  (It reminds me of the time when, during
the preparation of the illustrations for the *Random
House Unabridged*, I was cautioned to make sure
not to show male animals in profile lest children
draw &ldquo;pee-lines&rdquo; in the dictionary.  Examination of
reference-book illustrations is likely to confirm that all
mammals are retromingent.)

Entries that are likely to be offensive, either
because they are derogatory or taboo, are marked
with solid black triangles or white triangles, the former
for the really bad stuff, the latter for the somewhat
less bad.  There are always things to argue with
in dictionaries, so I shall refrain from disputing these
markings: racial and religious slurs seem to be universally
black; male anatomical terms are white, female
black; most sexual terms are black.  *Gang-bang*, however,
is white, and it is a pity that Chapman could not
use the citation provided by Professor Sir Randolph
Quirk for the term, though Quirk is, of course, British.

These and many other terms are indubitably
slang.  Questions arise, however, about a large number
of entries, some of which might be classed as jargon
(some of which is included as slang), some not: *game
plan, gandy dancer, gangland, gangster, ganja,
garden-variety, gate* ('ticket revenue')—just to pick a
few from a three-column interval.  Some of these may
be poor style (*game plan*); others are so familiar and
well established in (modern) English that they seem
natural enough, though admittedly not what one
might call elevated usage: *ganja* is a denotative term
for which there is no standard alternative, as far as I
know: *marijuana, bhang, heroin, opium*, etc. are not
in; why *ganja?*  Why *crack?*  These are not criticisms;
they are expressions of perplexity.

I disagree with the etymology of *Mickey Mouse*
'showy, meretricious, shoddy, inferior ...': &ldquo;apparently
this pejorative trend began after the wide distribution
of *Mickey Mouse* wrist watches ... which
were regarded as shoddy, gimmicky, etc., at that
time.&rdquo;  The entry is dated &ldquo;*after WW2*.&rdquo;  Mickey
Mouse wrist watches were sold in the early 1930s (by
the Ingersoll Watch Company, and they cost $2).
They had disappeared by WW2 and certainly were
not around &ldquo;after WW2&rdquo; till they were revived years
later.  There seems to be no evidence for the pejorative
use at the time they were popular, and, in any event,
they were children's watches—nobody older than 12
years of age would be caught dead with one.  Besides,
everyone liked (and likes) Mickey Mouse, and there
seems to be no foundation for the pejorative sense.  My
own theory is that in the animated cartoons in which
Mickey appeared, he was always saved from a terrible
situation by a not always artfully contrived set of circumstances.
As the cartoons were seen during the war
by servicemen everywhere, the sense of 'contrived'
attached to Mickey metaphorically, to account for
equipment failure—perhaps gremlins had something
to do with it.

None of this is anything but speculative, of
course, and should not diminish the usefulness and
importance of the *NDAS*, which, unfortunately, will
be out of date very quickly.  It is hoped that the publishers
will see fit to maintain it in new editions at a
frequency greater than that it has thus far enjoyed.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Street Talk: The Language of Coronation Street*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/street-talk-language-coronation/author/jeffrey-miller/)
Jeffrey Miller, (CBC Enterprises, 1986), 96pp. 

If fans of *Star Trek* are called *Trekkies*, are fans of
*Coronation Street* called *Coronaries?*  Perhaps, for
when one comes to reflect on this TV soap opera in
Britain and Canada, the conclusion is that its popularity
is clearly an affair of the heart.  Recently, one of
the actresses in the series died, driving virtually all
England into mourning; even the TV news and newspapers
gave the event long shrift.  Although encroachments
have been made by *East Enders*, another British
soap opera, *Coronation Street* remains the favourite of
many.  It caught the attention of Jeffrey Miller, an
American who went to live in Toronto, where the
show airs six days a week, &ldquo;with an extra half-hour on
'the Lord's day.' &rdquo;  The series is set in Lancashire, and
Miller has recorded an interesting collection of words
and phrases used by the characters.  As far as I know,
his is the first work devoted to the language of flctional
characters in a television soap opera.  If only one
out of ten of those who regularly watch *Coronation
Street* were to buy the book, it would be a huge financial
success.

In any event, the book is well worth having: the
definitions are encyclopedic and cover many expressions
that, as far as I know, are not doucmented elsewhere.
There are many photographs, more than half
in color.  Here is a sample or two:

>*Flaming Nora!:* 'Flippin 'eck!'; or as Americans
put it, 'Holy cow!' Nora is the Dark Lady of
*Coronation Street* vernacular.  The expression has
been used by countless characters, from Elsie
Tanner to Jack Duckworth, yet veteran *Street*
scriptwriter H.V. Kershaw admits, 'I have used
this phrase many times without any knowledge of
the lady.'  Even the peerless scholars of Oxford
University Press dictionaries can provide no clue
to Nora's history.
>
>*muriel:* Hilda Ogden's pronuciation of 'mural.'
She has a blow-up of an Alpine scene on her wall.
Many viewers have written to ask where they
could buy one.
>
>*worse things happen at sea:* 'Cheer up, things
could always be worse.'  Hilda once pulled the
plug on Stan's bath-tub of home-made beer,
fearing it was against the law.  Stan was
devastated.  'Worse things happen at sea,' she
told him.

It must be said that not all of the entries are
unfamiliar, and I am not sure why *spliced* 'married,'
*yammer* for 'cry for,' *set-to* 'argument,' and other
well-known slang terms are there.  Also, there are
familiar Briticisms—*yobbo* (but not *boyo*), *bog* 'toilet,'
*duck-egg* 'goose-egg,' etc.—which can be found in
other sources.  But no claim is made for exclusivity of
coverage, and if that is how the *Street* people speak, so
be it.  As the author points out in a note, &ldquo;this book is a
compendium of idiomatic British English, mostly Lancashire
English as, and only as, that language is portrayed
in the scripts of *Coronation Street*.&rdquo;

To order a copy, send US$12.70 to Street Talk,
CBC Enterprises, Box 500, Station A, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5W 1E6.  Mentioning VERBATIM
won't get you a discount, but it will impress the CBC
and Mr. Miller with the considerable (or negligible)
influence we have on our readers.  In Europe, information
may be obtained from Ward Lock Ltd, 8 Clifford
Street, London W1X 1RB.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Make Your Homecoming a Memorial One.&rdquo;  [From an
ad in the Dakota State College (SD) Eastern.  Submitted by
Jim Swanson, Madison, South Dakota.]

## Public Cutespeak
*Dennis Baron, University of Illinois, Urbana*

Time was, when you surveyed the alluring names
of American business establishments, you didn't
find much humor in them beyond the level of the *Dew
Drop Inn*, the punning title of many a neighborhood
bar or roadside rest.  Of course, there are some unintentional
double-meaning business names, like the
paradoxical *Vitale Funeral Home* which I noticed
once in New York's Little Italy.  (Many of these have
been recorded in the pages of *The New Yorker*.)

But nowadays the American public is going in for
cutespeak in a big way, a predictable outgrowth of the
many variants of *love and/or happiness is a warm/
sorry puppy*, the ubiquitous smiley face, and the new
goodbye on everybody's lips, *Have a nice day*.  Coupled
with this exaggerated sentimentality and sense of
good will is a new turn in the direction of corny wit.
Public cutespeak dictates that bars be called *The
Office* or *The Library*, so you can tell your friends you
spent a productive afternoon at the office or the
library.  Eateries are taking names like *Out to Lunch,
The Lunch Hour, My Choice*, or *My Place For* (as in
'Let's go to my place for ...').  One Los Angeles clothes
store is called *The Competition* (check out the competition).
There are also the cute-name restaurants, like
*Fritz That's it, TGI Friday's, or P. Eye McFly*.

One aspect of this outbreak of cutespeak is the
deliberate business pun.  There is a tumble-down *Tumble
Inn* on the outskirts of our small downtown today,
an indication that this mildly reprehensible tradition
of naming bars persists.  In fact, the pun phenomenon
is making a strong comeback in the midwest, and
there is some evidence that this trend has established
beachheads on the coasts as well.  Outrageous punning
business names are found, for example, in nursery
schools, where cutespeak is never out of place: *Babes
in Toyland, Captain Kidd, Patti's Cakes Nursery, The
Next Generation*, and of course the *Toddle-In-Nursery*,
not to be confused with the *Toddle Inn* cocktail
lounge nearby.

This sort of punning is now spreading to midwestern
restaurants and beauty salons, and to a lesser
extent, to the names of other kinds of businesses.  A
survey of telephone directories for Chicago and
Champaign-Urbana produces the following eateries,
which I suspect are just the tip of the iceberg: *Lettuce
Entertain You* (the flagship of a chain of pun food
places), *Barnum and Bagel, The Boston Sea Party,
Franks-A-Lot, Gables on Clark, The Great Impasta,
Just Dessert, Just for the Halibut, Lawrence of Oregano,
Let Them Eat Cake* (a bakery), *Lox Stock and
Bagel, Relish the Thought, Snax Fifth Avenue, Something
Fishy, Sweet'n' Counter*, and *Jonathan Living-ston
Seafood*.  There is even a name which puns on
another business: *Dogs R Us* (a hot doggery borrowing
from *Toys R Us*).

In contrast to Chicago, San Antonio is more limited
in its inventory of pun stores, sporting just the
sidewalk cafe called *The Kangaroo Court*; and San
Francisco, the city of food, offers little more than
*Coneheads Ice Cream Parlor*, two barbecue restaurants,
*Hog Heaven* and *Holy Smoke*, and the *Higher
Grounds Coffee House*, Surely the gathering place for
local philosophers.  Los Angeles seems also behind—or
ahead of—the times, with only two pun foodaterias:
*The Bread Winner* and *Dem Bones Bar-B-Q*.
Although Boston has had a *Tower of Pizza* chain for
some time, there is no evidence that other hub restaurants
are joining the bandwagon.  The current Manhattan
Yellow Pages (1986) offers little evidence that
this naming trend affects the Big Apple; I cannot even
find a listing for the macaronically named Chinese fast
foodery some friends of mine operated a few years
back, *Gung Ho*.

These Punny places with names like overripe
Camembert seem to have grown up with the middle-American
Yuppies, whose fondness for such unsophisticated
twists of the tongue must be an acquired taste.
Even more cutthroat than restaurants for their upwardly
mobile custom are the unisex hair salons, who
go in for such monickers as *Blood Sweat and Shears,
The Clip Joint, Cut and Dryed, Cut-It-Out, From
Hair to Eternity, Hair Today Gone Tomorrow, The
Hair Berdashery Hair Salon, Haircutecture, Hair It Is,
Hairizons, Hair Majesty, Hair Port, Head Hunters,
The Headliners, Head Quarters, Heads or Nails, Hi-Roller
Hair Castle, Mane Street, New Wave, Sharper
Image Hair Design, Shear Excitement* (also *Shear Artistry,
Class, Elegance, Madness, Magic*, and *Pleasure),
Shear Love* (a clip joint for pets), *The Upper Cut, US
Hair Force, United Hairlines*, and my own favorite,
*Curl Up and Dye*.

Clothing stores, particularly those catering to
women, have come out of *The Closet* to sport such
punning attire as *The Clothesline, Bottoms Up,
Clothes Quarters, County Seat, Fashionation, The
Fashion Bug, The Lady's Room, Purse Snatcher, Simply
Tops, Smarty Pants, The Great American Short
Story* (dealing in petites), and *The Long &amp; Short of It*
(for talls and petites).  Larger sizes and puns seem to go
together, for we also find *Added Dimensions* and 3
*Dimensions*, along with *The Fashion Bug Plus* and
*Ladies at Large*.  One New York discount clothier does
business as *The Emotional Outlet* (is the clothing preshrunk?).
There is a San Antonio resale store—
throwing out both grammar and good taste—called
*Too Good to Be Threw*, a chain of upscale sneaker
shops called *The Foot Locker*, and a Chicago swimwear
emporium known as *Liquid Assets*.

Other types of businesses go in for names in this
style only rarely, as yet, for example, *Sound Experience*
(car stereos), *The Lock Up* and *The Spare Room*
(storage facilities), *Splinter Group* (a woodworking
shop), *The Framer's Market* (from *farmer's market*)
and *The Great Frame Up*, both of which sell picture
frames, *Flatts and Sharpe Music Company, For Pet's
Sake, The Lazer's Edge* (a printer), and *First National
Frank*, a hot doggery complete with teller.

Cutespeak also makes itself felt in how we name
our boats and automobiles.  There is a long tradition of
punning yacht and power boat names such as *QT II
(pi*, that is; L. Urdang, personal communication; I
cannot report on this phenomenon directly since the
Chicago boats are all put away for the winter).  With
the introduction of vanity license plates in more and
more states, car owners have gone in for cuteplates in
a big way.  One litigious attorney in our town has SUE M
on his automobile.  A doctor affects VIRUS, and a Latin
teacher, JOVIS.  One car, no doubt a gift from a doting
parent, boasts MAZL TOV, the clipped Hebrew precursor
of 'have a nice day,' while a dilapidated, flower-child
Volkswagen microbus displays APATHY.  A low-slung
Lotus sports car calls itself MUTANT.  A pair of academics
new to the area evidence loyalty to their old alma
mater with a van labeled PENNST 8 and a station wagon
with PENN ST.  And a dentist asks the inevitable acronymic
question, RUNUM (*Are you numb?*).  Frank
Nuessel, Jr. (*American Speech*, 1982) records a variety
of cuteplates, including HI U QT, 10SNE1 ('Tennis, anyone?'),
2TH DR ('tooth doctor') and NUTS 2 U, as well as
several that manages to evade the watchfulness of
motor vehicular censors: RRGASM, BOOZER, AC-DC, and
IM GAY.

A casual finger-walk through the yellow pages of
the heart of the country and a visit to your local
marina or the parking lot of any good-sized shopping
mall in any vanity state should provide similar evidence
for store, boat, and car names.  My own list of
terms grows daily.  Product names, long subject to the
most bizarre twists and turns of cutietude, are falling
into line as well with the introduction of a new brand
of microwave popping corn, *Pop Secret*.

I should make it clear that I am not opposed to
wordplay.  There is nothing like a good pun, and I
resist the inevitable comment that these names are
nothing like good puns, because some are very choice
indeed.  However, the better part of public displays of
humor may ultimately require restraint of trade.  A
good witticism is enjoyable the first time around, and
sometimes the second or third time as well.  But frequent
repetition sours the joke, and since names are
meant to be repeated endlessly, the staying power of
funny names is seriously limited.  That is one reason
why most parents shun the temptation to burden their
children with the likes of *Pearl Button, Penny Price*, or
*Merry Christmas*.  (A more important reason is that
such naming practices are cruel.)  Our only hope for
relief may lie in the fact that the names discussed
above are fashionable, which means that one day the
fashion will change.  There can be no guarantee,
though, that it will change for the better, for business
names are exhibitionist by nature, and who is to say
that the *M-T Cup and Saucer* (food) or *The Cookie
Cutter* (hair) are any worse than *Ernie's Liquor and
Lunch or Le Elegante Beauty Salon*.  In the meantime,
there is little to do but monitor our increasing desire to
play with our words in public.


#### EPISTOLA {Murray R. Pearce}

I recently subscribed to VERBATIM and soon realized
what I had been missing.  Fortunately the back
issues were available, and I am now the happy owner
of a complete run of the journal.

I enjoyed Robert Fowkes's article on primults
[XI, 2] and would like to make two additions.  The
longest &ldquo;cheap&rdquo; primult I have noted is *speculation:
peculations*.  More interesting is a pair of the same
length but without the &ldquo;s&rdquo;: *lethologica: ethological.
Lethologica* can be found under *letho- *in *Webster's
Second*.

*[Murray R. Pearce, Bismarck, North Dakota]*


#### EPISTOLA {Cosima V. Lyttle}

Elmer Suderman [XII, 1] speculates on other
words for various varieties of farts.  Nathan Bailey, in
his numerous dictionary editions (1721-85), gives the
noun *feist* 'a fart without noise,' also the verb *fizzle* 'to
break wind backwards without noise, to feist or to
foist,' and also *poop* 'to break wind backwards softly.'
He further defines *fart* 'an eruption of wind backwards'
and *belch* 'to break wind upwards.'

*[Cosima V. Lyttle, Decatur, Georgia]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Indeed, the Fifth of Shostakovich dwarfed Beethoven
the way that composer's Erotica dwarfed the symphonies of
the Classical era.&rdquo;  [From the *Upper Arlington News*,
Columbus, Ohio, March 27, 1985.  Submitted by Peter L.
Jepsen, Columbus.]


### OBITER DICTA
*Edward W. Devlin, Westport Point, Massachusetts*

When the century and I were young, magazines
and newspapers made us familiar with writers and
illustrators named Albert Payson Terhune, Kate
Douglas Wiggin, James Montgomery Flagg, and
Charles Dana Gibson (of the Gibson Girls).  It seemed
to me then an amiable but stodgy fashion of the times,
a pointless affectation.  But now a closer look reveals a
multitude of three-named people, writers, artists, philosophers,
even business tycoons, endowers of art
galleries, museum wings and concert series, even
sportsmen, spanning the last century and reaching
into our own day—from, you might say, John Quincy
Adams to Jack Kent Cooke.

Adams and Francis Scott Key were among the
forerunners, I suppose; but there seems to have been a
flood of them during the High Victorian Age, and
many since then.  You can spot at once Harriet Beecher
Stowe, Julia Ward Howe, Henry Wadsworth Longfel-low,
John Greenleaf Whittier, Henry David Thoreau,
John James Audubon, Edgar Allan Poe, to name obvious
American examples.  My Beginner's list contains
109 trinomials.

If this thing is worth investigating, you can start
by asking vague general questions: what was the
motive for calling yourself Ralph Waldo Emerson,
instead of plain Ralph Emerson?  Or Louisa May
Alcott, James Fenimore Cooper, John Singer Sargent,
James McNeill Whistler, Edward Everett Hale, Helen
Hunt Jackson, Joel Chandler Harris, Mary Baker
Eddy, Frances Hodgson Burnett, William Dean
Howells, Frank Lloyd Wright?  What were the
impulses at work?  Were they dynastic pride, or desire
for distinction, or feminism, or compliance with custom,
or transcendental thinking?

Across the Atlantic, of course, family or dynastic
pride were in full control of many name-combinations,
but these were generally of the double-barreled
kind: Quiller-Couch, Baring-Gould, Granville-Barker.
Sometimes the middle name without hyphen
was used as though the hyphen were there: Conan
Doyle, Vaughan Williams—a sort of invisible hyphenation.
However, the hyphenates are a separate and
special branch of the species.  The de-hyphenated
forms were useful to ladies who were in the public
eye, usually for literary reasons.  They could tack their
husband's name to their father's, as did Miss Barrett
and Miss Wollstonecraft, and have the best of both
worlds.

It would take more time than it is worth to chart
the ebb and flow of trinomials by lining up names in
order of dates of birth.  But it does seem that after the
Victorian flood there was a lesser surge that came up
to the doorstep of the 1980s.  To the ones I mentioned
above you can add, with almost no effort, Edger Lee
Masters, James Whitcomb Riley, Joseph Wood
Krutch, Samuel Eliot Morison, Marjorie Kinnan
Rawlings, Edna St. Vincent Millay, Katherine Anne
Porter, Alice Duer Miller, William Randolph Hearst,
Alexander Graham Bell, Harry Emerson Fosdick, to
name some of the Americans.  And of course Franklin
Delano Roosevelt.  He rather spans the gap between
the earlier and later groups of three-namers.  The later
group makes the venerable custom seem quite new
and trendy: Alan Jay Lerner, Robert Russell Bennett,
Michael Tilson Thomas, Joyce Carol Oates.

However, when you jot down even a beginner's
list of trinomials, including the worthies and notables
of the last century and a half, you begin to wonder
who is left.  The great exceptions stand out by contrast—Charles
Dickens, Edith Wharton, William
James, Anthony Trollope, Ernest Hemingway, Alistair
Cooke....

This idle but engrossing pastime led me to the
other principle that has been at work on both sides of
the Atlantic: two-initialism, which combines austerity
and ambiguity.  We know that Eliot's first name was
Tom, but we're not really supposed to call him anything
more than T.S.  Who knows, off-hand, the first
two, or three, names of P.D. James, M.M. Kaye, M.
F.K. Fisher, C.V. Wedgwood, E.M. Delafield, R.
M. Delderfield, E.L. Doctorow, G.K. Chesterton,
C.S. Forester, E.M. Forster, I.M. Pei, P.G. Wodehouse,
W.H. Auden, E.B. White, O. Henry, e.e.
cummings, O.J. Simpson, S.J. Perelman, S.N. Behrman,
or even P.T. Barnum and H.L. Mencken?  Not
to mention L.L. Bean.

There's a special category of those who need no
more than three bare initials to be recognized: F.D.
R., L.B.J., J.F.K., H.H.H., F.P.A., G.B.S.  I
think of two two-letter persons who need no more: T.
R. and E.T.  Unless H.D. (Hilda Doolittle) qualifies.
Even more minimal are the Irish poet George William
Russell who reduced himself to AE, and Arthur
Quiller-Couch who nom-de-plumed himself Q.

A broad middle ground, of course, is occupied by
the combination of first name and initial: David O.
Selznick, Franklin P. Adams, Jean M. Auel, James M.
Cain.  But this doesn't seem to prove anything.  Except
possibly that the users have struck a happy balance
between family pride and reliance on their own
achievement.

Is all this trivia, or social study?  For all I know,
someone has already published a thesis on the subject.
If so, I don't think I want to read it.

When I sign my name I itch to spell out the second,
a family name to be proud of.  But modesty prevails,
and I join the broad middle band noted above.

A beginner's list of three-part names, British and
American, mainly from the last century but with a
sprinkling of contemporaries:

>Alan Jay Lerner              
Albert Payson Terhune  
Alexander Graham Bell        
Alfred North Whitehead  
Alice Duer Miller            
Andrew Lloyd Webber  
Arthur Conan Doyle           
Arthur Wing Pinero  
Ben Ames Williams  
Carrie Jacobs Bond            
Catherine Drinker Bowen             
Charles Dana Gibson                      
Charles Dudley Warner             
Clare Booth Luce                            
Cornelia Otis Skinner            
Dante Gabriel Rossetti           
Earl Derr Biggers            
Edgar Allan Poe            
Edgar Lee Masters                         
Edgar Rice Burroughs                    
Edward Arlington Robinson            
Edward Everett Hale                     
Edward Everett Horton                    
Eleanor Naylor Dana                     
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn               
Ella Wheeler Wilcox  
Ernest Thompson Seton  
Finlay Peter Dunne             
Frances Hodgson Burnett  
Frances Parkinson Keyes        
Francis Scott Key              
Frank Lloyd Wright   
Franklin Delano Roosevelt  
George Bernard Shaw (aka GBS)  
Harriet Beecher Stowe  
Harry Emerson Fosdick         
Harry Leon Wilson  
Helen Gurley Brown  
Helen Hunt Jackson           
Henry Arthur Jones           
Henry David Thoreau  
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow    
Herbert Beerbohm Tree  
Isaac Bashevis Singer  
Jack Kent Cooke              
James Branch Cabell          
James Elroy Flecker          
James Fenimore Cooper        
James McNeill Whistler  
James Montgomery Flagg       
James Russell Lowell         
James Truslow Adams          
James Whitcomb Riley  
Jessie Wilcox Smith  
Joel Chandler Harris          
John Alden Carpenter         
John Greenleaf Whittier  
John Hay Whitney  
John James Audubon            
John Maynard Keynes          
John Quincy Adams            
John Singer Sargent  
Joseph Wood Krutch           
Joyce Carol Oates            
Julia Ward Howe              
Kate Douglas Wiggin  
Katherine Anne Porter  
Katherine Lee Bates          
Logan Pearsall Smith  
Louisa May Alcott            
Margaret Chase Smith  
Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings  
Martin Luther King           
Mary Baker Eddy              
Mary Ellen Chase             
Mary Russell Mitford         
Maud Touzy Fangel            
Michael Tilson Thomas  
Oliver Wendell Holmes          
Ralph Vaughan Williams  
Ralph Waldo Emerson          
Robert Louis Stevenson  
Robert Penn Warren  
Samuel Eliot Morison         
Samuel Taylor Coleridge      
Sarah Delano Roosevelt  
Sheila Kaye Smith (or does she John Philip Sousa hyphenate?)  
Sylvia Townsend Warner  
Thomas Babington Macaulay      
Thomas Love Peacock  
Walter Savage Landor         
William Butler Yeats (aka W.B.)  
William Carlos Williams  
William Jennings Bryan  
William Lloyd Garrison         
William Makepeace Thackeray  
William Randolph Hearst        

A beginner's list of those who are known best, or only,
by their initials:

>A.A. Knopf      
A.A. Milne      
A.E. Housman    
A.M. Rosenthal  
A.P. Herbert    
C.L. Sulzberger  
C.P. Snow  
C.S. Forester      
C.S. Lewis      
C.V. Wedgwood  
D.H. Lawrence   
D.W. Griffith      
E.B. White  
E.F. Benson        
E.G. Marshall   
E.J. Kahn       
E.L. Doctorow      
E.M. Delafield     
E.M. Forster       
E.V. Lucas      
G.K. Chesterton    
G.M. Trevelyan  
H.B. Warner  
H.G. Wells  
H.I. Gardner       
H.L. Mencken    
H.V. Morton     
I.M. Pei        
J.B. Priestley  
J.B.S. Haldane     
J.M. Barrie        
J.R. Ewing         
J.R.R. Tolkien  
K.C. Jones      
K.T. Stephens  
L.L. Bean          
M.F.K. Fisher      
M.M. Kaye       
N.C. Wyeth  
O. Henry           
O.J. Simpson  
O.O. McIntyre   
P.D. James      
P.G. Wodehouse  
P.T. Barnum        
R.M. Delderfield   
S.I. Hayakawa      
S.J. Perelman  
S.S. Van Dine (aka W.H. Wright)  
T.E. Lawrence   
T.S. Eliot         
V.S. Naipaul    
V.S. Pritchett  
W.B. Yeats (aka William Butler)  
W.H. Auden         
W.H. Hudson     
W.S. Gilbert       
W.W. Jacobs     

If you're an editor in fact or in spirit, there's
a new magazine for you: *Righting Words, The
Journal of Language and Editing.*  If you
care about words and the English language because
you're paid to or proud to—or both—
you'll want to join us in *Righting Words.*  It's
the only magazine especially designed for editors,
educators, and everybody who loves the
majesty and mystery of the English language.

*Righting Words* has published Rudolf
Flesch on fussy usage and Willard Espy on the
accents of the animals.  It's had articles on electronic
editors, changing punctuation, free-lancers'
options, copy editors' attitudes, stylebooks
of a half-century ago, and much more, including
a wry look by some of the world's best cartoonists
at language and life.

Isn't it time, as the bureaucrats say, for you
to &ldquo;get on board&rdquo; *Righting Words?*

A one-year subscription—six issues—is only
$24 in the United States.  Send your check or
money order (U.S. funds only; please add $10
for overseas subscriptions) to:

*Righting Words  P.O. Box 6811  
FDR Station  New York, N.Y. 10150*

(You may use this form for ease of ordering.
Please print or use a typewriter.)

Name &mdash;  
Street &mdash; Box or Apt.  
City &mdash; State &mdash; Zip &mdash;  
&mdash;Check enclosed &mdash; Please bill me

(If you'd like to see a sample of *Righting Words*
before subscribing, just send $4.50, and *Righting
Words* will pay the postage, as long as it's a
United States address.)

## English English: *Scab*
*by Philip Howard*

I do not enjoy walking the gauntlet to work
through pickets, some of them friends, shouting
&ldquo;scab,&rdquo; &ldquo;blackleg,&rdquo; and other insults, and occasionally
spitting and jostling.  I do not think that the epithets
apply to me.  And yet I walked the gauntlet for nearly
a year to do my job at *The Times*, the flagship (after
the treasure ship, the *Sun*) of Rupert Murdoch's News
International British Armada.  I could have taken the
armored coach behind drawn curtains.  But that really
is a cowardly way to go to work.  If I were too
ashamed to walk into my place of work, I should
rather not work at all.

This is a complex political argument.  What is not
often written about it in Britain is the good thing that
for the first time in two centuries it gives control of the
way their words appear into the hands of journos.  I
can use an upvee* if I want to.  And I keep on trying to
find an excuse.  I can use foreign languages.  I can correct.
If there is a typo on the Books Page it is my fault.
It takes a great deal less time and a great deal less class
war to produce a page.

Nevertheless, if we cannot agree about the politics,
at least we should try to get the semantics right.  I
think that there is a faint but useful distinction, by no
means regularly observed, between a *scab* and a
*blackleg*. Viz. a *scab* is 'somebody in a factory or
industrial enterprise who refuses to join a strike'; a
*blackleg* is 'somebody imported from outside to take
the place of a striking worker, so helping the employer
to carry on his business and break the strike.'

The ugly words did not get their modern connotations
before the Industrial Revolution.  From
the sixteenth century *scab* was applied to a rascal,
scoundrel, rotter, or scurvy fellow, often a constable
or sheriff's officer.  It is found in this sense in Lyly,
Shakespeare, Defoe, and as surprisingly late as Kipling.
Captain Francis Grose, that rich well of bad language,
defined *scab* merely as &ldquo;a worthless man or
woman&rdquo; in his *Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar
Tongue*, first published in 1785.  But the word was
already being adopted in the specific sense of a worker
who would not join a strike, so forming a crust over a
suppurating industrial sore.  Patridge reckoned that it
was taken in this sense from American slang of 1811.
In fact the latest volume of the *OED* cites an interesting
early example from a Bristol newspaper of 1777:

>Whereas the Master Cordwainers have gloried
that there has been a Demur amongst the Men's
and Women's Men;—we have the Pleasure to
inform them, that matters are amicably settled
...The Conflict would not been [*sic*] so sharp
had not there been so many dirty Scabs; no
Doubt but timely Notice will be taken of them.

A *blackleg* was originally a gambling man with
whom you would have been unwise to do business.
Gambling is a mug's game anyway, in my view; but
then I do not have the sporting instinct.  The invaluable
Grose again: &ldquo;Blacklegs: A gambler or sharper on
the turf or in the cockpit; so called, perhaps, from
their appearing generally in boots; or else from gamecocks,
whose legs are always black.&rdquo;  Other slang-smiths
suggest more pertinently that those black legs
refer to the rook, as a swindler, cheat, and generally
unfeathered bird of ill omen: an old avian metaphor.
The earliest example of *blackleg* in its strike-breaking
sense found by the *OED* is as late as 1889: &ldquo;The question
of the preparation of a list of master-baker 'blacklegs'
was also touched upon.  These men are selling
bread at 4&frac14;d the quartern, and at even a lower rate.&rdquo;
Those inverted commas around the blacklegs suggest
that the metaphor was new, at any rate to the writer,
in 1889.

Both words are now widely used as abusive insults
in the political cockpit, *scab* in particular having a
harsh monosyllabic vehemence.  Even *fucking scabby*
has become a bore.  Both are clich&eacute;s and monotonous:
OK for shouting, if you feel like a shout, but adding
nothing to the argument.  Blunt instruments compared
with reasoned abuse.  For instance:

>How Thomas Paine gets a living now, or what
brothel he inhabits, I know not.  Like Judas he
will be remembered by posterity; men will learn
to express all that is base, malignant, treacherous,
unnatural and blasphemous by the single
monosyllable.
>
>—Paine

That was not a reactionary, menopausal old fogy
of the time, surprisingly; but William Cobbett, &ldquo;Peter
Porcupine,&rdquo; before he became a rabble-rousing radical,
and a fan of Paine.  Cobbett was a grand, angry
vituperator, who would never have starved himself for
a year by parroting *scab*.


#### EPISTOLA {Charles G. Bolte}

Further to Richard Lederer's splendid collection
of oxymorons [XII,4], here are some more editorial
ones:

*Moderate Arab leader, limited nuclear war, military
justice, Beirut cease-fire, South African human
rights, journalistic ethics, international law, national
security, Egyptian commando hostage-rescue, Institutional
Revolutionary Party* (PRI: Mexico's ruling party
always), *Master of Science degree in publishing* (Pace
University ad), *perfect binding* (term for binding used
for mass-market paperback books).

&ldquo;Criminal lawyer&rdquo; is a puzzler: oxymoron or tautology?

First prize for oxymoron title of this year's books:
&ldquo;Nuclear Ethics,&rdquo; by Joseph Nye.

*[Charles G. Bolte, Dresden, Maine]*

## Paring Pairs No. 25

[By Walter Staaks]

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that it is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM*.

(a). Vandals amok in Castro's field.  
(b). My dad, a weak hitter, is at the plate.  
(c). Bar patron fakes convulsion.  
(d). It's depressing to leave these lovely rooms.  
(e). St. Louis ball club's imported mascot could be a heart stopper.  
(f). Gradually assembled luncheon to promote reconciliation.  
(g). Universally heard in control towers.  
(h). Minor infection makes boss unreceptive to suggestions.  
(i). What she'll do when she goes back to that boutique on Main St.  
(j). Endurance test for an angry nation.  
(k). Had cosmetic surgery, and now...  
(l). Existentialist work violates fire laws.  
(m). Clowning actors spoil mood of Trojan War drama.  
(n). Token applause for deceptive move.  
(o). Champion Dervish took students for a spin.  
(p). Aspiring leftist physician serene about revolutionary movement.  
(q). Feds intercept pop-carrying coach.  
(r). &ldquo;Officer down!&rdquo;  Or is it just an excuse?  
(s). Interrupted dairy snack by scaring &ldquo;h&rdquo; out of her.  
(t). Daunting ceremonies, even for one of publicized courage.  
(u). Discussion of terms of shipment leaves directors cold.  
(v). Monarch, soon to be executed, issues pronouncement.  
(w). Avoid impairment of countenance by wearing mask.  
(x). Gossips next door track our every move.  
(y). It's not all bad news. For instance, we can expect plenty of chicken.  
(z). Some people rub Glaswegian star the wrong way.  

(1). Address.  
(2). Ample.  
(3). Better.  
(4). Bored.  
(5). Bussed.  
(6). Calm.  
(7). Cane.  
(8). Card.  
(9). Class.  
(10). Coke.  
(11). Cold.  
(12). Cop.  
(13). Counter.  
(14). Country.  
(15). Cross.  
(16). Eggs.  
(17). English.  
(18). Exit.  
(19). Face.  
(20). Feint.   
(21). Fit.  
(22). Freon.  
(23). Grate.  
(24). Head.  
(25). Her.  
(26). Horse.  
(27). Intern.  
(28). Knows.  
(29). Louis.  
(30). Meal.  
(31). Neighbor.  
(32). No.  
(33). Out.  
(34). Peace.  
(35). Plane.  
(36). Play.  
(37). Pops.  
(38). Praise.  
(39). Raze.  
(40). Return.  
(41). Save.  
(42). Says.  
(43). Scot.  
(44). Show.  
(45). Sorrow.  
(46). Spied.  
(47). Stalk.  
(48). Suite.  
(49). Tough.  
(50). Up.  
(51). Whirled.  
(52). Writes.  
(53). Yak.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 24

(a). Insignificant container for a dead midget. (44,3) Small Bier.  
(b). This beauty can be found in low places.  (12,2) Diving Belle.  
(c). Underwear holder for quick suit?  (4,6) Brief Case.  
(d). Advertising slogan.  (5,53) Buy Word.  
(e). The show doesn't go on in Japan.  (36,45) No Theater.  
(f). Impossible for knowledgeable dairyman.  (29,49) Know Whey.  
(g). Collected on the lotter—himself!  (37,52) Number Won.  
(h). Bum photo yields spacy trip.  (35,43) Moon Shot.  
(i). Postman in drag?  (32,19) Male Fraud.  
(j). Holy Grail.  (28,47) Knight Vision.  
(k). Underweight officer is a bit of a nut.  (31,26) Light Kernel.  
(l). These give soprano mal de mer.  (24,41) High Seas.  
(m). Inexperienced violinist in Davy Jones's locker. (16,21) Fiddler's Green.  
(n). Loud, electronic blues are like lead.  (23,33) Heavy Metal.  
(o). Bouncing evil Sudetenlander.  (1,9) Bad Czech.  
(p). Left to be used by most people.  (42,22) Second Hand.  
(q). Unusual collector's cravats.  (40,46) Rare Ties.  
(r). Woman whose husband is away peddling dope. (20,50) Grass Widow.  
(s). Stormy, but nice for ducks.  (18,48) Fowl Weather.  
(t). *Roots* (the movie).  (27,17) Kin Flick.  
(u). Bottle for a message.  (7,39) Correspondence Phial.  
(v). What the equitable railway conductor is.  (15,34) Fare Minded.  
(w). Aaron Burr, Alexander Hamilton, etc.  (15,38) Duel Personalities.  
(x). Microcomputer operator.  (11,25) Disc Jockey.  
(y). Source of black light?  (10,30) Dark Lantern.  
(z). Sagacious Georgian.  (51,8) Wise Cracker.

The correct answer is (14) Easy.  The winner of No.
24 was Linder Chlarson of New York City.  The winner
of No. 23 in Europe was William Simon of Berlin.

## Paring Pairs Prize

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those
received in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East,
or North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A.  *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please*.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Brave woman with her love in adventure's conclusion (7)  
2\. Taxi runs into horse—ghastly! (7)  
3\. Census hireling catching fish (5)  
4\.  Origin of a tear in book leaf(9)  
5\.  Rolling log real briskly (7)  
6\.  Mohawk's shack holding car I remodeled (7)  
7\.  Dancer tripping in center aisle (5,6)  
8\.  Dancer free to incorporate  
9\.  % of dance step (4,7)  
10\. Revolutionary tire type filled with carbon (7)  
11\. Sage at present wrapped by monarch (7)  
12\. Dock worker with torn vest to wear around (9)  
13\. Live outlet holds origin of shocks (5)  
14\. In retrospect, prepared a foundation for arguments (7)  
15\. Tennis star Smith with racket replacement (5-2)

**Down**

1\. The man's fear of Latin Americans (8)  
2\. Determined to serve old nuts (8)  
3\. Making angry call after one (5)  
4\. Page one is designed with intelligence (9)  
5\. Time for St. Patrick's Day parade (5)  
6\. Comfortable housing in Africa (9)  
7\. Second-rate Western setting shows river tributary (6)  
8\. Establishes secret changes (6)  
14\. Businesslike—fifteen bucks netting a hundred and one (9)  
15\. Ungrateful for stocking with ankles swollen (9)  
16\. Urban deficit I totaled (8)  
17\. Raise fowl, having a small number (8)  
19\. *Times* editor made corrections (6)  
20\. Braved fractures quietly, perhaps (6)  
22\. Lifted seat in sacks (5)  
24\. Love for a musical story (5)


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Flaunting means to exhibit ostentatiously, to show
off.  But flounting, of course, means to show contempt
for, scoff at.&rdquo;  [From *Reading in Virginia*, Winter
1984, published by the Virginia State Reading
Association.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Mako ... Because these species not only survive,
but flourish in the sea, we can look forward to a
steady supply as public acceptance continues to grow.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Coho Salmon ... One of nature's most delectable
foods, we buy fresh farm-raised fillets from the cold
water of Puget Sound, Washington.&rdquo;  [From the menu
of Phillips Harborplace, Baltimore.  Submitted by
Alice V. Farley, Baltimore.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Can't tell who from whom?... Help is available
from the Purdue University grammar hotline ...
&ldquo;We get a lot of business writing calls and how to deal
with a salutation when you don't know who you're
writing to,' [Bob] Child [assistant to the writing lab
director] said.&rdquo;  [From the *New Haven Register*,
November 9, 1986, AP syndicated story by Diane M.
Balk.  Submitted by Dennis G. Jarry, New Haven,
Connecticut.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. CHAP(T)ER ONE.  
6\. B-EEF (FEE) rev.).  
10\. SH(ALL)OW.  
11\. C-ON TOUR.  
12\. BO-UNTIES.  
13\. LYRIC (hidden).  
15\. E(ME)ND.  
16\. E-PIG-RAPHS (PHRASE anag.).  
18\. HO(THOU)SES.  
21\. SEPA-L(APES rev.).  
23\. REED-S (DEER rev.).  
24\. GOLD MINE (anag.).  
26\. OR(BIT)E-R.  
27\. TOPSIDE (anag.).  
28\. TEEM (rev.).  
29\. CHA(RIOT)EER

**Down**

1\. CASH (homophone).  
2\. A LA MO-DE (ED. rev.).  
3\. TALONED (hidden).  
4\. ROW(DINES)S.  
5\. NICKS (homophone).  
7\. E-GO T-RIP.  
8\. FORECASTE-LE.  
9\. ANG(L)ER.  
14\. NE(THERMOS)T (MOTHERS anag.).  
17\. INSULATOR (anag.).  
19\. TRE(M)BLE.  
20\. ONSETS (anag.).  
21\. SEMIPRO (anag.).  
22\. PENS-I'VE.  
24\. GIRTH (anag.).  
25\. HEIR (homophone).

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v13n4_Spring_1987)