--- 
title: "VOL XIII, No 3 [Winter, 1986]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Science Words for Humanists
*Arthur Plotnik, Chicago*

Take it from this humanist: the last English words
with any fizz left to them are bottled up in the
sciences, leaving the arts and letters with an idiom as
flat as yesterday's champagne.

Who can resist a good science word?  *Oozes*.  *Neap
tides*.  *Apogee*.  *Chiasma*.  *Ytterbium*.  *Endoplasmic
reticulum*.  *Superluminal quantum connectedness*.  If
your tongue isn't dancing, stop reading.

My own attraction to words outside the humanities
began in grade school.  To little ears dulled by the
clunk of &ldquo;noun,&rdquo; &ldquo;pilgrim,&rdquo; and &ldquo;citizenship,&rdquo; came
the music of *deciduous*.  *Coniferous*.  *Hypotenuse*.  I
was seduced.

Today many of us in the humanities weary of our
own noises.  In fact, we are heartily sick of our words,
and we are sick of saying so.  The language of discourse
and criticism in the arts is used up, bankrupt.  Here is a
recent shovelful of book-reviewing prose:

>Her novel proffers the reader the same uneasy
union of present and past concepts of fiction, the
same uncomfortable synthesis of modern
scepticism and Victorian morality....

Now, for a sound as fresh as newly turned earth, hear
a scientist describe a type of soil in northern Ontario:

>Entic haplothord, a humo-ferric podzol....

Humanists desperately need fresh vocabulary.  We
have used up our own words by burdening them with
the functions of art.  Our words must convey originality;
our words must stimulate.  And once they do so,
like the bee that loses its sting, they no longer excite
anyone.  For example, when Baudelaire first used the
word *agate* in an original and evocative metaphor for
cat's eyes (*Et laisse-moi plonger dans tes beaux yeux*,/
*M&ecirc;l&eacute;s de m&eacute;tal et d'agate*), he immediately exhausted
that image for all poets to come.

In science, however, a term need only *designate*,
not stir our souls.  To a scientist *agate* simply designates
a variety of the mineral chalcedony, and nothing
else is ever asked of it.  Whenever that substance must
be spoken for, agate will be the perfect word, the only
word, and no scientist will ever use it up.  But humanists
daily turn their best words into dust, creating an
insatiable thirst for newly evocative language.  It is
natural that, eventually, they will be drawn toward
the lush vocabulary of the sciences, with the notion of
borrowing the succulent terms for their own purposes.
Yet this very borrowing, say some of our language
masters, constitutes a vile and unnatural act!

In Wilson Follett's *Modern American Usage*
(edited and completed by Jacques Barzun), four pages
rail against the borrowing of scientific terms for &ldquo;vulgar&rdquo;
usage.  This &ldquo;scientism,&rdquo; as it is dubbed, harms
language &ldquo;because it is not the product of genuine
need or thought; it is by definition affected....&rdquo;  Follett
condemns the use of technical-sounding jargon to
imitate the supposed solemnity and authority of science;
and certainly no one who loves words can love
such constructs as *group-dynamicalaa*, one of the examples
Follett gives.  But is a humanist *never* to enter the
temple of scientific denomination?  No, not ever, says
Follett—unless one knows and uses the precise scientific
meaning assigned to each word.  Thus, we
non-scientists are never again to use such common borrowings
as *focus, allergy, potential, experiment*, and
*laboratory* without the *Oxford Concise Science Dictionary*
in hand to inform us.  No more &ldquo;language *laboratory*,&rdquo;
no more &ldquo;*experimenting* with new cuisine.&rdquo;
And certainly no more *flocculation* or *isotopic spin* in
casual conversation.

Lancelot Hogben, distinguished author, is another
who would protect the sanctity of precise scientific
terminology.  In *The Vocabulary of Science*, he
celebrates two great breakthroughs in science nomenclature
that have led to unique names for millions of
organisms and substances:  Linnaeus' *Systema Naturae*,
and the *M&eacute;thode de Nomenclature Chimique* by
Lavoisier and associates, both some two centuries ago.
He warns non-scientists to leave science nomenclature
alone: &ldquo;Assimilation of technical terms in everyday
speech especially by mass media—exposes them to
the process of semantic erosion responsible for the
multiplicity of meaning conveyed by other words in
daily use.&rdquo;

What makes many science words irresistible to
humanists is, of course, their foundations in Latin and
Greek.  Not the nasal Latin of a Chicago courtroom,
but the good old stuff, resounding as a Roman war
drum.  *Medulla oblongata!*  Not the rat-a-tat Greek
heard in the *Plaka* of Athens, but majestic classical
Greek, whose syllables flow like wine down our gullets—*polyembryony*.
The classical constructs are rich
in meanings as well as sound, full of mystery and surprises.
Students of Greek will know that *Grompha-dorhina
portentosa* represents *gromphas* 'old sow' plus
*rhinos* 'snout' plus the word for 'portentous or ominous.'
But will they know the full term to mean a species
of cockroach?

Why did Latin and Greek become entrenched in
scientific language?  The seventeenth and eighteenth-century
scientists who set the pattern for classical borrowings
were not driven by the melodiousness of the
two tongues.  The languages were already the vehicles
of ancient knowledge, preserved by medieval scholarship.
When the rise of scientific knowledge in Europe
called for codes of international communication, the
classical languages were naturally employed.  Because
they were linguistically rational and comprehensible
to the community of scientists, yet set apart from the
corruptible, imprecise, ever-shifting babble of vernaculars,
Latin and Greek were ideal for creating systems
of nomenclature.

Daniel Boorstin (*The Discoverers*, 1983) recounts
the heroism of Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus,
who within twenty-five years (1735-60) created the
first workable, widely accepted system for classifying
plants and animals—and provided the names for every
species known to him.  Before Linnaeus' &ldquo;binomial&rdquo;
scheme, the names of particular species were often
strings of descriptive Latin terms that grew to such
lengths as this: *Convolvulus foliis palmatis cordatis
sericeis: lobis repandis, pedunculis bifloris*.  As grand
as it might have been to trumpet such terms, they had
become impossible to remember.  The binomial system
as science majors know, used only a generic name
(Latin, Latinized Greek, or a construct from Greek
words), along with a unique species or &ldquo;trivial&rdquo; name
(usually Latin or Latinized).  The system may have
been simple, but not Linnaeus' acts of naming, in a
hurry, the whole of the plant and animal kingdoms.
Boorstin writes of how Linnaeus &ldquo;ransacked his Latin
for enough terms to make up thousands of labels,&rdquo; and
asks, &ldquo;when was there another such colossal feat of
name-giving since the Creation?&rdquo;

The fun of science verbalization goes far beyond
classical posturing.  In fact, the introduction of Latin-and-Greek-based
systems actually took some of the fun
out of nomenclature by displacing thousands of colorful
common names.  In chemistry, for example, *blue
vitriol* became copper sulphate, and *salt of worm-wood*,
potassium tartarate.  What common names may
lack in euphony, they often make up in imagery or
high-spirited silliness.  Give me a *purple-headed
sneezeweed* over a *Helenium nudiflorum* any day.
Give me a *tufted titmouse* or *red-breasted nuthatch* at
my window, not *Parus bicolor* or *Sitta canadensis*.  I'll
take a *stinkhorn fungus* over *Dictyophora duplicata*, if
I have to take a stinkhorn at all.

High spirit isn't limited to biological nomenclature:

—The discoverers of a dwarf elliptical galaxy
named it after the candy bar, *Snickers*, to provide an
alternative to that chewy chocolate, Milky Way
galaxy.

—Subatomic particles receive such whimsical
names as *quarks*, *gluons*, *gypsies*, *truths*, and *beauties*.

As not quite everyone knows, physicist Murray GellMann
borrowed *quark* from James Joyce's phrase
&ldquo;Three quarks for Muster Mark&rdquo; in *Finnegans Wake*.
In German, *quark* means 'curds, cream cheese, trash,
rubbish, or nonsense.'

Science terms frequently derive from personal
names, such as those of discoverers, innovators, and
patrons.  Sometimes the terms sound like players in a
Teutonic fairy tale: *One day, long ago, a Schr&ouml;dinger
equation, Schwann cell, and Schwartzchild radius met
in the Black Forest*....  Or they sound goofy, as in
*Gooch crucible.  Andrade's Creep Law*, the *Sorensen
Titration, Abbe's Sine Condition*, and other titillating
nomenclature can be found in Ballentyne and Lovett's
*A Dictionary of Named Effects and Laws in Chemistry,
Physics, and Mathematics*, which defines the reaction,
flaw, axiom, or paradox of one scientist or
another.

Individual scientists or teams often compete to
have a plant, insect, comet, star, or whatever named
after them, subject to the pronouncements of the
International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature,
International Astronomical Union, International
Committee on Nomenclature of Viruses, and other
authorities for names in their fields.  Being apart from
such competition should please humanists.  Of course it
does not.  In 1960, while studying at the Writers
Workshop of the University of Iowa, I was struck by
the naming of something 40,000 miles wide after
James Van Allen, a physicist across the campus.  Here
we were in barracks classrooms, two hundred humanists
who would struggle a lifetime to see their names in
10-point type; and there, in the science buildings, a
man had pointed to the earth's invisible girdle of radiation
and would have his name forever in the skies.

It was a traumatic insight into the &ldquo;two cultures,&rdquo;
but I accepted it: different reward systems and all
that.  If the physical world from *Okazaki DNA fragments*
to *Comet Araki-Alcock* were to be named after
scientists, let it be.  Most scientists slave obsessively at
their work, probably alienating friends and families.
They deserve an honor.  Humanists have other means
of immortality, such as carving their names in park
benches.  Besides, names derived from one's own can
prove embarrassing.  Hogben cites a plant named
*Kniphofia* in honor of J.J. Kniphof (1704-65) of
Erfurt, Germany.  The honor, however, is qualified:
*Kniphofia* is a phallus-shaped plant whose common
name is *red-hot poker*.

To immortalize their names in a term, scientists
have associated themselves with organisms as dreadful
as, say, a tumor virus.  In a lively argument for a
rational system of virus nomenclature (*Nature*, 303:
June 1983) Peter Newmark cites a new christening: the
*Hardy-Zuckerman* 2 *feline sarcoma virus*. &ldquo;Not that
everyone would wish to have a tumor virus named
after himself or herself, especially one that kills cats,&rdquo;
Newmark observes.  Because viruses are named in several
inconsistent ways, Newmark calls for a non-erratic
system, perhaps &ldquo;an acronym for the virus type
followed by a designation of the isolate by place (and
number if necessary).&rdquo;

Newmark's argument reflects the general movement
of science nomenclature away from the colorful,
bizarre, personal, and passionate, and toward the
objective, rational, quantitative, and dull.  With thousands
of unique names needed for new discoveries and
developments, how far can scientists stretch the language
before it becomes ridiculous?  *Galaxy cluster
NGC 6822* isn't much fun to say, but would anyone
want to continue the candy-bar series, calling something
bigger than the mind can conceive a *Chunky* or
an *Almond Joy*?

The scholarly Linnaeus &ldquo;ransacked his Latin&rdquo; for
his thousands of labels.  What have today's scientists
left to ransack?  I know they're running dry when I
read (in the March *Science 86*) the names they propose
for a new sixty-atom molecule resembling a seamed
soccer ball or a geodesic dome: *carbosoccer, soccerene*,
and *Buckminsterfullerene*.  Perhaps humanists can
help, even as their own literature pales.  Clearly, science
terminology has become too important and too
much fun to be left to scientists alone.  I propose that
humanists—with radiant exitance and Perfect Cosmological
Principle—move in and save the day.


#### EPISTOLA {John Henrick}

Apropos Richard Lederer, in &ldquo;Words That Don't
Look Right,&rdquo; [XII,2]:

>If your work has been called *meretricious*,  
Or you're offered a job *adventitious*,  
Or if in recent days  
You've received *fulsome* praise,  
Better go look those words up—they're vicious!

*[John Henrick, Seattle, Washington]*

## What Do You Call a Person from...?
*Robert R. Rasmussen, Arcadia, California*

When I first studied Spanish, I was disappointed
to learn that there is no rule for
deriving a word from a place name that identifies
inhabitants of that place.  Often the suffix -*no* is used:
*Mexicano, Cubano, Colombiano*.  But then so is -*ense*,
as in *Nicarag&uuml;ense, Sonorense, Londinense*.  Sometimes
-*&ntilde;o* is used, as in *Puertorrique&ntilde;o, Salvadore&ntilde;o*,
and *Lime&ntilde;o*.  There are other endings as well.  For
example, -*&eacute;s*, as in *Japon&eacute;s* and *Franc&eacute;s*.  Still others
exist that seem to have no reason for being: *Guatemalteco*
and *Ecuatoriano*.

I thought that English is so much more systematic.
But upon reflection, perhaps not.  English is no
less puzzling and capricious than Spanish.  And this
whole question of naming someone from a particular
place is more complex than I had at first imagined.

Certainly those of us who try to systematize the
language know that there are rules for creating a
name for a person from the name of a place, but these
rules are all too plentiful and interchangeable.  Commonly
we have -*ian*, from the Latin -*(i) anus* meaning
'pertaining or belonging to,' as a suffix for words ending
in -*a* or -*on*.  Thus we have *Canadian, Philadelphian,
Floridian, Washingtonian*, and *Oregonian*, to
name a few.  Sometimes, however, we use only -*n* for
words ending with -*a* or most consonants: *Texan*,
*Nevadan, Coloradan, Kansan*.  Still a third way is the
-*er* suffix, coming through the Middle English -*ere* or
-*er* from the Old English meaning 'a person who is a
native,' as in *New Yorker*.  At the same time, we may
use -*ite*, from Middle English through Old French and
Latin from Greek -*it(&emacr;s)* meaning 'a native of an area'
most commonly for words ending in *d, f, g, l, m, n, r,
s*, or *y: New Jerseyite*, *Berkeleyite, Wyomingite*.  People
from Berkeley used to call themselves *Berkeleyans*,
but they switched many years ago.  H.L. Mencken,
writing in 1936, referred to the -*ite* ending as a &ldquo;hideous
suffix.&rdquo;  Still, it is charming to hear *Carmelites*, as
the residents of Carmel, California, call themselves.
The -*ite* ending is common in the Bible: *Hittites*,
*Moabites, Israelites*.  The descendants of Abraham are
called Israelites until their return from the Babylonion
Captivity; after that, with the Northern Kingdom
destroyed, they are referred to as Jews, with an occasional
reference to &ldquo;people of the house of Israel&rdquo; or
&ldquo;children of Israel.&rdquo;  There is a strong religious significance
to the word *Israelite*.  When Israel proclaimed
itself a sovereign state in 1948, the word *Israeli* came
into being, the -*i* suffix coming from the Latin and
denoting possession.  *Israeli* is a political word only,
without the religious implications of *Israelite*.

With a few words naming places outside the
United States we use the -*ish* element, derived through
Middle English from Old English -*isc* meaning
'belonging to,' as in *British, English*, and *Welsh*.  It is
curious we use *English* to mean all of the citizens of
England and *Englishman, Englishmen, English-woman*,
or *Englishwomen* to identify the people.  Similarly,
*Welsh* stands for all the people of Wales, and
*Welshman* or *Welshwoman* is used to speak of just
one.  Then too the *British* is a collective noun, while
*Britisher* or *Briton* refers to a particular one.  We cannot
use *Englisher* or *Britishman*.  But when we cross
the Atlantic, we find that a person from New England
is not a *New Englishman* but a *New Englander*.

Most cities that end in -*on* will use the -*ian* suffix
to name their inhabitants.  Then London should yield
*Londonian*.  The word seems to support the image
the world has of England as being formal and somewhat
aloof.  But no.  They are *Londoners*.  And as with
*New Yorker*, the word suggests a business-like, no-nonsense
quality, getting straight to the pith and core,
as it were.

But Burbank, California, made famous by the
television industry, chooses not to have a name for its
citizens, even though *Burbanker*, after *New Yorker*,
has a hard-hitting, straightforward sound, and *Burbankian*
would suggest old-world charm, handsome
princes dancing gracefully with beautiful princesses in
large ballrooms with vaulted ceilings and crystal chandeliers.
But the newspapers in the area often use *Burbank
man*.  A headline might read BURBANK MAN
INJURED IN CRASH.

While the Boston Celtics dismantled the Houston
Rockets, the Boston fans appeared more like *Bostoners*
than *Bostonians*.  At the same time, the *Houstonians*—
for that is what they call themselves in Houston,
though the word is certainly not so familiar as Bostonian—acted
more like *Houstoners*.  Also, residents of
Galveston call themselves *Galvestonians*, the word
seeming incongruous with the Texas image.

Another rule tells us that words ending in -*o* will
add -*an* to create a word naming inhabitants: *Chicagoan,
Ohioan*.  But in California there are a number of
cities ending in -*o* and for these, that is not the way it
is done.  Rather, we have *San Diegan, San Franciscan*,
*Palo Altan, San Matean*.

During the World Cup of Soccer we heard both
*Argentinian* and *Argentine*.  During the Falklands War
one linguist explained that *Argentine* is closer to the
Spanish, and *Argentinian* is in the manner of the English.
This means that one could tell whose side one was
on simply by noting which word was used.

The citizens of Los Angeles call themselves *Angelinos*,
or *Angelenos*.  H.L. Mencken claimed the
word was spelled *Angeli&ntilde;os* but the press had dropped
the tilde because it was difficult to set in type.  He
showed the phonetics to be an-gel-EE-no, but a tilde
would make the word an-gel-EE-nyo, which is never
heard in Los Angeles.  Since the word ends in -*s, Los
Angelesian* is possible.  Thank God it is not used.

Things seem to be confused in Oklahoma.  People
outside the state often use *Oklahomian*, but within the
state they use *Oklahomian*, which follows one of the
rules quite nicely.

El Salvador falls victim to many errors.  Several
years ago, several *Salvadorans* perished in the intense
heat of the Sonoran Desert in northern Mexico and
southern Arizona.  The reporter who first relayed the
story used *Salvadorian*, a common but nonstandard
form of the word.  The first news releases on television
repeated that form, but by the time the evening newscasts
carried the story, the change had been made.  Yet
both *Ecuadoran* and *Ecuadorian* are accepted.  Peru
changes totally, to *Peruvian*, which is in the style of
the Spanish *Peruviano*.

The citizens of Kansas call themselves *Kansans*.
This seems much better than *Kansasians*, which is possible;
but with the accent on the second syllable, the
word does not sound complimentary.  Residents of
Arkansas used to call themselves *Arkansayers*, but now
they call themselves *Arkansans*.

In Idaho, the state university used to prefer
*Idahovan*, but *Idahoan* is more common.  And in Moscow,
Idaho, the state university preferred *Moscovite*,
but *Moscowite* and *Moscovian* are in general usage,
with *Moscowite* being more popular.

Jonathan Swift, writing in 1726 in *Gulliver's
Travels*, contributes some magnificent place names for
us.  In the land of Lilliput, the citizens call themselves
*Lilliputians*, but they could just as easily have called
themselves *Lilliputites* or *Lilliputers*.  And Swift gives
us the land of Brobdingnag with its *Brobdingnagians*,
and not, heaven save us, *Brobdingnaggers* or *Brobdingnagites*.
And the people of Glubbdubdrib, Swift
mercifully calls *the people of Glubbdubdrib*.  He refers
to another nation charmingly as the *country of the
Houyhnhnms*.

Citizens of Liverpool are *Liverpudlians*.  And for
many countries in Europe, the hapless student simply
must learn each one: Holland, *Hollander* or *Dutch;*
France, *French;* Ireland, *Irish*, etc.  Someone learning
English can, at best, make an educated guess based on
other similar words, but it is often wrong.

One may conclude that the rules are helpful and
uniform in many cases, but at the same time, there are
many, many exceptions.  The names that inhabitants
call themselves in a region are derived from local tastes
and traditions, and are often not formed to conform to
rules gleaned from many examples.  The local press
may be a leader here.  But often, residents will not
allow themselves to be led.  For instance, here in the
United States some have balked at the word *American*,
because both continents bear the name: *American*
can refer to anyone on these two continents.  So, to
distinguish the people of the United States from those
of other nations, there was a movement to use *Unisian*
or *United Statesian*, and even *Columbard*, but these
words never caught on.  One suspects that if the media
used these terms exclusively, one would hear them
only in the media, and citizens of the United States
would staunchly stick to *American*.

In short, people will think for themselves.  Burbank's
citizenry will not accept *Burbankian*.  Inhabitants
of San Francisco will not call themselves *San
Franciscoans*.  New Englanders will never agree to
*New English*.  And residents of Los Angeles will not
consent to *Los Angelesians*.  It is this brand of selfdetermination
that has forged a world of individualists
and at the same time fostered a diversification we have
all come to appreciate and admire.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;J. McG—, a former trooper with the Household Cavalry,...
admitted stealing a ceremonial state helmet valued
at &pound;1500 from Knightsbridge Barracks and dishonestly
handling its chinstrap and rosettes....&rdquo; [From *The Times*,
31 May 1985, p. 3.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Consent to Medical Treatment by the Mentally Ill.&rdquo;
[Headline in *The Lancet*, February 9, 1985.  Submitted by
Dr. Eugene G. Laforet, Newton Lower Falls, Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Pau Verg&oacute;'s St. Anthony of Padua, c1495, features
tempura and tooled gold on wood.&rdquo;  [From *TWA Ambassador*,
April 1985.  Submitted by Bernard and Masha Schweitzer, Los Angeles.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the golden bowl... is surrounded by the figurines
of Faith, Hipe and Charity...&rdquo; [From *The Times*,
July 4, 1985, p.1.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We will oil your sewing machine and adjust the tension
in your home for $1.00.&rdquo;  [Heard on Radio KBOR in
Brownsville, Texas on June 5, 1985.  Submitted by Max R.
Tyner, McAllen, Texas.]

## Naming-Day in Eden
*Nehemiah H. Behr, Ramat Gan, Israel*

And he called the name of that place Beth-El, but the name
of the city was Luz at the first.—Genesis 28:19

There is a Puyallup in Washington State, as well
as a Queets.  There is a Poth and a Dublin in
Texas.  Oklahoma has a Cement and a Swink, while
North Carolina has a Zap.  Montana has a Yaak, and
Oregon has a Talent as well as a Drain.  To come
nearer to my theme, New Hampshire has a Lebanon
and Maryland has a Zion.  These and many more can
be found in a few minutes' stroll through the Index to
any good road atlas of the U.S.A.

The British Isles, too, have their share of quaint
and curious town names.  What about Beer and
Bunny, Bun and Dun, Hoo and Wye, Hosh and Jump?
Each is a separate town or village.  Then there is Muff
in Northern Ireland and Marazion in Cornwall, also
known as Market Jew.  Perhaps it is as well that Fighting
Cocks in the North of England is well away from
Fighting Cocks Crossroads in the State of Eire.  And
one wonders whether the people of Nasty in Hertfordshire
would prefer to change with Nutts Corner in
Northern Ireland?

Toponomy can be as addictive as Scrabble, and
many readers of VERBATIM are probably devotees.  For
those who are not, I offer the idea without charge.  But
these names no doubt have their roots in local American
and British history.

A different task faced the State of Israel, and its
predecessor, the Zionist movement, when called upon
to find names first for dozens and later hundreds of
new towns and villages, scattered over the map of
Palestine, &ldquo;from Dan to Beersheba&rdquo; and points further
south.  This could not be left to private enterprise,
however well-meaning, so as far back as 1925 a
Place Names Committee was established; it was first
attached to the Keren Kayemeth Leisrael (Jewish
National Fund), and it is now in the Office of the
Prime Minister of the State of Israel.  It is composed of
geographers, historians, and scholars in various fields
who follow certain principles:

(1)  Historical: If a new settlement is on or near the site
of a place known from the time Israel was established
in the land, as shown in the Bible or elsewhere, the
ancient name is revived.

(2)  Commemorative: Some unusually important event
or person in national or Zionist or general Jewish
history may be the source of a name.

(3)  Symbolical: The new name may be based on the
character of the settlement, or an event in its life, or
some natural feature in the surroundings.

Guided by these broad ideas, the map of Israel has
been able to avoid some of the stranger names we have
seen in Britain and the U.S.A.; and the names
selected, in their modern Hebrew forms, create a
remarkable mosaic of history, geography, botany, and
other features.

Obviously, the Bible has provided much of the
source material, for the early settlers, who came to
Palestine from the 1880s, even though they were not
all religious, were familiar with the Bible.  So the first
agricultural school, opened near Jaffa by a French
Jew, Charles Netter, in 1870, is called Mikveh Yisrael,
from the verse in Jeremiah 14:8, &ldquo;O Hope of Israel, its
deliverer in time of trouble.&rdquo;

Petach Tikva was set up in 1880 by a group of
Jews from Jerusalem, and means 'gate of hope.'  They
wanted to buy some land near the traditional site of
the Valley of Achor, and took the name from Hosea
2:17, &ldquo;And I will give her vineyards from thence, and
the valley of Achor 'troubling' for a gate of hope.&rdquo;  But
the purchase fell through.  So they bought another
tract of hill and swamp, nearer the coastal plain, and
opened their &ldquo;gate of hope&rdquo; there, instead, and it is
now a thriving township for the region.

Perhaps one of the most surprising features of the
new names is the extensive use of acronyms, still
within the above principles.  Hebrew, both classical
and modern (which is a direct development of the former),
has a long history of acronyms under other
names, such as Notarikons and acrostics, and in many
forms, such as the names of famous rabbis or their
works, numbers, dates of the month and year, etc.
Many of these have been incorporated into the names
of new settlements.  But Israel has also known the loss
of many settlers, in wars and other troubles, and some
of their initials have been woven into names for places
settled by their friends.  Thus, Neve Ativ is a *moshav*
'cooperative village' on the Golan Heights, near the
borders of Syria and Lebanon, which operates ski
facilities on Mount Hermon.  The name is an acronym
of *A*vraham, *T*uvia, *Y*air and *B*enyamin, four soldiers
who fell in the fighting for the Golan.  So too, Avnei
Etan, a moshav in South Golan, is an acronym of the
initials of other soldiers who died in Israel's wars.

Further south a *kibbutz* 'communal settlement,'
Netiv Ha-Lamed H&eacute; bears a numerical acronym in its
name, for the letters Lamed-H&eacute; stand for 35.  It commemorates
35 soldiers, led by Danny Mass, who set
out in 1948 from the coastal plain in an attempt to cut
through the hills and relieve the besieged settlers of the
Etzion Bloc; but they were discovered and fell after a
fierce battle near the site of the present settlement.
Givat Hashelosha 'the hill of the three' is named for an
earlier episode.  In World War I three Jewish labourers
were executed by the Turks (who then ruled the country)
on charges of espionage.  Ma&#92;?&#92;aleh HaHamisha
'the hill of the five' is a collective settlement near Jerusalem,
named for five of its members who were killed
near there during the disturbances in 1938.  Dorot, a
kibbutz in the south, is an acronym of three names:
*Dov*, *Rivka* and *Tirza*.  Dov Hos was a labor leader
and pioneer, killed with his wife and daughter in a
road accident.

Other settlements bear the initials or acronyms of
figures in recent or earlier Zionist history.  The main
airport of Israel is known as Natbag, or *Namal Teufa*
*Ben-Gurion*.  Givat Hen is a moshav, the initials of
which are the first names of *Haim Nahman Bialik*, the
foremost Hebrew poet of modern times.  Yitav is a kibbutz
in the Jordan valley, named for Yad *Yitzhak
Tab*enkin, a Labor party leader.  Nearby is a statue in
the form of the Hebrew letters nun dalet, which symbolize
54, to commemorate those killed here in a helicopter
crash during Army training in 1977.  Mitzpeh
Aviv is one of the new hilltop outposts in Galilee, and
is an acronym of *Ab*raham *Y*aakov *B*raver, a veteran
teacher and geographer, whose maps and books
taught many of today's leaders.

Pa&#92;?&#92;am&eacute; Tashaz 'the footsteps of the year 5707' is
a curious &ldquo;date acronym.&rdquo;  The name commemorates a
lightning settlement operation in the desert of the
Negev, when eleven outposts were set up together, in
October 1946, which fell in the year 5707 of the
Hebrew calendar.

Kerem Maharal, in the foothills near Haifa, goes
even further back in history, for this is the &ldquo;vineyard
of Maharal,&rdquo; the acronym of the name of the famous
Rabbi Judah Loew of Prague, who died in 1609; he
was a Talmudic scholar, a moralist, and mathematician,
whose statue stands (or stood) at the entrance to
the Prague Town Hall.

Some place names commemorate rabbis or their
works, and this is true of the Kibbutz Hafetz Hayyim,
on the coastal plain.  Founded by religious pioneers of
Poalei Agudat Yisrael, it bears the name of Rabbi
Israel Meir HaKohen, better known simply as the
&ldquo;Hafetz Haim,&rdquo; after the title of his book of that
name; it treats of the dangers of slander and tale-bearing,
as in the verse in Psalms 34:13, &ldquo;Who is the man
that desireth life, and loveth days that he may see
good therein?  Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
from speaking guile.&rdquo;

Although I have dealt, so far, mainly with Jewish
settlement names, it should not be thought that Israel
is concerned with these alone.  In recent years there is
a movement to persuade the Bedouin Arab tribes, who
live chiefly in the deserts of the south, to abandon
their nomadic tent life and to settle in new towns built
near their tribal areas.  Four of these have been put up
and are now on the map: Tel Sheva, Rahat, Kuseifa,
and Tel Ar&#92;?&#92;oer.

The rulings of the official Names Committee are
usually accepted by the settlers who live in the place:
they themselves often propose a name to the Committee
and get its approval.  But not always.  In 1977 a
group decided to settle near a forest called Um-Tsafa
in the Samarian hills, and took the name Neve-Tzuf,
which might be taken to mean 'Honeytown.'  They had
their reasons: the Hebrew root in this name means
both 'honey' and 'view,' and they have a fine view
from their hill.  Also, they intended to raise bees for
honey.  Indeed, there are some 54 places in the Bible
where honey is mentioned, so the name chosen by
them might have been approved.  But the Committee
thought of the passage in Deuteronomy 32:13, &ldquo;And
He made him to suck honey out of the crag, And *oil*
out of the *flinty* rock.&rdquo;  The Hebrew for 'flint' is
*halamish* (Psalms 114:8).  And in the area are many
olive groves.  So the Names Committee gave the place
the name Halamish, which now appears on official
maps.  The settlers refused to take this &ldquo;hard&rdquo; ruling
and took the matter to the High Court in Jerusalem;
but the learned Justices felt that the opinion of the
experts must prevail.  So the place now has two names,
one official for maps and the post office, and the
other, the settlers' own...

Another somewhat strange story is that of the kibbutz
Ir-Ovot in the Arava, the long rift valley leading
down to the port of Eilat.  It is said to be named after
Oboth, one of the stations mentioned in the wanderings
of the children of Israel in the wilderness (Numbers
21:10-11).  But the location of that place, unlike
those associated with many Biblical names, has never
been determined.  And this spot has been through
many changes of settlers.  The Hebrew word *ov* also
means 'sorcery or magic,' so some wags have connected
the varying fortunes of the place with that
idea....  But of late the settlers have developed a new
branch of light industry: there seems to be an abundance
of warm underground water there, so they are
trying to use it as the basis of a spa, and thus to get out
of the hot water of their financial burdens.

In most of the new settlement names there is
much of the poetry of the Bible, not least that derived
from trees and plants.  Thus Nitzanim 'blossoms'
comes from Song of Songs 2:12, &ldquo;The blossoms
appear... the time of singing is come.&rdquo;  The vine
gave to Kiryat Anavim its name, the olive to Kefar
Zeitim, the almond to moshav Luzit.  And lest you
think that all this savors too much of the past, it is
good to know that a civic-mined businessman has
founded a modern garden town in Galilee and named
it Kefar Veradim, the 'village of Roses.'  Just as Palestine
is in a central position in the hearts of men of
good will all over the world, so the names of its towns
and villages find echoes in the hearts of all men.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This time she was in the audience; Berlioz, contemporary
accounts declare, was at the drums, and every time
their eyes met he beat them with re-doubled fury.&rdquo;  [From
program notes, City of Birmingham (England) Symphony
Orchestra, 14 March 1985.  Submitted by John Ferguson, Birmingham.]

## Iron Language
*Maxey Brooke, Sweeney, Texas*

There is, in the United States, a written language
with a vocabulary of a half million words, complete
with an orthography, a grammar, a syntax, and
an accidence.  Almost everybody knows a few words of
this language.  But those with a complete understanding
are limited to a few thousand.  It is the language of
cattle brands.  The practice of branding cattle for identification
seems to have begun with the Moors in
Africa and carried with them when they invaded
Spain.  The Spanish brought it to the New World.

&#92;?&#92;The early Spanish and Mexican
brands were simply arbitrary marks with
little or no meaning of their own.  Perhaps
the earliest New World cattle
brand was that belonging to Cortez.  It
was simply three crosses.

Most brands consist of letters and/or numbers
along with a few arbitrary signs, such as:

>Bar         &#92;?&#92;     
Slash    &#92;?&#92;  
Rail        &#92;?&#92;     
Bench    &#92;?&#92;  
Two Rails   &#92;?&#92;     
Rafter   &#92;?&#92;  
Stripe      &#92;?&#92;  

The position or structure of a letter determines its
name.

>Tumbling R   &#92;?&#92;   
Running R    &#92;?&#92;  
Lazy R       &#92;?&#92;   
Dragging R   &#92;?&#92;  
Crazy R      &#92;?&#92;    
Swinging R   &#92;?&#92;  
Walking R    &#92;?&#92;   
Rocking R    &#92;?&#92;  
Flying R     &#92;?&#92;

The last two are a bit tricky.  If the are is not touching
the letter, the name changes.  &#92;?&#92; is &ldquo;quarter circle
R,&rdquo; and &#92;?&#92; is &ldquo;R quarter circle.&rdquo;

&#92;?&#92; is simply &ldquo;WR&rdquo; but &#92;?&#92; is &ldquo;WR connected.&rdquo;
&#92;?&#92; is &ldquo;double R&rdquo; and &#92;?&#92; is &ldquo;Box R.&rdquo;

By now you have probably deduced the principal
syntax rule of cattle brands.  Brands are read from left
to right, from top to bottom, and from outside to
inside.  &#92;?&#92;, &#92;?&#92;, &#92;?&#92; are all &ldquo;circle R.&rdquo;

There are a thousand stories about cattle brands.
J. Frank Dobie told one about a renegade long-horn
with a huge DEATH branded on both its sides.  The cantankerous
animal was avoided by men and other cattle
alike.  It wandered alone in the desert for some
twenty years before it disappeared, presumably dead.

A pastime among some cow people is the drawing
of brands in the dirt and challenging others to name
them.  &#92;?&#92; is not too hard; it is &ldquo;H on T.&rdquo;  Logically
&#92;?&#92; should be &ldquo;Flying half circle diamond and a
half,&rdquo; but in reality it is &ldquo;Fleur de Mustard.&rdquo;  This
&#92;?&#92; is not &ldquo;double cross&rdquo; but &ldquo;pigpen.&rdquo;  And because
this brand &#92;?&#92; means absolutely nothing, it is called
&ldquo;Quien sabe,&rdquo; Spanish for 'I don't know.'  Brands that
can be read in two ways can lead to ceaseless
arguments.

One consideration in selecting a brand is; Can
it be easily changed.  &#92;?&#92; could easily become
&#92;?&#92;.  There is a story about a cattle rustler
who stole a herd of IC cattle and changed the brand to
*ICU*.  But before he could dispose of them, they were
stolen from him and the brand changed to *ICU2*.
To prevent this, some ranchers used big brands.

One such was &#92;?&#92; which covered the entire
side of a cow.  It was registered as the &ldquo;pothook&rdquo;
brand, but it was known far and side as the &ldquo;straddle
bug.&rdquo;  The trouble with this approach is that it
decreases the value of the hide.

The *XIT* brand is commonly known as &ldquo;Ten in
Texas.&rdquo;  It is said that this is because the ranch covered
ten counties in West Texas.  In truth it was so designed
because it would be difficult to change.  The owners
were so proud they offered a reward to anyone who
could change the brand so that it could not be recognized.

Naturally, somebody did it with the &ldquo;Star
cross&rdquo; brand.

&#92;?&#92;

Brands lend themselves to puns.  *4D* inevitably
became &ldquo;Ford.&rdquo;  Instead of being &ldquo;Bar circle&rdquo;

—&#92;?&#92; became &ldquo;Bar none.&rdquo;

I had heard the story of &#92;?&#92; (remember, a
two lying on its back is a &ldquo;Lazy 2&rdquo;) a dozen times and
dismissed it as a tall tale.  But a few years ago, just five
miles from where I live, I saw a cow, I am sure it was not
brand.  Since it was only one cow, I am sure it was not
a registered brand, but someone's idea of a practical
joke.

## Turkeys, Bombs, and Other Theatrical Souvenirs
*Stephen E. Hirschberg, Elmsford, New York*

It is the birth of theater: fresh from singlehandedly
slaying a woolly mammoth, Og returns to his cave
and reenacts (and, being human, embellishes) the triumph
for his paleolithic associates; surly grunts emanate
from a rival, the first drama critic.  With such
ancient origins it is not surprising that much of the
theatrical lexicon has been assimilated into our everyday
vocabulary.

The drama of ancient Greece is the senior donor
of such words to English.  Early performances were of
choral dances, with the drama's poetic lines of secondary
importance.  Chanting and moving as a unit, the
chorus would proceed in one direction (movement
called the *strophe*), turn back using the same meter
(the *antistrophe*), and conclude, standing still, in a
different meter (the *epode*).  From the root *strophe*
developed *apostrophe*—a turning aside in the midst of
a speech—more generally, a digression.  An allusion to
these choral movements, the *catastrophe* was the fatal
turning point of a drama.

In the mid-sixth century B.C. the eponymous
Thespis of Icaria, a chorus trainer, revolutionized the
format by separating a single recitiative actor—him-self—from
the chorus.  Today's actors, *thespians*,
aspire to such stardom.  This separation afforded
opportunity for verbal conflict (in Greek, *ag&omacr;n*), a
foundation of modern drama.  The leading character
(now, any leading figure) was the *protagonist*, and the
opposition, *antagonists*.  Complexity of the struggle
was enhanced by the addition of a second actor
*(deuteragonist)* by Aeschylus, and a third *(tritagonist)*
by Sophocles.  The Greeks' word for the stage actor
was *hypokrit&emacr;s* (one who pretends to be what he is
not; thus, *hypocrite*).

Through the 5th century B.C., the Classical Greek
period, all action took place on the circular flat bottom,
the *orch&emacr;stra* (from Gr. *orcheisthai* 'to dance'), of
the bowl-shaped theater.  Musicians occupied seats
adjacent to the *orch&emacr;stra*.  Actors could change masks
and costumes away from the performance area in a
small tent, the *sk&emacr;n&emacr;* (the term later referred to a
wooden partition closing the back of the orchestra to
permit more convenient garb changes and prop storage).
The next century saw the *sk&emacr;n&emacr;* become a more
substantial, flat-roofed structure with doors to the
*orch&emacr;stra*.  It is believed that the actors spoke from the
roof of the *sk&emacr;n&emacr;* while the chorus remained below, in
the *orch&emacr;stra*.  With the extinction of the chorus in the
modern drama, the Greek theater structure has left to
English the *scene* (from *sk&emacr;n&emacr;*), and *orchestra* to
denote both a collection of musical performers (who
occupied the *orch&emacr;stra* after actors and chorus abandoned
it) and the lower section of seats in a theater.

Masks were used to identify characters, show
their emotions, and cope with open-air acoustical
challenges.  They were equipped with megaphone-like
mouth holes in order to project sound better.  The
Latin *pers&omacr;na*—'mask' (probably from *person&amacr;re* 'to
sound through')—gives us *person* for 'any human
being.'

Perhaps the most peculiar of the Greek stage
props was the *m&emacr;chan&emacr;*, a crane used to lower a god
from heaven (*theos ek m&emacr;chan&emacr;s*) to disentangle the
plot and save the day for the hero (and playwright).  In
its non-stage sense, *deus ex machina* is any unexpected
device to resolve a difficult situation.  A kindred term
from the French, *coup de th&eacute;&#92;acap&#92;tre* (a 'sensational sudden
turn in a play'), likewise denotes a surprising turn
of events.

The pragmatic Romans adopted much of the
Greek form.  Modesty was apparently not an attribute
of the Roman actors: the end of a performance was
marked by actors' cries of &ldquo;*Plaudit&emacr;*!&rdquo; 'Applaud!'
Praiseworthy feats still rate our *plaudits*.  What seems
valid invites applause, and hence is *plausible*.

Though the English stage direction *Enter* was
perfectly acceptable to Elizabethan playwrights,
departures were in Latin: *Exit* 'he or she leaves' and
*Exeunt* 'they leave.'  From this Roman heritage is our
off-stage meaning of *exit*.  The *OED* cites the 1607
source *Barley-breake; or a warning for wantons*, &ldquo;so
Much like vnto a Player on a stage...  As one distract
doth exit in a rage.&rdquo;

Roman theater also gave a term for the bragging,
swaggering soldier, *miles gloriosus*.  Titus Maccius
plautus created the eponym *c*.206 B.C. in his comedy,
*Miles Gloriosus*.

The medieval mystery play, characterized by tableaux,
dances, songs and dramatic scenes, was a transitional
form between liturgy and lay drama.  The
plays were presented on a movable stage, a *pageant*
(subsequent embellishments of which included wheels
and a lower-level dressing room), now synonymous
with pomp.  Between the acts of mystery plays might
be inserted a broadly humorous episode based on wild
improbabilities—an *interlude* or *farce* (from the Latin
*farc&imacr;re* 'to stuff [into the program].'  A *farce* thus came
to signify something ludicrous, or an empty show.).  A
related device is *comic relief* (such as Hamlet's ridicule
of Polonius), a break in tension between serious
events.

With the end of the Middle Ages new dramatic
forms were born in Europe.  Sixteenth-century Italy
saw the development of *commedia dell'arte*, in which
troupes of stock characters improvised on plots which
usually involved the amorous entanglements of masters,
servants, mistresses, and confidantes.  Eponyms
emerged from the cast: Pantalone, a lustful Venetian
merchant identified by his tight trousers (from which
*pantaloons* and pants); Zanni, a ludicrous buffoon
(thus, *zany*), servant to a charlatan; Arlecchino, another
buffoon servant with tights which were parti-colored
(so *harlequin*, from the French for this name,
means 'bright and multicolored'); and Soubrette, the
coquettish lady's maid and intrigante (whence *soubrette*
'any frivolous or flirtatious young woman').

Melodrama evolved as a distinct genre in France
in the 18th century.  It was characterized by elaborate
action, dialogue, spectacle, suspense, and sentiment
(thus, *melodramatic*).  In Germany late in the century
arose the *Sturm und Drang* (&ldquo;Storm and Stress&rdquo;)
movement, opposing established society and featuring
extreme nationalism and impetuosity of style and diction.
Its name came from the 1776 drama *DerWirrwarr,
oder Sturm und Drang*, by Friedrich Maximilian
von Klinger.  The movement ended in 1784, but
*Webster's III* records *Sturm und Drang* in English
meaning 'turmoil.'

The *curtain-raiser* (consequently a preliminary
to an event) appeared in the late 19th century as
a concession to theater latecomers.  It was a short
play presented at the program's start so that the featured
presentation would not be interrupted by the
unpunctual.

Producers of vaudeville shows stimulated audience
interest with the idea of amateur night.  In the
course of the evening the worst of the performers
would be jerked off stage by a hook on a long pole.
Vaudeville may be dead, but to *give the hook* still
means to 'discharge for incompetence.'

With the significant exception of *commedia
dell'arte*, the theater moved indoors with the Renaissance.
From their building plans as well as their visual
and acoustic properties the playhouses of the Renaissance
and subsequent eras gave us phrases now in
commonplace use.  The least expensive seats were the
highest ones, in the gallery, occupied by those presumed
to be lacking the artistic sophistication brought
by wealth (thus *gallery* was identified with the general
public).  To *play to the gallery*, originally by overacting
to appeal to the taste of its denizens, is to 'curry
favor with the masses by crude devices.'

What actors require is visibility on stage.  Even
theatrical *stars* (so called because of the brilliance of
their performances) need to be *in the spotlight*.  In
1816 Thomas Drummond invented the limelight, a
spotlight which provided brilliant white illumination
by the incandescence of calcium oxide (lime).  Used in
theaters from 1837 until supplanted by Edison's electric
lights in the 1880s, its legacy is the wish of performers
and public figures to be *in the limelight*.
Occupying *center stage* assures good lighting for the
actor and unobstructed sight lines for his devotees in
the audience.

An actor trying to force attention on himself
might stand in the upstage (the rearward part of the
stage) while engaged in dialogue, thus forcing a fellow
performer to turn his back on the audience.  *Upstaging*
is a form of *stealing the show* (another is *forcing out of
the spotlight*), or practising one-upmanship.  The
extreme of stage attention-getting is the inept though
flamboyant overactor, the *ham*.  In general use indicating
a ridiculous or obnoxious exhibitionist, the
word is a relic of the minstrel shows.  In these a *hambone*
was a performer in blackface overacting dialect
routines (as in the song, &ldquo;The Ham-Fat Man&rdquo;).  Testifying
to the qualities of the ham, *hamming up* means
'wrecking by ill-advised, extravagant behavior.'

The acoustics of the theater must permit all the
playwright's lines to be audible.  A *stage whisper* is in
the script—a 'whisper intended to be overheard.'
Some stage talk is not meant for theatergoers' ears—
for example, a *prompt* for an actor who forgets a line.

Off-stage left and right are players ready to *take
cues* for their entrances.  They are anticipated but
unseen, *waiting in the wings*.  An actor called to
undertake a part on short notice might study it while
waiting thus and be prepared to *ad lib*; such an effort
with little preparation is *winging it*.

Preparation of the theater includes *setting the
stage*.  A *trompe l'oeil* painted curtain at the back of
the stage, establishing location, is a *backdrop*.  What is
invisible at the theater (hence private) is *behind the
scenes*, or *backstage*.  The stage manager has responsibility
for all physical aspects of the production.  He
generally is off-stage (the Stage Manager in Thornton
Wilder's *Our Town* is a notable exception).  By back
formation, to *stage-manage* is to arrange from behind
the scenes.

Non-theatrical English has assimilated from the
stage a number of terms indicating success or failure.
Something accepted by the common man is said to
*play* [well] *in Peoria* (Peoria, Illinois—a reflection of
the recepetion of road-company productions by smalltown
audiences with middle-American taste).  *Box
office* 'success or drawing power' may be more likely
with a star to *fill the bill* 'meet requirements'; the
phrase refers to the need for large-type lettering of the
featured player's name to occupy space on the printed
program, or bill.  A 'major success,' in a vaudeville
program, for instance, is a *tough act to follow*.

On the other hand, the show may be a 'total
disaster,' a *turkey* (theatrically, an entertainer whose
attributes are dullness, poor writing, inferior production,
and financial failure).  Some turkeys do not have
the sense to die quietly, but 'conspicuously fail'—they
*bomb*.  [Though *bomb* in England is equivalent to
*smashit* in America.—Ed.]

Dramatic characters, even those with minor
parts, live outside their roles as eponyms.  Shakespearean
creations who have gone from proper to common
nouns include *Shylock* 'an exacting creditor'; *Romeo*
capitalized, a 'male lover,' lower-case, a 'kind of man's
slipper'; *Juliet* a 'type of woman's slipper'; and *Benedick*
(a newlywed in *Much Ado About Nothing*),
spelled *benedict* or *benedick*, is a 'newly married man,
in particular, one who had a long bachelorhood.'
*Falstaffian* individuals resemble the fat, jovial, dissolute
Sir John Falstaff of *Henry IV* and *The Merry
Wives of Windsor*.  A blundering official may be called
a *Dogberry* (the foolish constable in *Much Ado About
Nothing*, who says [Act IV, Scene 2], &ldquo;though it be not
written down, yet forget not that I am an ass.&rdquo;).

Other notable eponyms from plays are *Lothario*
(a gay blade, in Nicholas Rowe's *The Fair Penitent*),
*malapropism* (Mrs. Malaprop had this proclivity in
Richard Sheridan's *The Rivals*), *Mrs. Grundy* (a narrowminded,
intolerant person like the unseen neighbor
in Thomas Morton's *Speed the Plough*), *Tartuffe*
(a religious hypocrite, like the hero of Moli&eacute;re's
*Tartuffe*), and *Peter Pan* (one young at heart, though
old in years—the title character in Sir James M. Barrie's
play.  The name is also attached to a style of collar
for women and children.).  In Susanna Centlivre's *A
Bold Stroke for a Wife*, Simon Pure, impersonated by
another, proves his identity in the end; *simon-pure*
thus denotes unqualified authenticity.

Let us not leave this subject without mention of
the utility of theatrical terminology in philosophical
discourse.  We offer this illustrative fragment from a
recently discovered dialogue:

GLAUCON: What, then, is the fate of Man, Socrates?  Is
it death and nothingness?

SOCRATES: Assuredly, Glaucon, it's curtains for us.

GLAUCON: What you say rings true, Socrates.  But what
of Evil?  Can it be that Evil exists without logical
cause, even as balls bounce and cookies crumble?

SOCRATES: Certes, Glaucon.  That's showbiz!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Bird-watching chart/map... poster of tips for attracting
birds with migration map on back side.&rdquo;  [From the
*National Geographic* 1985 *Publications Catalog*.  Submitted
by Jane Walsh, Berkeley, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It isn't going to be any one person's park....  I think
dogs are wonderful.  But they've got to be kept on leashes,
like everyone else.&rdquo;  [From an interview in the *Los Angeles
Times*, March 1, 1985.  Submitted by Pamela Jones, Sepulveda,
California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Nationally reknown literary counsultant....  There Is
No Substitute for Excellence.&rdquo;  [From *Children, Naturally*,
Spring 1985, front page.  Submitted by Alexandra Urdang, New York City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our manager was held hostage at gun point for six
hours in a police auction.&rdquo;  [From the May 31, 1985 issue of
Sh'ma.  Submitted by Claire Lee, Cincinnati, Ohio.]

## Images, Ornithology, and Jargon in the Defense Establishment: Some Reflections on a Refractory Subject
*Amrom H. Katz, Los Angeles*

Examples of military strategic jargon are found
frequently in editorials, articles, and speeches
dealing with defense, arms control, and strategy.  I
had to redefine many of these terms so that I could
understand them.  A few examples follow.

Consider *deterrence*.  This term is usually applied
to the military relationship between the Soviet Union
and the United States.  One is not sure that deterrence
is working.  On the other hand, if a war starts, it is
clear that deterrence has ceased.  The end of deterrence
is conspicuous but while some think deterrence
is going on, others will not agree.  Deterrence is arguable
and it is not very well understood.  Were we to
draw up a contract and say, &ldquo;We've deterred you.
signed, the United States,&rdquo; and then persuade the
Soviets to countersing it saying &ldquo;Yes, we've been
deterred&rdquo; that would be deterrence.  But we have no
examples where both sides have signed such a declaration
or even agreed verbally.  Deterrence has been
principally a matter of unilateral declarations.  This
has led me to define deterrence as follows:

>Deterrence is threatening to do something to
somebody if he does something to you, which,
when he does not do it to you, you claim he has
been deterred, whereas he may never have had it
in mind in the first place.

Another widely discussed topic is *limited war*.
There have been many different definitions of limited
war, most of them containing some limitation with
respect to ferocity or to the kinds of weapons used.
Some raise questions about sanctuaries, as in Vietnam
and in Korea.  No definition seemed to cover all cases,
so I made my own definition:

Limited war is a war that is somewhere else.

Let's think about that for a moment.  If limited war is
a war that is somewhere else, when you are at the
place where it is, it is not somewhere else.  It is right
there.  For most of the wars that have been called limited
wars, the people who live where the war is being
fought do not believe that it is a limited war.  By some
current standards, World War II was a limited war.
One would be poorly received, or worse, if he were to
explain to the French, the Germans, or the English
that World War II was a limited war.  The relativistic
nature of my definition is clear.

Let us turn now to *preventive* war and *preemptive*
war.  Strategists and columnists use these words, as
do presidents, senators, and congressmen.  Einstein is
alleged to have defined preventive war as &ldquo;anticipatory
retaliation.&rdquo;  What is the difference between preventive
war and preemptive war?  I have produced a
pair of definitions that clarify the matter for me, and
may for you, too.

>*Preventive* war is a war, which if you wait
awhile, you can still have it.
>
>*Preemptive* war, on the other hand, is a war such
that if you wait awhile, it is a second strike.

In other words, preemptive war is the last possible
preventive war: If you wait anymore, the other
side has gone first.

As an example of the semantic traps lying around
the political landscape, let me describe my position on
Vietnam when the national debate was at its height in
the late 1960s.  I wanted the United States to get out of
Vietnam and to stay out.  I wanted the shooting to
stop.  I wanted the Vietnamese free of outside influences.
I wanted them to be free to make up their own
minds on their government.  How does that sound for a
position?  Well, the trouble with that position (and
that kind of statement) is that it was probably held
simultaneously by President Johnson, Senators Eugene
McCarthy and Barry Goldwater, Women's Strike for
Peace, the Federation of American Scientists, President
of North Vietnam Ho Chi Minh, and President of
South Vietnam Thieu, to list but a few names.

That kind of position statement, one that carries
with it (seemingly) precise prescriptions but has
imprecise applicability, is a statement without content.
If such a disparate a set of people could agree on
that statement, it is not a useful statement, but a position
without program, policy, or plan for getting
there from here.  Watch out for similar statements
about today's problems.  Statements that are without
prescriptions and a road map seem to me to be very
much like standing on the south rim of the Grand
Canyon, looking across at and focusing on the north
rim, thus missing the entire Canyon.  Vietnam is,
unfortunately, not the only booby trap on the political
landscape.  Arms control is probably the most contentious,
complex, and political subject before the public.
I leave it as an exercise for the student to flush out and
then to flesh out some more examples.

Every specialized group, whether sociologists,
educationists, psychologists, or strategists, has its own
peculiar vocabulary, or jargon.  One function of jargon
is to enable swift communication between experts,
many of whom are self-appointed or self-anointed.
Another main use of jargon is to raise barriers against
outsiders.  The outsider must run an obstacle course
over the words being used before being admitted to
the field.

Discussions of defense, arms control, and deterrence
provide many opportunities for the skillful use of
jargon and the stimulation of images.  For example,
consider *arms race.*  This phrase has been employed for
so long that it has pre-empted the field, making it
hard to introduce any other image.  The image of a
race usually involves a starting line, an agreed starting
time, rules to run by, a winner, and at least one loser.
Ordinarily, the image conjured up by the *arms race* is
that of a 100-yard dash.  Typically, spelling out the
details of the image proves the error in its choice.  Suppose
that before we adopted that image we had drawn
the metaphor of a *crawl*, a *jog*, a *walk* or a *steeple-chase.*
Some people, depending on their viewpoint
about the defense budget, can point to the *arms race,*
saying, &ldquo;It's nothing but a walk.&rdquo;  They could add that
the percentage of our GNP going into strategic arms is
steadily decreasing.  If we really need and demand an
image, I would suggest a different one.  The so-called
arms race to me more closely resembles *a continuous
track meet*, a never-ending track meet, with the
results being posted every once in a while.  We might,
for example, give the Soviets some points for winning
the shotput and the United States for winning the
archery contest.  These two events correspond to the
Soviets' greater throw-weight (of their missiles) and to
the (presumed) greater accuracy of the U. S. missiles.
Moreover, in a track meet, somebody wins this event,
somebody wins that event, and the team scores may
come out about the same.  In this Grand Track Meet,
from time to time there may be more than two contestants,
which can affect the scoring.

One of the most interesting examples (unfortunately
still with us) of the sterilization and polarization
of discourse in the United States derives from the
dichotomous and forced sorting of people into hawks
or doves.  We are treated and expected to react like litmus
paper: red or blue; acid or base.  We are forced
into making a choice.  In my experience, I find that
using such labels is (all too frequently) a substitute for
thought.  They illustrate the increasing tendency to
talk in code language, using flag words and overdrawn
and stark caricatures.  Most national problems
have some fine grain, some subtleties, some shading of
realities other than black and white.  Complex and
important choices are reduced to black and white cartoons:
yes, no; in, out; for, against.

Except for specialized symbols (bulls and bears,
elephants and donkeys) images based on mammals
haven't caught on.  The bird family, however, furnishes
lasting imagery.  I have come to believe that
these images work not only for individuals but for
nations as well.  But we must enlarge the choices.

Consider the spectrum of possibilities furnished
by the birds.  While you read the list, think of friends,
colleagues, enemies, or nations to whom they could
apply.  We have, besides hawks and doves, eagles,
owls, crows, buzzards, dodos, ostriches, parrots,
chickens, shrikes, mockingbirds, vultures, yellowbellied
sapsuckers, coots, loons, pigeons, bustards,
grouse, titmice, and quail, just to mention a few.
There are many more available images; consult your
nearest bird-watcher.  However, once launched and
adopted, an image conditions the description.  Instead
of being a mere symbol of what you are talking about,
the images often determines and becomes the very
thing itself.

This short tour may embolden the reader to question
any communicator, great or otherwise, who
attempts to paper over genuine problems with jargon
or images.  Remember that the images being projected
on the screen cannot be changed merely by attending
the theater.  You have to pay attention to the projector
and to the slide being projected.  And you must see to
changing the slide in the projector.


#### EPISTOLA {John F. Salz}

This is in regard to your review of Mr. Steinmetz's
book on Yiddish [XII, 4].  The first thought that came
to my mind reading the review was—you're definitely
not into Yiddish.

For starters, *enjoy* is definitely not Yiddish.
Maybe a Jewish college student waiting tables in a
California Health Food Bistro might say &ldquo;Hi, my
name is Bruce; I'll be your waiter for the evening.
Enjoy.&rdquo;  But even *that* scenario is unlikely if the kid is
really Jewish and not *formisched* (i.e., 'mixed up').

As to your statement that Yiddish owes its dissemination
to New York publishing houses and other New
York training grounds for Hollywood types.  Well,
maybe.  Still, Yiddish outside Jewish circles is a relatively
new phenomenon, not more than 25 years old.
Before that it was rather uncool to be Jewish, especially
if one wanted a job, or a house in certain neighborhoods,
or membership in clubs.

I think the main dissemination was accomplished
by the *schmatte schleppers* (manufacturers' representatives
in the ready-to-wear industry) about the same
time an anti-discrimination movement in the U.S. was
taking place.  Many of the salesmen who spread
throughout the U.S. promoting their wares originated
from New York.  They used Yiddish words such as
*tineff* for 'shoddy goods,' *goniff* for 'thief,' *mumser* for
an 'unpleasant person' (usually the head merchandise
buyer), *zu viel gelt* for 'too much money,' *schlock* for
'junk,' and so on.  The words caught on with the store
personnel and owners, even in the department
stores—and even with the *goyishe*—i.e., the 'gentiles.'

At trade exhibits and other gatherings of the
*schmatte* industry, Yiddish words became part of the
unwritten trade lexicon.  I think being Jewish became
somewhat in vogue (people I had never suspected—
and had known for many years—admitted to being
Jewish) and Yiddish found its way into conversational
English, especially among the intelligentsia.

Yet, hearing Yiddish from the mouths of gentiles
doesn't always sit well with many Jews, because the
gentile simply does not understand the delicate meanings
of some of those words—words created in the
ghettos of European communities to describe situations,
things, and people unfamiliar to American culture.
As a collector of Jewish humor, I cannot resist
telling good Jewish jokes to my gentile friends—only
to regret it moments later.  They simply do not &ldquo;get
it,&rdquo; although those of Italian heritage often surprise
me with their insight into such humor.

There are many dialects of Yiddish.  For example,
Jews who lived in the German sector of Czechoslovakia
(Sudetenland) all spoke German, most also Yiddish
and Czech.  Their Yiddish was a localized version; but
they also spoke &ldquo;proper&rdquo; Yiddish.  They spoke German
in dialect, but they all could also speak &ldquo;hoch
Deutsch.&rdquo;  And the same with Czech—the dialect of
the region as well as the Prague (classic) Czech.  Surely
a nightmare for a linguist, no?  The moment he opened
his mouth, a stranger could be instantly classified as to
his station in life, his politics, religion, and the reason
for his presence.

So, Mr. Urdang, enjoy... and *Bleib gesund*
('Stay healthy!')

*[John F. Salz, Sausalito, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Simpson}

I was surprised by a comment contained in Barry
Tunick's review of *The Complete Word Game Dictionary*
[XII,2].  Mr. Tunick states that &ldquo;Serious Scrabblers
recognize only one reference work.&rdquo;

This is certainly not the case in Great Britain,
where *Chambers 20th Century Dictionary* is the official
reference dictionary for the U.K. National Scrabble
Championship.

*[John Simpson, W &amp; R Chambers Ltd, Edinburgh]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

In his article about sexist language [XI,1], Richard
Lederer refers to Sterling Eisiminger's observations
on racist language (&ldquo;Colorful Language,&rdquo; [VI,1]), as
reflected in the pejorative use of the word *black*.  The
subject has been with us for some time now.  Over a
dozen years ago, psychiatrist Dr. Alvin Poussaint decried
the demeaning effect of such terms as *blackmail,
black list, black market,* etc., on the black psyche
(*Boston Globe,* 8 November 1971), and I doubt that he
was the first to do so.  Given the unhappy polarization
of the races, I can understand why such negative
expressions stick in the craw, especially when other
colorless terms are available or easily coined.

However, in all objectivity, it should be emphasized
that the roots of this linguistic problem are not
really racist at all, as today's heightened sensitivities
might lead us to believe.  As Mr. Eisiminger rightly
pointed out, in many cultures the world over, black
and white have long been symbolic of evil and good
respectively; probably since man realized that the
dark of night was more conducive to danger and mischief
than the light of day.  And this, with no racial
connotations whatever.

In fact—and this is the essential point—one finds
even among many peoples of color, both in Africa and
the Caribbean, the very same distinctions.  For example,
anthropologist Geoffrey Parrinder, in a discussion
of African witchcraft, explains that &ldquo;some African
peoples themselves use the word *black* in speaking of
(the) evil type of magic.  For all African tribes believe
that there is good magic also, *white* magic.&rdquo;  (*Witch-craft
European and African*, p. 139).  Similarly, any
student of Haitian voodoo—a direct descendant of
West African religion—knows that the evil divinities
of death are characterized as black, while white is the
color of the good divinities of life.  Many other examples,
anthropological and linguistic, could be given.
But we would not accuse the Haitian or African blacks
of racism against themselves on the basis of such associations.

Of course, it must be admitted that the American
black of today has more reason to be sensitive to this
issue than those blacks who live (or lived) in relative
isolation from the white man and his real—not linguistic—racism.
Still, let us not lose perspective.  Racists
there are, aplenty.  But let us not go looking for
more under every innocent adjective.

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alan S. Kaye}

I should like to offer some comments on N. C.
Nahmoud's &ldquo;Landmarks in Arabic&rdquo; [XII,2].  In addition
to errors in diacritics, 'cat' is *gitt, sawt* is 'voice,'
*sum&umacr;w* is 'height' (no accent on the first *u*), etc., the
*spiritus lenis* should be the voiced pharyngeal fricative
(the *spiritus asper*).  Thus awwal = 'howl,' arsh =
'throne.'  It was left out in ajaleh 'speed.'

Also, coincidence explains these similarities; there
are even better ones which Maurice Swadesh pointed
out in his last book: qarn = 'horn,' &#92;?&#92;a =
'three,' etc.  As is well known in comparative-historical
linguistics, even words with very similar phonetic
structures and identical semantic structures are not
necessarily related (for example, English *bad* and Persian
*b&aelig;d* = 'bad' are not related at all, that is, the
resemblance is pure chance, even though English and
Persian are both Indo-European languages).  So Arabic
*qata&#92;?&#92;a* and English *cut* are coincidental just as the
Algonquian pronominal prefixes first person *n*-, second
person *k*-, and third person *w*- match up with Arabic
pronouns and prefixes in verbal morphology perfectly
(and, I might add, with the other Afroasiatic languages),
but by total coincidence (certainly not genetic
relationship and indeed not borrowing or diffusion).

Nahmoud's examples remind me of trying to relate
Arabic *&#92;?&#92;umm* and English *mother*, *&#92;?&#92;ab* and English
*pop, papa*, etc.

*[Alan S. Kaye, California State University, Fullerton]*


#### EPISTOLA {Douglas I. Pirus}

Philip Howard should &ldquo;take care&rdquo; lest his diatribe
against this expression [XII, 3] opens up a can of
worms that has raised the hackles of more pedantic
grammarians than Hippoclides could waggle a leg at.

According to my translation of Herodotus' *The
Histories* (Aubrey de Selincourt), the exchange between
Cleisthenes and Hippoclides was as follows:

>'Son of Tisander,' he cried, 'you have danced
away your wife.'
>
>'I could hardly care less,' was the cheerful reply.

As for me, the parting admonition to &ldquo;take care
(of yourself)&rdquo; makes a lot more sense than *Goodby* or
*Ta Ta*.  I &ldquo;could hardly care less&rdquo; what someone says to
me when parting, &ldquo;so long&rdquo; as it is not something like,
&ldquo;Just you wait till I see you next time.&rdquo;

*[Douglas I. Pirus, Garden Grove, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Cosima V. Lyttle}

In his letter [XII,1] R. Antony Percy mentions the
word *marrowsky* in lower case. J.C. Hotten, in *The
Slang Dictionary* (Chatto &amp; Windus, 1873) includes in
the definition for *medical Greek* &ldquo;the slang used by
medical students at the hospitals.  At the London University
they have a way of disguising English, described
by Albert Smith as the Gower Street dialect,
which consists in transposing the initials of words,
e.g., *poke a snipe* = smoke a pipe; *flutter-by* = butterfly,
etc.  This disagreeable nonsense, which has not
even the recommendation of a little ability in its composition,
is often termed Marrowskying.&rdquo;  The word is
capitalized.

Eric Partridge, in *Slang Today and Yesterday*
(Macmillan, 1954), also refers to &ldquo;Gower Street dialect,
Marrowskying or Morowskying, and Medical
Greek.&rdquo;  All are capitalized.  He gives the earliest date
recorded for each of the four terms as, respectively,
1845, 1850, 1860, and 1855.  He mentions that Ware
defines and spells &ldquo;Mowrowsky... interchange of initial
consonants, by accident or intention, as bin and
jitters for gin and bitters.  Very common, 1840-56.
Brought into fashion by Albert Smith from hospital
life.  Now (1909) chiefly patronized in America.&rdquo;  Ware
further states, &ldquo;A Mowrowsky is often a transfer of
two words, as in *The Taming of the Shrew*, where
Grumio cries, in pretended fright, 'the oats have eaten
the horses!' During the Donnelly discussion (1888)...
an intended satirical mowrowsky was invented by an
interchange of initials... Bakespeare and Shacon.&rdquo;
Ware does not capitalize *mowrowsky.*

Partridge also refers, in his *Slang Dictionary*, to a
&ldquo;supposed origin from a Polish count,&rdquo; but neither he
nor any of the other aforementioned sources were able
to confirm or identify that person.

*[Cosima V. Lyttle, Decatur, Georgia]*


#### EPISTOLA {John B. Rockwell}

Anent your speculation [XII,2] on Greene's *The
Third Man* (and Carol Reed's *The Third Man)* having
a sports (cricket) provenance, I doubt it.  The movie
*The Third Man* had the occasional plot device that
logically required a third man who was unidentified
and who must be found.  This was the American, Harry
Lime, who fled to the Viennese sewers (Greene despises
Americans).  Recall that in connection with the Mac-Lean/
Burgess spy ring in Britain years ago there was a
suspected fourth man who years later turned out to be
Blount, the (late) Keeper of the Queen's Pictures.
(Sorry not to be able to recall the name of the &ldquo;third
man&rdquo; in this notorious instance.)  Here the existence of
a fourth man was a logical necessity—as in Greene's
&ldquo;Entertainment.&rdquo;

*[John B. Rockwell, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {Basil Wentworth}

I refer to Professor Staaks's letter on postpositive
modifiers [XII,2].  It's a pity to disqualify the pun, but
*Pope Pius* does not properly portray a postpositive
modifier.  *Pope* is, of course, a title.  *Pope Pius* belongs
to the family of *Captain Smith* and *Brother John*,
rather than to that of *Captains Courageous* and *Brothers
Karamazov.*

The name *Pius* (which, incidentally, means 'merciful,'
rather than 'pious') reminds one of the story
about the schoolboy who learned that the -*ous* suffix
meant 'full of,' as in *righteous* and *joyous.*

As another example of the postpositive modifier, I
play in a group called &ldquo;Tubas Two&rdquo; (modeled after
&ldquo;Fiddlers Three,&rdquo; of course).  Two other examples
would be *durance vile* and *man alive!* (or *Sakes alive!,*
whatever that might mean).

*Alive* is a rather curious adjective, by the way, in
that it apparently can appear only after the word it
modifies—whether immediately after or separated by
a verb.

*[Basil Wentworth, Bloomington, Indiana]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Goodland}

Eric Winters' apochryphal explanation of *aluminum*
in OBITER DICTA [XII,2] is trivial compared with
(my hazy recollection of) the more veracious one. *Al*
was discovered (to be a metal) and was originally
named by Sir Humphrey Davy as *aluminium*, from
the salt *alum*, following prevailing chemical nomenclature.
Subsequently, this was misspelt as *aluminum*
by Danish physicist Oersted when he isolated the
metallic form.  Can the case therefore be made that the
original and more correct term is *aluminium*, still
prevalent as British English?  Incidentally, doesn't
Canada's &ldquo;mid-Atlantic&rdquo; spelling compromise make
Winters' secretary correct?

*[Robert Goodland, Arlington, Virginia]*


### OBITER DICTA
*Joan D. Freudy, Freeport, New York*

Read any good books lately?  Noticed anything
disturbing about them?  As an inveterate book-a-holic I
experience a euphoric moment whenever the librarian
hands me a shiny-jacketed hard-cover volume which
has been waiting on reserve.  I can hardly wait to start
reading and I anticipate with excitement and enthusiasm
delicious hours of adventure to come.

Sadly, though, I must confess that during the last
few months those relaxing hours have been punctuated
by a series of unwelcome and irritating interruptions.
For, as I read my way along, I encounter with ever-increasing
frequency misspelled, misused or misprinted
words and awkward, inept expressions... a
dismal phenomenon.

Yes, these days the products of our once revered
publishers are liberally sprinkled with mistakes: wrong
spelling, poor phrasing, omissions, incorrect grammatical
constructions—all of which create visual impediments,
diminish the exhilaration of reading a fine
book, and deplorably demean the printed page.  I cite
below a list of obvious errors in the marvelously readable
and enjoyable *And Ladies of the Club* by Helen
Hooven Santmyer—a weighty tome, it is true, but
totally fascinating in its broad-spectrum overview of
small-town America down through the years.  It is
published by G. P. Putnam's Sons, prestigious publishers
since 1838.

As I have found many similar errata in other
current books, I have written letters on the subject to
several publishers.  None took the trouble to answer.
What price computers?  At what cost have we computerized
production?  What has happened to excellence?

We in the United States have always claimed
leadership in technology.  Can we then allow such slipshod,
careless work?  Do we accept the publication of
error-laden material by our foremost publishing
houses?  If we continue to buy these books without
comment or protest, we tacitly sanction defective
products and denigrate the position of our country in
every sphere.

Why not instead make ourselves heard in the market
place?  Let us resolve that from now on we shall
notice and denounce all departures from good usage.
Let us demand, yes, *insist* upon careful screening,
unerring proofreading, top-quality editorial and production
supervision for all the books we read.

*AND LADIES OF THE CLUB*

| *PAGE* | *READS*                                                 | *SHOULD READ*                           |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| 37     | Vigil                                                   | Virgil                                  |
| 42     | wags                                                    | was                                     |
| 76     | whim                                                    | whom                                    |
| 99     | he                                                      | she                                     |
| 135    | wws                                                     | was                                     |
| 182    | not                                                     | now                                     |
| 188    | this                                                    | his                                     |
| 215    | war                                                     | were                                    |
| 215    | should put                                              | should have put                         |
| 306    | come to the help                                        | came to the help                        |
| 323    | henna                                                   | Hanna                                   |
| 357    | peof                                                    | pair of                                 |
| 376    | Waht                                                    | What                                    |
| 389    | One the evening                                         | On the evening                          |
| 390    | Baron munchausen                                        | Baron Munchausen                        |
| 391    | Binney                                                  | Binny                                   |
| 409    | althought                                               | although                                |
| 433    | cannot managed                                          | cannot manage                           |
| 549    | Capain                                                  | Captain                                 |
| 624    | though                                                  | thought                                 |
| 645    | though                                                  | thought                                 |
| 654    | one evening when was late                               | one evening when he was late            |
| 717    | better that Mark                                        | better than Mark                        |
| 722    | I was quite true                                        | It was quite true                       |
| 732    | Barara                                                  | Barbara                                 |
| 794    | go of                                                   | go off                                  |
| 849    | Lugwig                                                  | Ludwig                                  |
| 853    | Buy                                                     | But                                     |
| 859    | went back to standy                                     | went back to stand                      |
| 864    | unkept                                                  | unkempt                                 |
| 873    | judgement                                               | judgment                                |
| 884    | mther                                                   | mother                                  |
| 885    | Nor Jessamine                                           | Nor could Jessamine                     |
| 918    | change you mind                                         | change your mind                        |
| 918    | I won't changed                                         | I won't change                          |
| 921    | her were                                                | he were                                 |
| 943    | pretened                                                | pretend                                 |
| 945    | could no forbear                                        | could not forbear                       |
| 949    | the only Rausch Paul's wife really knew                 | Out of context.  Ellen *is* Paul's wife |
| 949    | Paul's mother had half off                              | Paul's mother had held off              |
| 950    | who enjoys                                              | who enjoy                               |
| 953    | helpless elderly widow                                  | helpless elderly widows                 |
| 961    | rememberance                                            | remembrance                             |
| 965    | thot for myself                                         | than for myself                         |
| 965    | proselyting                                             | proselytizing                           |
| 967    | resemblence                                             | resemblance                             |
| 967    | finer                                                   | finger                                  |
| 969    | the things is                                           | the thing is                            |
| 969    | taking ifs                                              | taking it                               |
| 995    | wating                                                  | waiting                                 |
| 1015   | Kiddy                                                   | Kitty                                   |
| 1017   | what can manage                                         | what we can manage                      |
| 1019   | to all Club meeting                                     | to all Club meetings                    |
| 1026   | resored                                                 | restored                                |
| 1046   | though                                                  | thought                                 |
| 1048   | when he asked                                           | when he asks                            |
| 1051   | off the sleep                                           | off to sleep                            |
| 1054   | When Papa planned, I suppose.  He wanted                | When Papa planned, I suppose he wanted  |
| 1065   | Gara                                                    | Gare                                    |
| 1071   | presure                                                 | pressure                                |
| 1071   | though                                                  | thought                                 |
| 1106   | he father                                               | her father                              |
| 1110   | scence                                                  | scene                                   |
| 1112   | of Jenny                                                | to Jenny                                |
| 1117   | waw                                                     | way                                     |
| 1117   | use                                                     | used                                    |
| 1127   | Waynesobro                                              | Waynesboro                              |
| 1128   | though                                                  | thought                                 |
| 1148   | frist                                                   | first                                   |
| 1149   | She has look in her eyes                                | She has that look in her eyes           |
| 1154   | I you                                                   | If you                                  |
| 1173   | cam                                                     | can                                     |

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Word or Two Before You Go...*](https://www.abebooks.com/Word-Two-Before-Go-Jacques-Barzun/11800343598/bd)
Jacques Barzun, (Wesleyan University Press, 1986), c. 244pp.

I am tempted to refer to Jacques Barzun as a
Simon-pure purist, but I fear that it would need pointing
out that it is John Simon that was being referred
to.  Confronted with a book by Barzun, who is, after
all, an eminent, expressive, articulate writer, I am at
once intimidated (Who dares criticize the Master?)
and gleeful at the prospect of finding slips.  Though
scarcely abundant, they do occur, both in form and
style: for example, after scoring *anecdotage* for, essentially,
its corniness (not allowing for the fact that not
everyone is as well-read or as venerable as he), Barzun
resorts to &ldquo;wall-to-wall carping,&rdquo; which, I submit,
may go as well in casual conversation as the puns he
criticizes but doesn't merit enshrinement in the deathless
text of a Barzun opus.  Criticizing *astrolaw* as a
poor substitute for *space law* (not without justification),
he identifies *astra* as Latin for 'stars'; although it
does appear in Latin (where the word for 'star' is
*stella*), *astra* is really Greek plural (from *&aacute;stron*).
Barzun does not seem to be prejudicial against metaphors
as a race, but he finds *impact* in the sense of
'importance, effect, influence, etc.' reprehensible.  It
may not reflect the most felicitous of writing, but it is
an attempt, however feeble, to break out of the mold.

And talking about mold, Barzun objects to words
the meanings of which have changed during their history.
He is fond of words in their &ldquo;original&rdquo; meanings.
Thus, he writes &ldquo;Tact is literally touch.&rdquo;  I am familiar
with a few English words employing Latin *tact*-in the
sense of 'touch'—*tactile*, *taction*, *tactual*-but the
statement is completely wrong for English, in which
*tact* means something entirely different from 'touch.'
He also objects to words that have been coined on the
basis of a false analysis of their morphemes (meaningful
elements), like *workaholic, breathalyzer*, and *reprography*.
But ordinary speakers of a language are
not trained etymologists, and they never have been:
English (as well as other languages) has many words
that have come about as a result of false analysis of
their components: Barzun simply chooses to criticize
those that seem unnatural to him, presumably because
they did not occur before he was born.  He has nothing
bad to say about *alchemy* or *chemistry*, about *jade*
('semiprecious stone'), or about other words that have
changed in meaning for one reason or another.  In Sanskrit,
*jangala* meant 'arid, desert land'; would Barzun
object to the modern sense of *jungle*, a direct derivation,
because it hasn't retained its original meaning?
Then, too, there are those that are just plain fun, like
*monokini* based on *bikini*.

Barzun on words is not very good, I'm afraid: his
nations are old-fashioned, prejudiced, and intolerant.

Barzun on style is much better, especially because
his own is usually exemplary.  When he is not discussing
the technology of language, he is on much firmer
ground, though he often falls prey to his own corny
sense of humor: In his citation of idiotic idioms like
&ldquo;the proof is in the pudding,&rdquo; he cannot resist adding,
&ldquo;Some will recall that with Whittaker Chambers it
was in the pumpkin.&rdquo;

This book is a collection of essays, some of which
are quite old.  In most instances, it is difficult to tell
just how old—&ldquo;English As She's Not Taught,&rdquo; for
instance, has a reference dated 1952—and I was wondering
as I read them, if Barzun really believes as
strongly today the statements he wrote some 35 (or
more) years ago.  As it was he who edited the book, I
must assume that he does, which is so much the worse.

Sometimes he misses the point entirely—or
adroitly.  He takes to task Alien Walker Read, Professor
Emeritus at Columbia University and one of the
most eminent, productive, and skilled observers of the
English language.  (The very first footnote in Mencken's
*The American Language* refers to Read, so you
know he has been doing his thing for a long time.)  In
1964, Read delivered a paper, &ldquo;Can a Native Speaker
Make Mistakes?&rdquo; to which he answered &ldquo;No.&rdquo; Read is
a very careful, well-spoken native speaker of English;
he is also a prominent linguist and, as such, a keen
analyst of language.  He is neither rash nor cynical (as
Barzun would have us believe).  As a scholar who
examines language, he may be likened to a physicist or
a chemist: It is not readily conceivable that Barzun
would accuse a physicist of rashness or cynicism
because he investigates the phenomenon of gravity
(which kills people if they step out of windows of tall
buildings) or a chemist because he analyzes and describes
arsenic (which, if eaten, is fatal).  Yet the function
of a linguist is justly parallel to that of any other
&ldquo;scientific&rdquo; observer, and the conclusions he draws are
equally valid, provided that they are correct.  The perception
of correctness about the observable phenomena
of life change as we learn more.  I recall a cartoon
by Gahan Wilson, published just before NASA landed
men on the moon.  As we all know, the moon's rotation
around the earth is almost exactly the same period as
its rotation on its axis; hence, the same side of the
moon (with slight variation) is always facing us on
earth.  Wilson's cartoon showed the moon as a huge,
hemispherical stage set in the sky, completely hollow
and with the back supported by wooden framework.
To us today, that notion is ludicrous—as ludicrous as a
Ptolemaic structure of the universe, with spheres
within spheres—hence, we can be amused by such a
cartoon.

Barzun's view of language is somewhat Ptolemaic,
if not almost superstitious.  In &ldquo;English As She's
Not Taught&rdquo; he writes (or wrote):

>During the last hundred years, nearly every
intellectual force has worked, in all innocence,
against language.  We can gauge the result from
the disappearance of the Dictionary properly so
called.  Consult one of the best of them, *Webster's
New World Dictionary*, and what you find is a
miniature encyclopedia filled with the
explanations of initials, proper names, and entries
like &ldquo;macrosporangium&rdquo; and &ldquo;abhenry,&rdquo; which
are not and never will be words of the English
language.
>
>The power of words over nature, which has
played such a role in human history, is now an
exploded belief, a dead emotion.  Far from words
controlling things, it is now things that dictate
words.

That is Barzun in his role of logomancer, and if
you believe that, you will believe that the moon is hollow
(and made of green cheese).  His exposition
abounds with examples of howlers to illustrate his thesis
that the language is degenerating.  As readers of
chuckle or two.  But Barzun takes such things seriously
and regards them as symptomatic of deterioration.

It is not enough for Barzun to condemn many
words of English: he also condemns dictionaries for
listing and defining them, as if the lexicographer were
responsible for the lexicon he describes.  Barzun confuses
the description of a word list with a qualitative
analysis of it:

...[W]hat need of *&eacute;cras&eacute;, elinguation, eloign,
embassador, furfuraceous*, followed a little later
by a long list of *non*-words, many unreadable and
some quite imaginary, for *nonastronomic*,
*nonvaginal*, *non-Attic*, et cetera?  It's a pity, too,
that Churchill's unlucky *triphibious* should be
accepted here....

The dictionary referred to (though not identified)
is *The Random House Dictionary of the English Language*—*Unabridged
Edition*, but that is immaterial.
The point is that Barzun wants a dictionary—if he
wants one at all—that contains only words approved
by him.  He fails to understand that the words he cites
appear in writing (if not speech), though it may not be
the kind of writing he reads.  Moreover, all of the
words in the *RHD* are supported by citations, and his
charge of their being imaginary is simply wrong.
Finally, (again), the lexicographer's function is to
report the lexicon, not to pass judgment on what it
should contain.  Were Barzun's logomancy to function,
we could strike *cancer* from the language and everyone
suffering from it would be instantly cured.

Barzun is dead wrong about other things, too.  In
&ldquo;Page Mrs. Malaprop,&rdquo; he fastens on the meaning of
*legend* as &ldquo;a story without basis in fact&rdquo; and refuses to
move off the spot.  Yet, the dictionary—albeit the
*RHD*—shows other (appropriate) senses for *legend*:

>6\.  a collection of stories about an admirable person.
>
>7\.  one who is the center of such stories: *She
became a legend in her own lifetime*.

The word in this sense has been extended, especially
in its adjectival form, *legendary*, to things,
allowing us to speak of a *legendary wine*, which
means 'a wine about which (encomiastic) legends
might be written.'  I see nothing wrong in that (except
hyperbole).  But Barzun clings to the 'fanciful, mythical,
imaginary' overtones of *legend* and admits no
semantic spread—by which one is led to assume that
he is equally intolerant of metaphor.

For a critic who is often quite vituperative in his
excoriation of the writing of others, Barzun is not
without sin.  He refers to constructions like *the Columbia
campus* and *the Ford factory* as examples of
&ldquo;simple apposition,&rdquo; while any grammarian would describe
them as noun phrases with the first (noun) element
in attributive position.  (Apposition is generally
reserved to describe a word like *stylist* in *Barzun*, *the
stylist, considers most people to be poor writers*.)   He
persists in referring to-*holic* as a compounding element,
when the element is-*(a)holic*.  He disapproves of
making a transitive verb from an intransitive, as in
*They strolled the boardwalk*, totally insensitive to the
difference between that and *They strolled along the
boardwalk*.  Presumably, he would also condemn *She
cruised the avenue*, unaware of the distinction between
that and *She cruised along the avenue*.  Barzun
is on very thin ice, indeed, in criticizing *depart* as
transitive in *Cunard Princess departs Apaculco:*  What
will he do when the time comes to *depart this life*?
Presumably, he will leave all functional shifts behind
and retire to a Nirvana where everyone speaks Proto-Indo-European,
where (in his imagination) all words
have only one meaning and one function.  He really
ought to do some homework on the history of language
before uttering his pronouncements, some of which
seem to spring from an entirely erroneous view of
what something means.  At one point, he offers, &ldquo;Now
although many people are unaware of the fact, 'I am
pleased' is not a nice expression.  It does not mean 'I
am glad,' or 'happy,' but 'it pleases me'—it is the formula
of royalty condescending to a subject.&rdquo;  Where
does Barzun come up with such balderdash?  &ldquo;I am
pleased to inform you that you have won $1 million in
our lottery&rdquo; is not condescending in the least.  And
should *sprachgef&uuml;hl* be capitalized when, in italics in
the text, it is clearly a borrowed German noun?  But
then, what can one expect from someone who gave a
rave review to Eric Partridge's *Origins*, a work so riddled
with inaccuracies and misconceptions as to make
it useless as a serious reference book?

It is pointless to go on.  On those rare occasions
where Barzun confines his remarks to *style*, he makes
some useful contributions.  But most of the essays in
this book read like a strung-out litany of *don'ts*, for
which (usually) the wrong reasons are given.  As a pedagogical
method, simply listing all the things one
should *not* do is negative and not constructive.  To
some extent, this book is passively constructive in the
sense that it offers, notwithstanding its dogmatic,
opinionated Bourbonism, examples of good writing,
which anyone can study to good advantage as long as
the information is taken with a grain of salt and the
opinions are ignored.  What is missing almost entirely
is any positive guidance on what the reader should do
to improve his writing and to enable him to write
clear, expository prose.  A good place to start would be
to train himself in clear, expository thinking.

Not all of the essays are concerned with condemning
modern (American) English usage.  Later on, one
encounters, in tones that are a bit less testy, subjects
that are treated with greater knowledge, perception,
and dignity.  Notable is &ldquo;Mencken's America Speaking,&rdquo;
about *The American Language*, a long piece,
though that, too, descends into the occasional diatribe.
Alas, Barzun seems unable to keep himself from
being silly about &ldquo;a standard language,&rdquo; and he
appears particularly silly when he persists in harping
on his (apparent) contention that the Standard to be
hewn to is the variety of English he speaks and writes.
But for the fact that his words see the light of publication,
he would be talking and writing to and for
himself.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Hammond Barnhart Dictionary of Science*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Hammond-Barnhart-Dictionary-Science-Robert-K/30114180940/bd)
Robert K. Barnhart, (Hammond, 1986), xxiv + 740pp.

These days the general public and the media
exhibit an increasing inability to distinguish between
science and technology.  Indeed, it is not always easy
to draw the distinctions, though the editors of this
book (*HBDS*) have achieved some measure of consistency.
Thus, *radiology* is in but not *radiography* or
*radiograph*; on the other hand &ldquo; 'a photograph made
by means of X rays,' &rdquo; is given as the second definition
(after the *Physics* definition) under *X ray*.  This illustrates
not a shortcoming of the dictionary but of the
problems encountered in trying for a separation
between technology and science: omitting the photo
sense would have been silly; including it violates the
most stringent application of principle.  In those
instances I have checked, the editors have erred on the
side of common sense.  *Wheel* and *axle*, a simple physical
machine, is in; *wheel* is not.

For the student of science and for any person
functioning outside his own discipline, whether scientist
or layman, the *HBDS* is a fine work.  The only
fault I find with it is in its illustrations of ostensive
objects, many of which are crudely executed.

The style of defining is explanatory and straightforward:
the editors have eschewed the stilted, formulaic
definitions so often found in many dictionaries,
especially those compiled by amateur lexicographers
who seem to feel that definitions must be written in a
turgid, old-fashioned way.  Thus, for example:

>*graft... 2* *Biology, Medicine* a to transfer (a
piece of skin, bone, etc.) from one part of the
body to another, or to a new body, so that it will
grow there permanently.
>
>*renal...* *Anatomy*. of, having to do with, or
located near the kidneys: *renal arteries*.

This latter is certainly preferable to the &ldquo;of or pertaining
to ...&rdquo; or &ldquo;of or relating to...&rdquo; which pervades
most dictionaries.  I might pick a bone with
&ldquo;located near&rdquo; for which I should have preferred &ldquo;situated
near.&rdquo;  Generally, I like the almost conversational
approach.

One particular nasty problem in scientific defining
for the layman—for much of this century—has
been a definition of *relativity*.  The *special theory* and
the *general theory* present serious obstacles to the
definer for several reasons, the most important being
that neither can be adequately defined in the compass
of a paragraph.  Another is that there are few people
who truly understand the theories.  Yet, the terms are
bandied about by amateurs, in contrast to other highly
specialized terms in science, most of which are seldom
encountered outside their disciplines.  In the circumstances,
the editors have, I think, done very well,
indeed.

Entries incorporating uncommon words show
their pronunciations in a respelling system that is easy
to use and for which essential key information is provided
on odd-numbered pages.  In some cases, brief
etymologies are provided.  Some of the illustrative
examples are contrived (e.g., *renal arteries*); those
that have been taken from scientific writings do illustrate
the entry in context, but they are not always
revealing:

>*scatter... 2* to undergo scattering: *The
majority of the energy is carried by phonons
which inelastically scatter at the interface*
(Nature).

Such instances, however, are rare, and most of the
citations I read provided not only syntactic evidence of
the use of the term in context but yielded up additional
information not provided by the definition
itself.

This is a fine work, certainly usable at the secondary
school level and by people of any age and persuasion
who need ready access to good definitions in the
sciences.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Collins English Dictionary*](https://collins.co.uk/products/9780008284374)
New Edition, (William Collins Sons &amp; Co. Ltd., 1986), xxvii + 1771pp.

Omitted from the front matter of this edition is
Patrick Hanks's article, &ldquo;Meaning and Grammar&rdquo;;
added to the main alphabetical text of the dictionary
are eighty-one pages of entries and definitions that
have come into the language since about 1978, when
the editorial work on the first edition was completed.
The latter addenda are welcome; the former essay will
not be missed (if, indeed, anyone but the authors ever
read the prelims of dictionaries).  Aside from the new
matter, the only other noticeable change is the omission
from the new edition of markers to indicate syllabic
breaks in polysyllabic headwords, a useful guide
to their hyphenation.  The first edition offered an elaborate
and unique symbology: ordinary syllable breaks
were marked by a centered dot; preferred hyphenation
breaks were indicated by a tiny plus sign.
Although these marks gave the headwords a slightly
cluttered look, they imparted useful information (e.g.,
Where does one hyphenate words like *special* and
*communism*?), the publisher's research into users'
preferences yielded evidence that many people do use
the dictionary to find out where words ought to be
broken at the ends of lines.  I should have written &ldquo;*did*
use,&rdquo; for, as we all know from reading any daily newspaper
or many another type of periodical, hyp-hens
can now appear almos-t anyw-here in a word.  It is
my understanding that Collins has now determined
that the usefulness of such information has diminished
considerably and that it could well be sacrificed in
favor of a cleaner-looking, easier-to-read headword.
As other British dictionaries do not generally show syllabication
markers, there was no justification for
keeping them for competitive reasons, and nostalgic
sentiment plays a very small role in the dictionary
business.

Well, on to an attempt at assessing what has been
done in this new edition.  I have acquired the habit, as
a lexicographer, of scribbling marginal notes in the
dictionaries I use more or less regularly.  These range
from queries regarding the accuracy and wording of
definitions (which might be viewed as criticisms) to
notations of words and senses omitted (which can be
either criticism, if the word or sense was known to
have existed at the time of compilcation, or mere commentary,
if the word or sense appeared in the language
later on).  Thus, Johnson could be criticized for
having got wrong the definition of *pastern* but could
scarcely be taken to task for the &ldquo;omission&rdquo; of *telephone*
or *electronics*.

Rambling casually through my scribbling, I note,
for example, that neither edition of the *CED* carries
the generalized sense of *stonewall* 'obstruct,' though it
has been around for many years (and on both sides of
the Atlantic).  Properly, the sense '(*often passive*) to
thwart; defeat' has been added to *snooker*.  On the
other hand *snuck* 'a past tense or past participle of
*sneak*,' labeled *&ldquo;U.S., not standard*&rdquo; in the earlier edition
is now labeled *&ldquo;U.S.*, *and Canadian*, *not standard*,&rdquo;
but it ought to be labeled (in addition) &ldquo;often
humorous.&rdquo;  The cross reference under *SLR* to *reflex
camera* is an improvement over the earlier definition.
*Shopfitter, shopfitting* ought to have been added, and
the verb definition of *concertina* 'to collapse or fold up
like a concertina' is not helpful without the appropriate
information about how concertinas fold up, which
ought to have been in the noun definition for *concertina*,
a shortcoming in both editions.  *R&eacute;sum&eacute;* is given a
pronunciation showing stress on the first syllable; but I
continue to hear people in Britain, who seem to persist
in an arch contempt for simulating French pronunciation,
stressing it on the second: riZOOmi.  Other perverse
pronunciations (conTROVersy) are shown, but
not the pervasive REStauranTEUR, with its intrusive
-*n*- (on both sides of the Pond).  The Americans have
also engaged in inducing strange shifts of stress into
some words; one that amuses is the shift from AFFluent
to afFLUent, possibly to avoid any confusion with
a word from the vocabulary of ecology that has
intruded into the popular language: EFFluent.  Possibly
the thing to be avoided is an effluence of affluence,
the affluence of effluents, or some other such peril.

Focusing on a run of words at the beginning of Q,
a few of the types of changes made in the new edition
become evident.  The editors seem to have found sufficient
evidence for the dropping of periods in abbreviations
in modern (British) practice to have eliminated
many of them entirely, without even showing the
older forms as variants: *QARANC*, *QB*, *QC*, *QED*,
*QEF*, *QF*, *ql*, *qm* (but *q.l.* remains), *Qld*, *QM*, *QMC*,
*QMG*, *QMS*, and so on.  Notwithstanding evidence
gleaned from modern sources, which I cannot question,
it seems to me that there is a sufficiently large
body of older evidence in existence to warrant the listing
of these with their traditional full stops.  In the
same interval, *Q* to *quadraphonics*, there appear several
changes and a number of new entries: *QANTAS,
Qingdao, Qinghai, Qiqihar, Q-methodology, Qom,
QSM, Q-sort, quad* (for *quadraphonic), quadr*- (var.
of *quadri*-).  The Chinese place names show commendable
attention paid to the Pinyin transliteration of
entries formerly entered under spellings conforming to
other systems for transliteration.  *Pinyin* did not make
it into the 1979 edition, but it is there now.

It would be unfair to evaluate each of these
addenda on its own merits, and that is not the point of
this exercise.  The point is to demonstrate that there are
a great many new entries—more than 10,000 according
to a comparison of claims made in the jacket
blurbs of the two editions—and, though it would be
tedious to document other changes here, it is clear that
every entry in the old book was examined and
reviewed and that little has slipped past the editor's
eagle eye.  Even *propitiatory*, for some reason omitted
from the first edition, has been added.

This new edition is well worth buying: if you
have the earlier one and have become accustomed to
its style, you will need this updated and revised edition;
if you do not have the 1979 edition, here is an
opportunity to avail yourself of a superior work of lexicographic
reference.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Dwight Bolinger}

The phenomenon for which D.S. Bland proposes
the term *subjective onomatopoeia* [XII, 2] has been
examined and discussed for decades by a number of
linguists and critics, including Otto Jespersen (with
examples such as those of the -*ump* family cited by
Bland), Edward Sapir (the *ici* and *l&aacute;* vowel contrast
that Bland picks up from French), Russell Ultan (size
and distance symbolism in general), J.R. Firth, Fred
W. Householder, Jr., Roger Wescott, Norman Markel,
Eric Hamp, Yakov Malkiel, E.M. Uhlenbeck (for Javanese),
Raimo Anttila (for Finnish), Morton Bloom-field,
V. Christian (for Semitic vowels), Arthur
Crisfield (for Lao), Marshall Durbin (for Mayan), A.
A. Fokker (for Russian proper names), A. Graur (for
Rumanian), Charles Hockett, and others almost too
numerous to mention.  There is no lack of proposals of
names for it.  Householder credits J.R. Firth with the
term *phonestheme*, which a number of us who developed
the theme in the' 40s and' 50s adopted; one could
generalize the discipline as *phonesthematics*, I suppose.
The late Peter Tamony suggested *coincidental
support*.  Robert Longacre speaks of *phonological syntagmemes*,
Malkiel of *phonosymbolism*, Wescott of
*phonosememes*.  The traditional term of course is
*sound symbolism*, but that is probably too comprehensive.
If *subjective onomatopoeia* can stick, good luck.

*[Dwight Bolinger, Palo Alto, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Peter A. Douglas}

In his article &ldquo;Words That Don't Look Right&rdquo;
[XII, 2], Richard Lederer omitted one notable example
from his list of words that do not mean what their
appearance suggests.  The word is *restive*.  This word
has nothing to do with *rest*, though the unwary could
very easily assume otherwise and equate it with *restful*.
After all, such words as *active, captive, festive*,
and *plaintive* have obvious connections with their
roots and are no more than they seem.  But *restive*
comes from OF *restif*, meaning 'balky, unwilling to go
forward, stationary.'  The earlier English spelling was
*restif* or *restiff* and was later assimilated to the -*ive*
adjectives.

*Restive* means 'refractory, stubborn, resistant to
or impatient of control or authority,' and can be
equally descriptive of horses and people.  The overall
meaning of the word has come to have a flavor of
unruliness, irritation, and chafing under restraint or
against coercion.  By extension, therefore, *restive* has
come to mean 'fidgety or discontented—or *restless*.'
*Restive* and *restless* are now generally used as equivalents,
though each carries its own distinct meaning in
exact usage.  Here we have rather an oddity: two
words whose meanings are converging while they
appear to mean the opposite.

*[Peter A. Douglas, Albany, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Joel R. Hess}

The phenomenon which P.S. Bland terms &ldquo;subjective
onomatopoeia&rdquo; in his article &ldquo;Humpty Dumpty
and the Sluggish Slut&rdquo; [XII, 2] has indeed been noted
before.  My linguistics professor described it in detail,
and gave it the name &ldquo;phonesthemism.&rdquo;  *Webster's
Third* defines *phonestheme* as &ldquo;the common feature of
sound occurring in a group of symbolic words.&rdquo;  Thus,
Mr. (Ms.?) Bland seems to be mistaken in claiming it
to be an unnamed phenomenon.

The word *phonestheme* is, of course, a blending
of *phoneme* and *esthetic*, indicating quite elegantly
the tendency of certain sounds to acquire esthetic or
emotional connotations.  Unlike Bland, I don't believe
these sounds, or groups of sounds, need be inherently
connected with the idea expressed.  The &ldquo;slackness of
jaw movement&rdquo; in *sl*- followed by short vowels can
just as easily be characterized as a &ldquo;sustainment of a
seamless column of air&rdquo; in such words as *slick, sleek,
slide, slippery*, or as a &ldquo;savage sibilant&rdquo; in *slit, slice,
slaughter*.  The point is neither that there is something
inherently slovenly in *sl*-, nor that the whole concept is
the figment of our mass imagination, but that *sl*- has,
by processes which remain unclear, somehow acquired
at least three distinct phonesthemic connotations: the
slippery, wintry connotation of 'sleds' and 'sleet'; the
quick, violent connotation of 'slayings' and 'slashes'; as
well as the unsavory connotation of 'sluggish sluts.'
The various connotations interact and give our language
yet another layer of richness.  (Incidentally, the
phenomenon can be found in all languages, not just
English.)

*[Joel R. Hess, Institute for Scientific Information, Philadelphia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Kirkham P. Ford}

In Mr. Urdang's article [XII, 2] &ldquo;Telling It Like It
Isn't,&rdquo; he gave examples of attention-getting devices in
newspaper headlines.  Sometimes headlines get attention
unintentionally.  Some examples are:

>*Not Easy for Woman to Get in Foundation* (Article on hiring by charitable foundations.  
*Cleveland* (Ohio) *Plain Dealer*, 1958)  
*Flight Simulators Teach U.S. Navy Pilots to Fly
Without Wings* (Advertisement in *Barron's*, 1979)  
*Pre-Natal Smoking Could Kill Baby* (Paris, Tenn. *Post-Intelligencer*, 1980)   
*What's Happening in Bedrooms* (*Practical Builder*, 1966)

*[Kirkham P. Ford, Paris, Tennessee]*


#### EPISTOLA {David Crystal}

Regarding your list of British/American distributional
differences, [XII, 2], here's one that caught me
out completely a few weeks ago: I was talking to the
U.S. psycholinguist Danny Steinberg in Japan about
someone's visit somewhere, and the conversation went
something like this:

>Steinberg: So how did he like the place?  
Me: Oh, he was full of it.  
Steinberg: Too bad.  
Me: ??

I haven't been so tongue-tied since my first encounter
with a U.S. breakfast, when I was asked &ldquo;How would
you like your eggs?&rdquo; and stammered &ldquo;Er, cooked!&rdquo; A
post mortem showed that *to be full of it* had diametrically
opposed meanings for the two of us.  For me it
meant 'wildly enthusiastic'; for him it meant 'wildly
unenthusiastic.' 'had it up to here,' as one says.  I have
been looking for this difference in the usual sources,
but haven't found it mentioned yet.  An interesting
one, yes?

*[David Crystal, Holyhead, Gwynedd]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert J. Powers}

Mare Schindler writes [&ldquo;Unusual Place Names in
Canada,&rdquo; XIII, 1] &ldquo;*Anse* is a meadow.&rdquo; I doubt that,
even in Canadian French, and his context rules out a
typo.  *Anse* is 'cove'—in its geographical sense.  My
*Hammond Medallion World Atlas*, 1971 edition, lists
six Canadian towns with names beginning with
*L'Anse;* four in Newfoundland, two in Quebec.  All
seem to be firmly secured on the shores of large bodies
of water.  My Cajun French dictionary [A *Dictionary
of the Cajun Language*, by Rev. Msgr. Jules O.
Daigle, M.A., S.T.L., xxxvii + 594pp, Edwards
Brothers, Inc., Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1984] says of the
watery *anse:*&ldquo; ...Cove formed by woods or streams
in a more or less semicircular shape.  In Louisiana
many places go by the name of cove or anse.  E.g.:
*L'Anse des Ardoins*, *L'Anse aux Briques*, *L'Anse aux
Pailles*, etc.&rdquo;

*[Robert J. Powers, Shreveport, Louisiana]*


#### EPISTOLA {Marc A. Schindler}

At the end of my article, &ldquo;Unusual Place Names in
Canada,&rdquo; I implied that the Canadian Toponymic
Committee does not recognize the exclamation mark as a
legitimate part of a place name.  It seems that I spoke too
soon—while perusing a map of the Temiscouata area of
Quebec, I ran across this gem: *Saint-Louis-de-Ha! Ha!*
And in Chicoutimi County, Northern Quebec, is *La
Baie des-Ha! Ha!*  The official at the Surveys and Mapping
Branch of the Canadian government who compiled
their gazetteers confirmed that the only punctuation
mark allowed as part of a place name in (English) Canada
as far as she knew is the apostrophe.  Quebec has its
own toponymy committee.

Mr. Robert J. Powers is right about *anse*; I cannot
account for having made such an error.

*[Marc A. Schindler, Gloucester, Ontario]*

## Paring Pairs No. 24

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM*.

(a). Insignificant container for a dead midget.  
(b). This beauty can be found in low places.  
(c). Underwear holder for quick suit?  
(d). Advertising slogan.  
(e). The show doesn't go on in Japan.  
(f). Impossible for knowledgeable dairyman.  
(g). Collected on the lottery—himself!  
(h). Bum photo yields spacey trip.  
(i). Postman in drag?  
(j). Holy Grail.  
(k). Underweight officer is a bit of a nut.  
(l). These give soprano mal de mer.  
(m). Inexperienced violinist in Davy Jones's locker.  
(n). Loud, electronic blues are like lead.  
(o). Bouncing evil Sudetenlander.  
(p). Left to be used by most people.  
(q). Unusual collector's cravats.  
(r). Woman whose husband is away peddling dope.  
(s). Stormy, but nice for ducks.  
(t). *Roots* (the movie).  
(u). Bottle for a message.  
(v). What the equitable railway conductor is.  
(w). Aaron Burr, Alexander Hamilton, etc.  
(x). Microcomputer operator.  
(y). Source of black light?  
(z). Sagacious Georgian.

(1). Bad.  
(2). Belle.  
(3). Bier.  
(4). Brief.  
(5). Buy.  
(6). Case.  
(7). Correspondence.  
(8). Cracker.  
(9). Czech.  
(10). Dark.  
(11). Disc.  
(12). Diving.  
(13). Duel.  
(14). Easy.  
(15). Fare.  
(16). Fiddler's.  
(17). Flick.  
(18). Fowl.  
(19). Fraud.  
(20). Grass.  
(21). Green.  
(22). Hand.  
(23). Heavy.  
(24). High.  
(25). Jockey.  
(26). Kernel.  
(27). Kin.  
(28). Knight.  
(29). Know.  
(30). Lantern.  
(31). Light.  
(32). Male.  
(33). Metal.  
(34). Minded.  
(35). Moon.  
(36). No.  
(37). Number.  
(38). Personalities.  
(39). Phial.  
(40). Rare.  
(41). Seas.  
(42). Second.  
(43). Shot.  
(44). Small.  
(45). Theater.  
(46). Ties.  
(47). Vision.  
(48). Weather.  
(49). Whey.  
(50). Widow.  
(51). Wise.  
(52). Won.  
(52). Word.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those
received in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East,
or North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A.  *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please*.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 23

(a). Privilege to worship as they please.  (26, 34) Pagan Rite.  
(b). Skirt the issue of whether the drink's worth a groat.  (13, 2) Farthing Ale.  
(c). Counterfeit coin doesn't smell right.  (11,37) False Scent.  
(d). Hypochondriac's favorite drink?  (38,27) Sham Pain.  
(e). Sailor coils rope on phony featherbed.  (10,7) Fake Down.  
(f). Source of pork sausage?  (19,20) Ground Hog.  
(g). Destiny and the sick poorly celebrated.  (21, 15) I11 Feted.  
(h). Participated in strike against fabric of society. (35,22) Sat In.  
(i). Official in charge of depravity.  (47,29) Vice President.  
(j). Sailor's worst way to commit peccadilloes.  (39, 3) Sin Bad.  
(k). Poor finale at the Sabbath.  (49,9) Weak End.  
(l). Holding on till end of story.  (18,40) Gripping Tale.  
(m). Formerly, strolling, sauntering.  Now jogging? (5,16) City Gaits.  
(n). Yielding to feeble hebdomadal necessity occasioned by tiny genuflecting parts.  (50,23) WeeKneed.  
(o). This rogue knocks the big chive.  (32,36) Rap Scallion.  
(p). They've gone off on this fellow who's been in the sun.  (41,17) Tan Gent.  
(q). Infantile golfers gum on about this.  (42,46) Tee Thing.  
(r). An Oxonian decemvirate held together by these? (43,6) Ten Dons.  
(s). Pole on which earth rotates rests on turtle, according to myth.  (44,28) Terra Pin.  
(t). Spain is where it's at—not Don Carlos.  (45, 33) The Rein.  
(u). Legal clause favours eyesight.  (30,48) Pro Vision.  
(v). Support Mussolini, the fruit—or vegetable?  (30, 8) Pro Duce.  
(w). Bennett Cerf, a sharply humorous chap.  (31, 17) Pun Gent.  
(x). Loaded deck cannot supply bridge pincers.  (43, 1) Ten Aces.  
(y). A person could die laughing.  (25,24) Man's Laughter.  
(z). According to Beaufort, knocking the H—-out of a hoop skirt is breaking wind in a force 8. (12,22,14) Fart In Gale.  

The correct answer is (4) Cent.  The winner was
Rose Corbett, of Long Island City, New York.  The
winner of No. 22 in Europe was Sean Devine, of Co.
Dublin, Ireland.  The winner of No. 21 in Europe was
Helen Reynolds, of Cambridge.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Escort has time to write beginning of book (7,3)  
6\. Returning money paid after bishop makes complaint (4)  
10\. Superficial movie about everything (7)  
11\. Profile leader of cast playing in one town after another (7)  
12\. &ldquo;*10*&rdquo; star loosens knots for rewards (8)  
13\. Multiply riches, penning words to song (5)  
15\. Correct me in final (5)  
16\. Quotations including turn of phrase about roast victim? (9)  
18\. You once planted amid houses in gardening buildings (9)  
21\. Monkeys around with left part of flower (5)  
23\. Rushes south after retreating elk (5)  
24\. Fashion modeling—a source of riches (4,4)  
26\. Atom in metal piece of Russian satellite (7)  
27\. Deposit slips, on the surface (7)  
28\. Turned to face swarm (4)  
29\. Ben-Hur to encourage holding a revolt (10)

**Down**

1\. Sound place to hide money (4)  
2\. Fashionable editor raised south of Texas landmark (1, 2, 4)  
3\. Scout alone dodged bears with claws(7)  
4\. Banquets held amid brawls and horseplay (9)  
5\. Cuts to veto in hearing (5)  
7\. Millionaire finally collected rent—a selfish course of action (3, 4)  
8\. Predict the future with quarter of pinochle deck (10)  
9\. Man with hook and ladder originally breaking fire up (6)  
14\. Lowest income brackets: working mothers (10)  
17\. Bad conductor ruined *Soul Train* (9)  
19\. Soprano ingests bit of milk shake (7)  
20\. Rolling Stones' beginnings (6)  
21\. Athlete breaking promise (7)  
22\. Moody writers I have abridged (7)  
24\. Made alternations to right size (5)  
25\. Will winner broadcast to audience?  (4)  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Any person with information on residents of the Union
cemetery... [From the *Genealogical Helper*, May-June 1984.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. INTERMITTENT *(hidden)*.  
10\. S(CREW)UP.  
11\. RO(UN)DUP (PROUD *anag*.  
12\. BOUND-ARIES.  
13\. ERA-S (ARE *anag*.).  
15\. REH-EAT (HER *rev*.).  
16\. RE(ARM-O)ST.  
19\. WESTERNS.  
20\. A-VA-TAR.  
23\. R-APT.  
25\. A-C-COUN(TAN)T.  
27\. T(IN) HORN.  
28\. DR-I-VEIN.  
29\. PU-LL A F-A-ST ONE (FALL UP *rev*.).

**Down**

2\. NE-WSDEALER (LEEWARDS *anag*.).  
3\. EX(P)ERT.  
4\. M(ARK)ETER.  
5\. TAUT *(homophone)*.  
6\. EI-DER (RED I.E. *rev*.).  
7\. TYPESET (*hidden*).  
8\. I-SO(B)AR.  
9\. D(ROUGH)TS.  
14\. P-REVENTI-ON (NO IT NEVER *rev*.).  
17\. OUTRAGED *(hidden)*.  
18\. AN(ACON)D-A.  
19\. WIRETA-P (WAITER *anag*.).  
21\. RO(TUN)D (NUT *anag*.).  
22\. H(OLD) IT.  
24\. PAN-EL.  
26\. S-ODA (ADO *rev*.).

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v13n3_Winter_1987)