--- 
title: "VOL XIII, No 2 [Autumn, 1986]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## The True Meaning of Christmas
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School Concord, NH 03301*

The great English etymologist, Owen Barfield,
once wrote that &ldquo;words may be made to disgorge
the past that is bottled up inside of them, as coal
and wine when we kindle or drink them yield up their
bottled sunshine.&rdquo;  When we uncap the sunshine that is
bottled up in the many words that relate to the Christmas
season, we discover that the light that streams
forth illuminates centuries of human history and
customs.

The word *Christmas* comes from the Old English
*Cristes maesse*, meaning 'the festival mass of Christ.&rdquo;
*Christmas* is a fine example of a disguised compound,
a word formed from two independent morphemes that
have become so closely welded together that their
individual identities have been lost.  Christmas is the
only annual religious holiday to have received official
and secular sanction by all of the states.  The word *holiday*
is another disguised compound, descending from
the Old English *haligdaeg* 'holy day.'  With the change
in pronunciation has come a change in meaning so
that holidays, such as Independence Day and Labor
Day, are not necessarily holy.

The name *Christ* is a translation of the Hebrew
word *messiah* 'the anointed one,' rendered through the
Greek as *Khristos.  Jesus* also goes back to ancient
Hebrew and the name *Yeshua* (Joshua), which is
explained as 'Jah (or Jahveh, i.e. Jehova) is salvation.'
We learn about Jesus through the gospels.  *Gospel* is
yet another disguised compound, from the Old English
*god* 'good' and *spel* 'news.'  The four gospels spread
the &ldquo;good news&rdquo; of the life and work of Christ.  No surprise
then that the four men who wrote the gospels are
called *evangelists*, from the Greek *euaggelion*, which
also means 'good news.'

The babe was born in *Bethlehem*, a Hebrew word
variously interpreted as meaning 'house of bread or
food,' 'house of fighting,' or 'house of (the god)
Lahamut.'  The Christ child was laid in a *manger*, a
word related to the French verb *manger* 'to eat.'  Why?
Because Jesus's crib was a large wooden box that had
served as a trough for feeding cattle.  We call the worship
of the new-born Jesus the *Adoration*, from the
Latin *adoratio: ad*- 'to,' *oro*- 'pray'; hence, 'pray to.'
Among those who came to worship were &ldquo;wise men
...from the East,&rdquo; *magi*, the plural of *magus*, a
Latin word for 'magician.'  Magi were members of an
ancient Persian priestly caste of magicians and
sorcerers.

In the Christian calendar, the period of preparation
for the birth of Christ is called *Advent*, deriving
from the Latin *advenire* 'to come toward.'  the word
*yuletide*, as a synonym for the Christmas season, dates
back to a heathen and then Christian period of feasting
about the time of the winter solstice (December
22).  The origin of *yule* is uncertain.  One suggestion is
that *yule* issues from the Gothic *giul* or *hiul*, which
meant 'wheel.'  In this context, *yule* signifies that the
sun, like a wheel, has completed its annual revolution.
The Gothic *ol* or *oel* and the Anglo-Saxon *geol*, all
meaning 'feast,' and the Middle English *yollen* 'to cry
aloud' have also been considered as sources of *yule*.
Whence the *tide* in *yuletide?*  From an Old English
word meaning 'time,' as in *Eastertide* and &ldquo;Time and
tide wait for no man.&rdquo;

Among the most intriguing Christmas etymologies
are those for *Santa Claus* and *Kriss Kringle*.  When the
Dutch came to the New World, the figure of St. Nicholas,
their patron saint, was on the first ship.  After the
Dutch lost control of New Amsterdam to the English
in the seventeenth century, Sinterklaas (a form of St.
Nikolaas) gradually became anglicized into *Santa
Claus* and acquired some of the features of the English
Father Christmas.  *Kriss Kringle* involves an even more
drastic change from one language to another.  The
Germans and German-speaking Swiss who settled in
Pennsylvania in the eighteenth century held the custom
that the Christ Child, &ldquo;the Christkindl,&rdquo; brought
gifts for the children on Christmas Eve.  When these
Pennsylvania German (also known as Pennsylvania
Dutch) communities were joined by English-speaking
settlers, the Christkindl became Kriss Kringle.  By the
1840s, Kriss Kringle had irretrievably taken on the
identity of St. Nicholas, or Santa Claus.  Slogans like
&ldquo;Put Christ back in Christmas&rdquo; were coined in an
effort to remind people of the holiday's holy origin.

Of the various plants associated with the Christmas
season, the *poinsettia* possesses the most intriguing
history etymologically.  A Mexican legend tells of a
penniless boy who presented to the Christ Child a
beautiful plant with scarlet leaves that resembled the
Star of Bethlehem.  The Mexicans named the plant
*Flor de la Noche Buena*, 'Flower of the Holy Night.'
Dr. Joel Roberts Poinsett, the first U.S. minister to
Mexico, discovered the Christmas flower there in 1828
and brought it to this country, where it was named in
his honor in 1836.  The poinsettia has become one of
the most popular of Christmas plants—and one of the
most misspelled (Pointsettia, pointsetta, and poinsetta
are all no-nos) words in the English language.  Some
dictionaries list both poin-set-ee-uh and poin-set-uh as
acceptable ways to say the name of the plant, but language
guardians much prefer the first pronunciation.

Another botanical Christmas item is the pear tree.
In the seasonal song &ldquo;The Twelve Days of Christmas,&rdquo;
have you ever wondered why the true love sends not
only a partridge, but an entire pear tree?  That's
because in the early French version of the song the
suitor proffered only a partridge, which in French is
rendered as une pertriz.  A 1718 English version combined
the two—&ldquo;a partridge, une pertriz,&rdquo; which,
slightly corrupted, came out sounding like &ldquo;a partridge
in a pear tree.&rdquo;  Through the process known as
folk etymology, the partridge has remained proudly
perched in a pear tree (une pertriz) ever since.

A Merry Christ Mass and Happy Holy Days to all.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It means that corporal punishment for student misbehavior
is as obsolete as disembowelment for murder used to
be.&rdquo;  [From *The Philadelphia Inquirer*, May 11, 1985.  Submitted
by Douglas E. Chaffin, Ocean City, New Jersey.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Consent to Medical Treatment by the Mentally Ill.&rdquo;
[Headline in *The Lancet*, February 9, 1985.  Submitted by
Dr. Eugene G. Laforet, Newton Lower Falls, Massachusetts.]


### OBITER DICTA: *The Arbuthnot Test*
*Laurence Urdang*

Good old Frank Sullivan, who for many years wrote
about Mr. Arbuthnot, the Clich&eacute; Expert, in the pages of *The
New Yorker*, must be gazing down (or up) at us with what
even for him would be a wry smile: the clich&eacute; has come out
of the closet (whither any self-respecting English teacher
would have it consigned) to emerge as the touchstone of culture
in today's trivia-minded world.  During the past year or
so there have emerged not only *Trivial Pursuit*, of which its
pursuers—if not its creators—seem to have lost the perception
of what is trivial, but TV game shows that give contestants
the opportunity to win untrivial amounts of money by
filling in the slots in mind-stretching linguistic conundrums
like *kick the—, bed and—, —under the collar*, and
*Uncle—Cobbleigh and all*.  To add to the excitement and
mind-stretching difficulty of such identification, London
Weekend Television recently (January 1986) introduced a
new program, *Catchphrase*, in which contestants are shown
a rebus on an outsized, computer-driven television monitor
and are required to identify clich&eacute;s from appropriately obvious
pictures.  On one such program I watched a young man
win &pound;2435 for correctly linking their pictorial representations
with the following &ldquo;catchphrases&rdquo;: *high society; pushing
up daisies; get it under control; picking up the pieces;
daddy longlegs; pigeon-toed; skeleton in the cupboard; Big
Ben; on the other hand; square meal; double-decker sandwich;
dog-eared; elbow-room; scuba diving; and lay (!) in
bed*.  I leave it to the reader to conjure up the illustrations
associated with these—except the last, which is, of course, a
grammatical error and not an opportunity taken by LWT to
slip in a bit of pornography.

The question of whether all of the expressions, words,
compounds, and so forth can properly be called catchphrases
is not very important.  What is important is that such
a source of noninformation and, taking into account the
bored, confused, and utterly stony-faced behaviour of the
presenter, who is, in other incarnations, a comedian of some
competence, nonentertainment could possibly attract viewers,
much less a studio audience.  One can scarcely place any
blame on the contestants, who, considering the high unemployment
statistics in the United Kingdom, ought to take as
much as they can: after all, identifying *pushing up daisies*
on national TV for a few hundred pounds in less than thirty
minutes is easier than standing in a dole queue.

So-called quiz programs abound on both sides of the
Pond.  They stretch from the pre-war *Information, Please*,
&ldquo;moderated&rdquo; (I think that's the word) by Clifton Fadiman,
litterateur and the sole survivor of the quadrumvirate that
included Oscar Levant, John Kieran, and Franklin P.
Adams, and the later, very much down-market *Dr. I.Q*. (&ldquo;I
have a lady in the balcony, Doctor!&rdquo;), both originally on
radio.  One would have difficulty classifying *You Bet Your
Life* as a true quiz show: it was little more than an opportunity
for Groucho Marx to be funny, but no less entertaining
for that.  But Groucho's poser, asked of failed contestants to
enable them to leave the studio with a few coins to rub
together, &ldquo;Who is buried in Grant's Tomb?&rdquo; seems to have
set the standard for the well-informed of today.  How is it
possible to make people believe that knowledge may be
important when a housewife can win $20,000-worth of
prizes by correctly guessing the price of a dozen boxes of
corn flakes or of a food mixer?  At the other extreme are programs
like the late, unlamented *$64,000 Question* (originally,
when on radio, in less greedy or inflated days.  *The
$64 Question)* and *Mastermind* (BBC-TV), which seem to
attract admirers of the idiot-savant, that is, the individual
who knows a great deal about very little.  The former met its
demise, as most readers will recall, because some of the contestants
were fed the answers (or the questions, I forget
which) in advance; the latter, a national travelling road-show
in Great Britain, where its weekly host is usually a university,
allows its contestants to select topics like &ldquo;Chinese
history from 1611 to 1637,&rdquo; causing the put-upon researchers
for the show to devise questions dealing with extraordinary
esoterica.  This is undoubtedly great fun for the
researchers, but unlikely to be informative to the viewers or
studio audience, who come away with little more than a
feeling of being impressed by one person's ability to assimilate
a collection of facts in the narrow compass of what may
be a relatively broad subject.  In any event, what is not conveyed
by any of these up-market programs is the impression
that their participants have any genuine *understanding* of
the information they have often assimilated merely by rote.
A typical example of such application of rote memory was
Dr. Joyce Brothers's knowledge of boxing.  By her own confession,
offered later on, she had no interest in or knowledge
of boxing; possessed of a good memory, though, she boned
up on the subject and, as a large segment of the American
population breathlessly watched (and listened), relieved
Jack Barry, producer of the show, of $64,000, which was
quite a tidy sum in those days.  It was never established
whether she was one of those who had been fed the questions
in advance, and I imply no conclusions here.

There is the occasional quiz show that is not characterized
by overbearing triviality.  One that comes to mind is
*Blockbusters*, and ITV show in Britain; a quiz show for teenagers,
it isn't as degradingly bad as the adult shows.  But it is
more of a guessing game than a true test of knowledge of
any profundity: a typical question is &ldquo;Name an animal,
beginning with A, that eats ants and whose name means
'earth-pig.' &rdquo;  There are a few other shows, *University Challenge,
College Bowl*, etc., that are also not so bad, but they
are all directed at youngsters and have youngsters as participants.

It is only fair to distinguish between quiz shows, which
are supposed to test the knowledge of participants, and
game shows, in which the relative skill of participants need
not extend beyond their ability to jump in and out of jockey
shorts (Y-fronts to you Brits) more than twenty-one times a
minute.

The issue to be addressed is not whether even the best
kind of quiz show is entertainment, which is for individual
taste to decide—the ratings cannot be denied—but whether
the trivialization of knowledge on such shows is giving education
a bad name.  It does this in two ways: the trivial
shows lead the public to believe that the assimilation of nonessential
knowledge (or of knowledge possessed by every
sane inhabitant of the country over the age of 12) should be
rewarded.  It is patently a disservice to education everywhere
to delude people into believing that an ability to identify
*pushing up daisies* from a picture, however crude, of
someone, literally, pushing up daisies, is worthy of reward,
any more than is inhaling or exhaling.  At the up-market end
of the quiz-show scale, it is dishonest to offer reward to people,
whatever the monetary value of that reward, for having
committed to rote memory the names and dates of, say, the
presidents and vice presidents of the United States.  With no
such category implied, a contestant on a recent British TV
quiz (*Every Second Counts*, BBC, February 23rd) was asked
to name the regent after Victoria; given several seconds to
guess (!), time ran out before she could give the correct
response (which she did not know).  The guesses were
&ldquo;George V, Edward II, Edward III, Edward IV&rdquo;; the somewhat
wooden &ldquo;host&rdquo; of the program, Paul Daniels, finally
gave the right answer (reading it from a card) and pointed
out that had she not stopped at Edward IV, she would soon
have reached the correct answer.  It was not apparent that
the woman contestant was in any way below average in
mentality or education—at least, she didn't stop at Edward
IV because she couldn't count past IV.  One cannot help feeling
that an American competitor, asked to name the president
following Teddy Roosevelt would have foundered in
the same way.

Such facts and facts in general, as such, are not terribly
important, perhaps: after all, if you have to know them,
they can readily be looked up in dictionaries, encyclopedias,
almanacs, or other reference books.  Moreover, an anti-education
view, prevalent among secondary-school students, is
that if you are a car mechanic, plumber, or the owner of a
hugely successful fried-chicken franchise, it is completely
irrelevant to know who wrote *La Traviata* or, for that matter,
who is buried in Grant's Tomb.  That, though, is a
slightly different issue, albeit not entirely unrelated; the
point is that the kinds of TV shows discussed here are tantamount
to the most insidious propaganda that could be
devised to undermine any reasonable notion of what information
is and what education is: had the greatest minds in
the anti-education camp tried to invent a means for undermining
public respect for education, they could probably
not have come up with a more dangerously destructive
device than the quiz show.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Via Dola Rosa, the pathway Jesus trod to his
crucifixion....  [From an article in *The Gettysburg Times*,
March 21, 1985.  Submitted by Donald Marritz, Biglerville,
Pennsylvania.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Dedication and commencement of Ecumenical Stud
Groups on the theme 'Growing Together.' &rdquo;  [From a church
newsletter, Greater Manchester, England.  Submitted by
John Ferguson, Birmingham.]

## Our Playful Vocabulary
*Burt Hochberg, Games Magazine, New York City*

In compiling a list of English words that originated
in games, but not in sports, I began by trying to
separate games from sports to avoid wasting time on
irrelevant research.  Trying, but not quite succeeding.
The more I investigated the matter, the less clearly I
understood what it is about a game that makes it not a
sport, and vice versa.  Even chess, the quintessential
game, cannot be definitively categorized.  In the Soviet
Union, for example, it is considered a sport; can we
insist that it is not?

Lacking an unequivocal guideline, I decided that
every borderline game/sport that added anything
interesting to our vocabulary was, for my limited purpose,
a game.  Bowling, golf, and croquet are
included, though many people consider them sports.
Archery, which is not a game anyway, was admirably
covered by Peter A. Douglas in VERBATIM [V, 3].

This list does not pretend to be exhaustive—that
would have been an unrealistic ambition in view of
the large debt that our language owes to games.  I have
omitted many common expressions because of their
obviousness (especially phrases with *play* and *game*),
others because of their rarity or obscure origins.  Many
terms that originated in games were listed by Stephen
Hirschberg in VERBATIM [XII,3]; they are not repeated
here.

The game categories, and the terms within each
category, are arranged alphabetically.  Terms that
apply to no specific game are given in the Miscellaneous
category at the end of the list.

*Board and Table Games*

*Atari*

This Japanese word, familiar as the name of a
leading American home computer manufacturer, is
from the game of go, where it signifies a threat to capture
one or more of the opponent's pieces.  Like the
warning *check* in chess, it is not spoken during serious
play.

*back to square one*

Back to the starting place.  The phrase was popularized—at
least in England—by radio broadcasters of
cricket matches who hoped to make the game comprehensible
by referring to grids which had been printed
in newspapers.  The broadcasters borrowed the image
from a board game (probably snakes and ladders) in
which an unlucky dice roll sends a player's token to
the beginning of the track.  *Hopscotch (q.v.)* has been
suggested as another possible source.

*domino theory*

If communism is allowed to take root in one
country it will inevitably spread to neighbouring countries.
So goes the *domino theory*, a metaphor based on
the parlor trick of standing dominoes on end in such a
way that pushing over the first one topples the one
behind it, and so on *ad Dominum*.

*endgame*

The characteristic final phase of certain games,
particularly chess and backgammon; metaphorically,
any final phase, such as old age.

*Go to jail, go directly to jail, do not pass Go, etc.*

From Monopoly; sometimes used as a wry enumeration
of the consequences of bad luck or of a bad
move or decision.

*Kibitz*

The flycatcher (also called lapwing, pewit, and
other names) is an insectivorous bird with an irritating
cry.  *Kiebitz*, the German word for this fellow, is the
source of the German verb *kiebitzen* 'to look over the
shoulder of a card player.'  The Yiddish version *kibitz*
has several meanings, all of them well established in
English: 'comment while watching a game (typically
cards or chess); second-guess; banter, wisecrack, or
tease.'

*Bowling*

*Bowling Green*

The name of several towns in the U.S., and of a
section of lower Manhattan.  I do not know about the
other towns, but New York's Bowling Green got its
name from the fact that it was a level grassy area (a
green) where people bowled.

*debut, debutante*

The French word *but* means 'goal, aim, target'
and also 'point (in a game).'  *Debuter*, 'to make the
first play,' was originally used in old forms of billiards
and bowling, and probably other games.

*Kingpin*

The *kingpin* (or 1-pin or headpin) is the most
important pin in the starting array because its action
influences that of all the other pins.  The term is used
also for a person in the highest position of authority.

*Card Games*

*above-board*

Wrote Samuel Johnson:  &ldquo;In open sight; without
artifice or trick.  A figurative expression, borrowed
from gamesters, who, when they put their hands
under the table, are changing their cards.&rdquo;

*deal from the bottom of the deck*

A form of cheating.

*deuce*

Generally, two of anything construed as a single
unit (such as a $2 bill).  In card games where the ace is
high, the deuce is the weakest card.  In craps an opening
roll of deuce (two ones, or &ldquo;snake eyes&rdquo;) loses
immediately.  The unluckiness of deuces may be why
*deuce* came to signify misfortune or evil or the devil
himself.  (See the *OED*.)  The meaning of *deuce* to
signify a tied score is found only in tennis and table
tennis.

*discard*

Originally (and currently), to play or otherwise
divest oneself of a card.

*fast shuffle*

A method of setting up a *stacked deck (q.v.)*.
Generally, any deceptive, underhanded tactic.

*finesse*

The meaning of *finesse* as an elegantly tricky or
evasive stratagem originated in whist (and was later
incorporated into bridge, a descendant of whist),
where it is a technical maneuver in the play of the
hand.

*joker (in the deck)*

Anything, as a clause in an agreement, that
changes the purpose, effect, or nature of something,
often unexpectedly or surreptitiously.

*7-Up*

One story has it that this brand of soft drink was
named for the popular card game seven up (also
known as all fours and old sledge).  According to
another story, *7-Up* was so named because it was
introduced in a novel seven-ounce bottle and because
its maker wanted to exploit the popularity of Bubble-Up,
a competing soft drink.  A spokeswoman for the
Seven-Up Company, in St. Louis, could not confirm
either story; the name's origin, she said, is unknown.

*Shoot the moon*

In the game of hearts, players lose points for
every heart they're stuck with at the end of the hand.
But in the most popular version of the game, a player
dealt the right cards can *shoot the moon;* that is, try to
take all the hearts (plus the queen of spades) to earn a
bonus.  If the attempt fails, of course, the player will
end up with a handful of losers.  As a metaphor, the
phrase means to risk all for the ultimate prize.

*singleton*

One of anything, as distinct from other things
within its group (&ldquo;a set of twins and a *singleton&rdquo;)*.  The
term originated in whist, where it refers to the only
card of its suit in a hand, and is in common use in
bridge.

*stacked deck*

A deck the cards of which have been secretly
arranged—for example, by a *fast shuffle*—for the purpose
of cheating.  The victim (by extension, any victim)
has the *cards stacked against him*, a situation in
which he is powerless.

*vie*

This word, from the Old French *envier* (whence
also *envy*), once meant, among other things, to 'place
a wager in a game'; specifically, the card game gleek.
(See the *OED*).

*Carnival Games*

*close, but no cigar*

Cigars were once prizes in many carnival games.

*gimmick*

A *gimmick*, or gaff, is a secret device used to control
a dishonest game, such as a wheel of fortune.  Its
meaning off the lot is 'any trick, device, or stratagem
employed to increase something's interest or appeal.'

*play fast and loose*

The old fairground game, fast and loose (sometimes
called the strap game), wasn't exactly dishonest—it
merely played on the gullibility of the suckers,
as so many carny games do.  A strap would be folded
in half and rolled up with the two ends on the outside.

A sucker would be invited to bet that he could place a
stick in one of the inside loops so that when the two
ends of the strap were pulled apart the stick would be
caught (&ldquo;fast&rdquo;).  A sucker being a sucker, the stick was
always in the clear (&ldquo;loose&rdquo;).  *To play fast and loose*
now means to behave in a deceitful or irresponsible
manner.

*shell game*

This old gambling game (earlier known as thimblerig),
in which the operator openly places a pea
under one of three walnut shells, then rapidly shifts
the shells around and challenges a sucker to bet on the
location of the pea, has given its name to any kind of
chicanery or subterfuge.

*Children's Games*

*animal, vegetable, or mineral*

A phrase used to express doubt that the basic
nature or purpose of something has been definitely
established.  It comes from the word-guessing game
Twenty Questions, where the only hint given the
guessers is the word's category—*animal, vegetable, or
mineral*.

*blind-man's buff*

Any activity the practitioners of which seem not
to know what they are doing.  The *OED* cites figurative
uses of the term going back to 1590.  In the game,
a blindfolded player tries to catch other players who
are &ldquo;buffing&rdquo; (buffeting; i.e., 'playfully harassing')
him.

*dibs*

*Dibs*, short for *dibstones*, were animal knucklebones
(or pebbles) used in the game of dibstones, also
called jackstones or, more usually nowadays, jacks.
The meaning of *dibs* to stake a claim to something (as
in &ldquo;I have *dibs* on the crossword puzzle&rdquo;) may or may
not be related to that game.  *The Random House Dictionary*
says it is, but Wentworth and Flexner, in *Dictionary
of American Slang*, say it comes from *divvy*, a
slang form of *divide*.

*getting warm*

From the game Hunt the Thimble (known also by
many other names), in which one player hides an
object and tells the &ldquo;hunter&rdquo; whether he is getting
closer to it (&ldquo;warm&rdquo;) or farther from it (&ldquo;cold&rdquo;).

*hide-and-seek (or hide-and-go-seek)*

A simple game in which one or more players hide
themselves, and others try to find them.  Figuratively,
*to play hide-and-seek* is to maneuver evasively.

*hopscotch*

A rapid series of moves from place to place, literally
or figuratively by hopping.  *Scotch* is from an old
French word meaning 'scored line' or 'mark.'  In the
game hopscotch, a player tosses an object into a numbered
grid and then tries to retrieve it while hopping
sequentially into every area of the grid on one foot
(except the one where the object lies) without stepping
on a line or losing his balance.

*leapfrog*

To advance (ahead of others) by jumping.  In the
game, players take turns leaping over the bent backs
of players in front of them in a continually advancing
chain.

*musical chairs*

In the game of Musical Chairs (known also as
Going to Jerusalem), music is played while the players
circle two rows of chairs, placed back to back and
numbering one fewer than the number of players.  The
object is not to be left without a seat when the music
stops.

*Croquet*

*mall; Pall Mall*

Pall Mall, a street in an elegant district of London,
owes its name to Charles II's favorite game,
Pallamaglio (an ancestor of Croquet), which used to
be played in an alley (now called The Mall) in nearby
St. James's Park.  (Pall Mall cigarettes were so named
to suggest the upper-crustness associated with that district.)
The game got its name from the Italian *palla*
(whence *ball*) and *maglio* ('mallet').  The current *mall*
(a shopping center) is a direct descendant of the alley
where Pallamaglio was played.

*Dice Games*

*hazard*

This gambling game, a predecessor of craps, gets
its name from the Arabic az zahr 'the die.'

*raffle*

An old game using three dice; the winner of the
stakes was the player who rolled either three like numbers,
or the highest triplet if there were others, or the
highest pair if there was no triplet.  The word came to
be used for various kinds of lotteries.

*Golf*

*stymie*

Before the rules were changed in 1951, a player
could not lift another player's ball that lay between his
own ball and the cup.  That situation was called a
*stymie*, and the term came to mean any block or
obstruction.

*tee off; teed off*

To *tee off* is to begin the play of a hole by driving
the ball off the tee.  It has several figurative uses: 'to
begin anything; to attack or denounce; to strike hard.'
*Teed off*, aside from being the past tense of *tee off* in
the above senses, is an adjective meaning 'annoyed' or
'angry.'  The *NID3* relates it to the golf term, but other
sources think that it an offspring of *ticked off* (which
has been traced to WWI British navy slang) and
should be spelled *t'd off*, or that it is a euphenism for
*peed off*, itself a euphenism for *pissed off*.

*Marbles*

*knuckle down*

marble games are played by shooting marbles
with the thumb while the knuckles of the other fingers
rest on the playing surface for stability.  In games, *to
knuckle down* is 'to prepare to shoot a marble' in that
way; figuratively, it means 'to apply oneself seriously.'

*Pool and Billiards*

*carom*

An angled rebound.  The meaning comes from
Billiards, where a *carom* is a shot in which the cue ball
is made to rebound so as to hit two other balls.  *Carom*
is a shortening of *carambole*, an obsolete three-ball
game with a similar object.  The origin of *carambole* is
the East Indian carambola tree and its fruit, but their
connection with the game is obscure.  Were the fruits
used as balls in a primitive version of the game?

*Puzzles*

*jigsaw puzzle; piece of the puzzle*

A common metaphor, especially in detective fiction,
used to describe the intricate fitting together of
facts or other elements to achieve completeness.

*Miscellaneous Games*

*game not worth the candle*

A lost cause.  Before the invention of the electric
light, it was said that to continue a hopelessly lost
game would be to waste the candle used to illuminate
it.

*handicap*

The origin of this word was *Hand-in-Cap*, an old
lottery game in which two players and an umpire put
forfeit money in a cap.  The umpire then stated the difference
in value between two articles that the players
offered to exchange with each other.  If neither player
then put up more money, the umpire took the forfeit
stake and the articles were not exchanged.  If both
players upped their offers, the umpire took the money
and the articles were exchanged.  If only one player
increased his offer, that player won the stakes and
there was no exchange.

*high jinks*

Originally, various tavern games in which
patron would be challenged to sing or perform a silly
task or drink a quantity of ale (or whatever) on penalty
of some forfeit.  The tasks and who would do them
were sometimes decided by dice.  *High jinks* (often
spelled *hijinks*) now refers generally to any boisterous
play.

*jeopardy*

In Old French, *jeu parti* meant 'evenly divided
game'; hence, 'an uncertain outcome.'  In English,
*jeopardy* took on the meaning of 'danger or risk.'

*Iudicrous*

From the Latin *ludus* 'game, play,' *ludicrous*
once meant 'frivolous or characteristic of play.'  The
meaning has shifted somewhat to 'laughable or
absurd.'


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This time she was in the audience; Berlioz, contemporary
accounts declare, was at the drums, and every time
their eyes met he beat them with re-doubled fury.&rdquo;  [From
program notes, City of Birmingham (England) Symphony
Orchestra, 14 March 1985.  Submitted by John Ferguson, Birmingham.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It isn't going to be any one person's park...I think
dogs are wonderful.  But they've got to be kept on leashes,
like everyone else.&rdquo;  [From an interview in *the Los Angeles
Times*, March 1, 1985.  Submitted by Pamela Jones, Sepulveda,
California.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary of Contemporary American English contrasted with British English*](https://www.abebooks.com/9783324002004/Dictionary-contemporary-American-English-contrasted-3324002001/plp)
Givi Zviadadze, (Tbilisi University Press, 1981; VEB Verlag Enzyklopadie, Leipzig, 1985), 462pp.

A correspondent of mine in Yugoslavia sent me a
copy of the 1981 edition of this book; before I could
get round to writing anything about it, I learnt of the
1985 edition and decided to see in what ways it might
have been improved or expanded.  It arrived in April
1986 and is rather disappointing.

Zviadadze, as can be told by his name, is a Georgian
and, as can be told by this book (*DCAE)*, not a
native speaker of English.  It has always been my view
that for the analysis of certain kinds of information,
nonnative speakers are far superior, especially because
they have the ability to identify language anomalies
the native speakers are simply unaware of.  However,
it is absolutely essential that their analyses be vetted by
a knowledgeable native speaker to correct misconceptions
and misinterpretations that inevitably creep in if
researchers are left to their own devices.  From the lack
of any acknowledgment in the Preface, it would
appear that Zviadadze has relied entirely on his own
analyses of the texts that form the corpus of the
*DCAE*, and that is unfortunate.

The sources used, which number about 750
books, articles, and short stories in the bibliography,
represent generally a satisfactory, if eclectic, choice.
They do not, for example, suffer from the almost propagandistic
choices I have seen reflected in other
works from behind the iron curtain which tend to
ignore all western writings except those of Dickens,
Dreiser, Upton Sinclair, and a handful of other authors.
Yet, there are some curious choices— curious to
me because I have never heard of the authors or the
works cited and suspect their wide dissemination.  I
may be displaying a poverty of intelligence, but I have
no knowledge of Ludwell Hughes or his *Overnight
Guest* (Midwood Book, 1965), of Doug Harvey or his
*Abnormal Wench* (Merit Book, 1962), of John Ehle or
his *The Land Breakers* (Harper &amp; Row, 1964), or of
scores of other writers and their works.  There is also, I
think, too much emphasis on short stories and, perhaps,
on books and stories that employ eye dialect
(whence we find &ldquo;cri(c)k&rdquo; for *creek*, for instance).

Owing to the selection, which does not appear to
have been checked with someone who might have
offered useful advice, we occasionally find what
would accurately be classified as American dialecticisms
presented as standard (or colloquial, or slang)
Americanisms.  Owing to the absence of an American
editor, we frequently find odd inclusions, like *alcometer*
(which I understand but have not encountered),
*down one's alley* which sounds like an unidiomatic
version of *up one's alley), automobilist* (which, surely,
is an archaism), *beatster* (for *beatnik), bald as a pig's
knuckle*—British English equivalent: *bald as a bladder
of lard*—(for the absent but much more common *bald
as a coot)*, and many others.  The definition of *drug-store*
is a good one, but that of *hardware store* somehow
missed: &ldquo;a shop in which various metal-made
articles are sold.&rdquo;  No comment is offered on *nana* for
*banana* (Zola must be spinning), *fork out* and *fork
over* are given as variants of one another, *analyst* and
*analysis* are given, without comment, as the American
forms for *psychoanalyst* and *psychoanalysis*, and *air-line*
is given as the usual form of *beeline*.

In each case, the British English (BE) equivalent
is shown for the American English (AE) entry.  This
leads to occasional confusion, as there may be no BE
equivalent at the same language level as the AE form,
as in the case of (AE) *shake one's ass (tail*, etc.) and
(BE) *shake a leg*, which is the more common AE form,
as well.  Sometimes, such faulty parallels are commented
on, sometimes not.  In most cases, the fault lies
in the style of presentation of the information rather
than in the descriptive text, which often explains—
correctly—what is going on.  Zviadadze's failure to
seek guidance has had a particular effect on the listing
of slang terms, many of which seem quaint and
archaic: without advice, how could the author know
that *sharpie* is somewhat old-fashioned?  The citations
are all valid, and the lack of evidence from later
sources cannot, necessarily, be construed as evidence
that a word or expression is no longer frequent.  For 'a
man; fellow' are listed (AE) *cat, skate, duck, bugger*
and (BE) *bloke, cove, sod, bod*.  It is unusual to see
*bugger* classified as American English until one reads
the citations, most of which have &ldquo;little bugger,&rdquo;
which is something entirely different.  It is unlikely
that any Englishman would put *cove, bod*, and *bloke*
in the same list with *sod*.

People should be warned: researchers in any language
rely on citational evidence alone at their peril.
Using three good citations, namely, &ldquo;he ran toward
the moving cars,&rdquo; &ldquo;air hissed under the cars,&rdquo; and &ldquo;the
brakemen go along the cars to the caboose,&rdquo;
Zviadadze concludes that (AE) *the cars* = (BE) *train*.
Perhaps the worst plan was to include metaphors and
similes, among which we find, listed for AE: *sure as
cowflops; rain pitchforks, Coke bottles and bananas
(or kangaroos, chicken coops, darning needles, hammer
handles); cuckoo as a clock; dead as a fried mule;
bug's age, snake's age* (for a 'long time'); *innocent as a
starched shirt; naked as a bug*, etc.

Native speakers, seeing *on the cuff*, would expect
to find *off the cuff;* they would wonder at *slapjack* for
*flapjack* (especially as there is no citation for the former);
they might wonder how *gal* came to be equal in
status (albeit slang) with *frail* and how BE came to
adopt *judy* (same sense) as its own when citations like
&ldquo;This Judy is by no means a rutabage&rdquo; is available
from Damon Runyon (who, unfortunately, is missing
from the bibliography).  Americans will be surprised to
learn that *whin* is used in AE for *furze*, and that
*tippity-bounce* (for *seesaw*) appears outside its small
isoglossal boundary in New England.

There is much good material in this book, but it
has often been misinterpreted, misrepresented, or
mispresented.  There are typographical errors, as well:
*slapjack*, already mentioned, may be one; *vee-vee* for
*vee-pee* (vice president) is another; the heading of the
bibliography is &ldquo;Author's [*sic*] Quoted&rdquo; (which is
repeated for 43 pages as a running head); and Sylvia
Plath has been relegated to a home canning occupation
by calling her book *The Ball Jar*.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*English Usage*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/english-usage-a-guide-to-first-principles-international-library-of-phenomenology-and-moral-sciences_walter-nash/2967388/#edition=64088242&idiq=51460045)
Walter Nash, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1986), xiii + 167pp.

The dust jacket blurb of this book says, among
other things, that it &ldquo;will be an invaluable text for
undergraduate students of English language, and will
appeal to all readers interested in the elements of
usage and style.&rdquo;  The former statement may be true
for those specialized in the study of the English language;
the truth of the latter depends entirely on just
how much interest those readers have.  The book has
much merit and delves deeply into matters of style
(which, I suppose, cannot really be separated from
usage in the most general sense but which differs
markedly from it to the mind of the specialist).  The
best and most readable parts deal with the author's
personal observations on matters of usage; the going
gets a bit heavy in the analyses of stylistic nuances of
word order, but that comment is directed to the casual
observer of language, not to the specialist, who will
find Nash's treatment thorough, cogent, and to the
point.

For the layman, there is much useful information
and advice: he can simply skip over the penetrating
analyses of syntax.  The chapter on Punctuation is
wise, but it scarcely reflects on the haphazard practices
followed in British writing.  The chapter on
Authorities is sensible, but I was somewhat put off by
what I consider to be a rather sparse Bibliography
(even though it does contain—and with high praise—
Porter Perrin's *Handbook of Current English*, probably
one of the best books ever done on the subject).
Nash's approach to books like Fowler's *A Dictionary of
Modern English Usage*—indeed his whole attitude
toward usage books—is descriptive and critical—not
so much of the books as of those who consider them
bibles.

*English Usage* is not a usage book in the same
sense as a *Fowler* or a *Strunk &amp; White:* it is a book
*about* usage.  The author properly criticizes the writing
styles of some of the purveyors of purity in language,
citing passages here and there that would have served
their authors as bad examples.  Notwithstanding its
qualities, at $25 for 157 pages (of text) the book is a bit
pricey and may end up in the hands only of those who
must pursue their interest in language at any cost.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert E. Marks}

In your review of *Kind Words* [XI,4], you remark
that the euphemism *join the majority* (instead of *die*)
will soon be meaningless, &ldquo;for there will be more people
alive on this planet than ever died.&rdquo;  As we economists
say, whether this is so is an empirical matter, but
lack of data has rarely stopped us from theorizing.

Two simplifying assumptions are that the world
population has always been growing at a constant
compound rate, and that all people have always lived
to the same age (life span).  With these, I have proved
that, if the doubling time of the world population is
less than the life span, then the number of people who
have ever died will eventually overtake the number of
people alive.  Conversely, if the doubling time is
greater than the life span, the number of people who
have ever died is always less than the number of people
alive.

For example, if all people have lived to their biblical
span of three score years and ten, and if the world
population has always grown at its present doubling
time of about 39 years, (corresponding to a compound
annual growth rate of 1.78 per cent), then the number
of people alive has always been greater than the number
of people who have ever died.

Of course, these assumptions are unrealistic, but
the model does give us a feel for the relative sizes.

*[Robert E. Marks, University of New South Wales]*

## The Nihongo Religion [^a1]
*Paul V. Axton, Meikei High School, Ibaraki, Japan*

>To be a Japanese, at the same time that it means
being a member of the Japanese race, also means
speaking the Japanese language.—Takao Suzuki,
Lecture of March 18, 1978, on &ldquo;Why Teach Nihongo
to the Foreigners?&rdquo;[^a2]
>
>The reason Japanese have the same mentality is that
they have only one language and the same brain
functions.  From this point of view, if they lose the
Japanese language they are no longer Japanese.—
Tadanobu Tsunoda, *Nihonjin no No*, p. 171.[^a3]

For most Japanese the Japanese language is the
central ingredient of being Japanese.  To be a
member of the race means to be able to speak the language,
and one cannot speak the language if he's not
of the race.  Takao Suzuki has noted, &ldquo;Foreigners
properly ought not to understand the language at
all.&rdquo;[^a4] Those that do are intellectually banished as *hen
na gaijin* 'crack-brained foreigners' or, in the case of
Japanese Koreans, are classified as permanent aliens
who must be fingerprinted and registered as if they
have a home other than Japan.  Japanese children
abandoned in China as a result of World War II are
now non-Japanese because they don't speak Japanese.
Every few weeks the news shows weeping Japanese
being sent back to China having failed to find anyone
to sponsor them as Japanese citizens.  Petitions and
pleading from those who fail have yet to change this
official policy.  Not even birth can guarantee acceptance
into the race.  To be Japanese you must speak
Japanese, for that is what makes you Japanese.

This regard for the Japanese language dates back
to early Shintoism and can be traced to the recent
past in the *Kokutai No Hongi*, a document circulated
before the war and banned by the occupation
forces.  The most recent and well-known spokesman,
Tadanobu Tsunoda, has set out to prove scientifically
that Japanese is what makes the Japanese people
unique.

Tsunoda, a neurophysiological researcher with
the credentials of an ear-nose-and-throat specialist,
claims the Japanese brain functions have been modified
by the Japanese language so that Japanese have
maximum use of the left and right hemispheres of their
brain.  In a meeting of advanced and third-world
countries, he says, only the Japanese could really
understand both groups: advanced countries would be
left-brain dominant; third-world countries would be
right-brain dominant; while only Japanese could balance
these two and operate equally well out of either
hemisphere.[^a5] Perhaps it is this data Takao Suzuki had
in mind when he wrote, &ldquo;...the reason why the UN
does not now function effectively is because Japanese
is not one of its official languages.&rdquo;[^a6] The language enables its speakers to be arbiters of peace.  Strangely
enough, this special characteristic, which took thousands
of years to evolve, is lost with exposure to a second
language.

>Japanese themselves lose the functional
usefulness of the &ldquo;creative&rdquo; side of the brain as
soon as they begin speaking, reading, writing, or
thinking in English.  Japanese who feel out of their
element in English, including myself, are
somehow relieved when they hear the comment,
&ldquo;So many times when a person speaks really good
English, he's also a real drip.&rdquo;[^a7]

Tsunoda does not just mean that while speaking English
Japanese lose their creativity; he means that learning
English will &ldquo;dry up&rdquo; one's creativity entirely.
Japanese become &ldquo;drips&rdquo; by learning English.  His
experiments, he claims, show a marked drop in activity
in the creative side of the brain of second-generation
Japanese living overseas, of Koreans, Indians,
Westerners, or, it seems, anyone who is not
Japanese.[^a8]

Tsunoda notes that the height of Japanese creativity
was in the 17th to 19th centuries, during the Edo
Period when Japan was closed to foreign influence.  He
claims it was in this period that most all significant
cultural and artistic advances were made.  The Meiji
Period marks the demise of Japanese creativity, which
Tsunoda attributes to the opening of Japan and influence
from the West.  Western thinking produced something
of an epidemic of stifled creativity.[^a9]

This creativity, available only to the Japanese, is
owing to the amazing activeness of the &ldquo;linguistic side&rdquo;
of the Japanese brain.  Japanese receive laughing,
humming, crying, shouting, and animal noises in the
left side of their brain, while Westerners receive these
in the right side of the brain.  Because of this, Japanese
interpret what Westerners call &ldquo;noise&rdquo; in a very different
and more significant way.  These &ldquo;noises&rdquo;
impart a meaning of linguistic import without words.
The sounds of nature speak to Japanese where Westerners
can perceive no meaning.[^a10] Tsunoda first made
this discovery at an American dinner party where with
everyone jabbering away he noticed instead the
&ldquo;music&rdquo; of the crickets outside.  None of the other
guests could perceive the profound beauty of nature's
music but were instead totally occupied by conversation.
The Japanese brain allows nature's sounds to
intrude upon language.  (The fact that Tsunoda admittedly
speaks little English would also seem to affect the
profundity of cricket sounds).[^a11]

Tsunoda says nature's music has had such an
impact on Japanese that Japanese music is itself a careful
duplication of natural sounds.  Westerners hear
nothing but &ldquo;noise&rdquo; from nature and, as a result,
Western music sounds artificial.  The Japanese must go
through special training to appreciate Western music
(though they can never appreciate opera, for it taxes
the left side of the brain).  To contrast the two types of
music, Tsunoda says that a bird's singing will cancel
out Western music but will harmonize with Japanese
music in the Japanese brain.[^a12]

Tsunoda claims Japan is a favorite stop for Western
musicians because the Japanese have the capacity
to listen to music for long periods.  Apparently even
Western music is perceived in a special linguistic way
in the left side of the brain, which is why the Japanese
never respond verbally to a concert as that would be
like interrupting a conversation.  Japanese clap but
would never yell like Westerners, who receive music in
the right hemisphere of the brain.[^a13]

Tsunoda explains that the Japanese connect logic
to feeling, while Westerners pit logic against nature.
Thus the West has produced modern technology and
science which do not fit the Japanese regard for
human beings as part of nature and their concern to
coexist with nature.  As a result, Japanese science, like
Japanese music, cannot be duplicated by the West.
Tsunoda uses the example of a Japanese monkey study
to prove his point.  Japanese can understand monkeys
mentally while still able to view them objectively.
This psychological analysis of monkeys is something
that only Japanese scientists could accomplish.  This is
also why the Japanese readily understood and accepted
evolution.[^a14]

One drawback to Japanese thinking, according to
Tsunoda, is that the left side of the Japanese brain is so
busy that it literally wears people out.  This explains
the two major activities on trains: reading comic books
and sleeping.  Adult comic books represent a major
industry in Japan, which, Tsunoda explains, reflects a
special need of Japanese to rest their left brain.  Japanese
are so good at sleeping on trains, something
Tsunoda says Westerners don't do, because their left
brain is continually exhausted.  It is also this left brain
exhaustion that explains all the salutations in Japanese
using &ldquo;tired.&rdquo;[^a15]

In the final analysis there is very little about Japanese
behavior that Tsunoda does not attempt to
explain as being language-related.  The Japanese brain
functions the way it does because of the Japanese language;
these two unique elements came together in the
evolution of the race so that all of Japanese culture is,
in effect, a product of the language.  Tsunoda reaches
a crescendo when he claims Western people have cut
themselves off from the creative source and that the
world's hope for creative advancement now rests with
the Japanese people and their unique culture and language.[^a16]

Tsunoda's &ldquo;scientific&rdquo; discovery of the unique
nature of the Japanese language and brain has made
him a national celebrity whose theory is known at
every level of society.  He is taken quite seriously even
by the academic community, where university auditoriums
full of people soak up his lectures without a
snicker.  The Japanese media, public, and even significant
sections of government have eagerly adopted his
ideas.  This in itself is a significant insight into Japanese
mentality.

The Japanese quest for &ldquo;self-identity&rdquo; *(Nihonjinron)*
is a conscious national effort made necessary by
World War II.  The war constituted not merely a
military defeat but total religious and cultural devastation.
Of all things Japanese only the language
remained, and it is the language that has served to
explain Japanese &ldquo;uniqueness&rdquo; since.  Tsunoda simply
provides &ldquo;scientific&rdquo; evidence for the recurring
answers to the question of identity.  The Japanese are
unique because their language is unique: Japanese
cannot be understood by foreigners because foreigners
cannot speak Japanese and &ldquo;real&rdquo; Japanese can't speak
English.  The Japanese have an elusive, mystical mentality
because of the nature and function of the language.
Japanese books, magazines, and newspapers
are filled with the same kind of statements.  It is hard
to find even a Western analysis of Japan that has not
absorbed the same propaganda.

Roy Andrew Miller likens Tsunoda and his reception
to the racism of Nazi Germany, but simple racism
does not account for a discrimination that is just as
often anti-Japanese as it is non-Japanese.  This is true
not only of the Japanese abandoned in China but of
job applicants educated overseas and of children
returning from overseas.  In the last case the government
has initiated numerous studies looking into the
&ldquo;problem&rdquo; of overseas children in Japanese schools.
That there is a problem goes unquestioned.  It is
assumed that prolonged foreign influence, especially if
it is accompanied by fluency in a foreign language,
must be &ldquo;treated&rdquo; much as a disease is treated.  To
those who have worked for a long period with overseas
children, this &ldquo;problem&rdquo; prognosis seems even more
ridiculous.  Yet every year educators from all over
Japan meet and discuss how to handle these children
who have been exposed to foreign influence.  Rather
than racism this seems to be the reflexive action of a
weak ego.

While many foreign influences have been welcomed,
a strong linguistic influence in any form
appears as a threat to the binding force of being Japanese.
Edwin Reischauer has noted there is the fear
&ldquo;that, if many Japanese learned a foreign language too
well, this might impair their command of the Japanese
language or at least some of their identity as
Japanese.&rdquo;[^a17] As a result, Japan is intellectually isolated
behind its self-imposed linguistic barrier: &ldquo;... it
sometimes appears to be a tongue-tied giant or a sinister
outsider on the edges of world society.&rdquo;[^a18]

In explaining this linguistic barrier, Tsunoda
seems to justify its continuation.  According to him the
Japanese brain is so unique in its functions that it cannot
be made to handle English.  This uniqueness is not
something to be ashamed of but rather is itself evidence
of the uniqueness of all things Japanese.  There
is, of course, no hope to regear the functions of the foreign
brain so that it might handle Japanese.  As a
teacher of Japanese explained it in my presence (in
Japanese) the foreigner can never really understand
Japanese and even if he can perfectly imitate the
sounds of the language he is still only producing
sounds of which he has no knowledge.  The Japanese-speaking
foreigner is viewed as an intruder in the Holy
Place, a profaner of the sacred.  This exclusiveness of
the *Nihongo* Creed guarantees that the Japanese will
remain in their linguistic sanctuary, looking outward
at the rest of the world.

Tsunoda's work might be mistaken as an attempt
to fill a gap in the hypothesis of Benjamin Whorf.
Whorf, in trying to explain thought categories, relied
completely on linguistic observations and did not
provide independent evidence about cognition (Lennenberg
1953).  Though Tsunoda's experiments concentrate
on cognitive processes he is actually seeking to
prove something quite different than the Whorfian
hypothesis.  Whorf's theory is built upon the plasticity
of the child's cognitive system.  Children exposed to
different languages learn different perceptual systems.
According to Whorf, language determines perception
regardless of race.  Tsunoda's main thesis is that Japanese
brain functions are unique and that only Japanese
are properly evolved to handle the language in all of
its depth and grandeur.  For Tsunoda, race and language
are so intertwined that they cannot be separated.
This not only contradicts Whorf but ignores the
past twenty years of development in linguistics.
Though Tsunoda's hypothesis might also be called
&ldquo;linguistic determinism&rdquo; this would mean something
very different from what is commonly meant by the
term.

***

[^a1]: Nihongo is the Japanese word for the Japanese language. Credit for this title goes to Takao Suzuki who first
proposed making the language a religion.

[^a2]: Cited in Roy Andrew Miller, *Japan's Modern Myth*, New
York &amp; Tokyo: John Weatherhill, Inc., 1982. p. 144.

[^a3]: I would like to thank Saori Amagasaki for translating
and helping me understand Tsunoda's *Nihonjin no No*.

[^a4]: Takao Suzuki, *Tozasareta Gengo-Nihongo no Sekai*, Tokyo: Shincho-sha, 1975. pp. 176-177, cited in Miller, p. 157.

[^a5]: Tadanobu Tsunoda, *Nihonjin no No*, Tokyo: Taishukan
Shoten, 1978. pp. 170-172.

[^a6]: Takao Suzuki, Lecture of March 18, 1978, cited in
Miller, p. 289.

[^a7]: Tsunoda, *The Japan Foundation Newsletter*, April-May,
1978, cited in Miller, p. 76.

[^a8]: Tsunoda, *Nihonjin no No*. pp. 170-172.

[^a9]: Ibid. pp. 360-361.

[^a10]: Ibid. pp. 90-95.

[^a11]: Tsunoda, Lecture of November 9, 1984, at Tsukuba
University.

[^a12]: Tsunoda, *Nihonjin no No*. pp. 90-95.

[^a13]: Ibid.

[^a14]: Ibid. pp. 362-363.

[^a15]: Ibid. pp. 98-99.

[^a16]: Ibid. p. 378.

[^a17]: Edwin O. Reischauer, *The Japanese*, Tokyo: Charles E.
Tuttle Co., 1977. p. 398.

[^a18]: Ibid.

## Future Precedents and Nontoxic Poisons
*Paul Duchon, Laguna Hills, California*

We recently acquired a small vacuum cleaner.
The assembly directions stated, &ldquo;Press part A
and part B together.  When you hear an audible click,
you will know they are in place.&rdquo;  I did as directed.  I
heard the click.  It was certainly audible.  Then I spent
the rest of the evening alternately pulling parts A and
B apart and pressing them together, trying to hear an
inaudible click.

A few days later a politician said in a televised
interview, &ldquo;The saying 'the best politician that money
can buy' should become a relic of the past.&rdquo;  His words
sent me back to the never-never land of inaudible
clicks to look for relics of the future.  On a later program
another politician talked about past precedents.

Unfortunately, redundancies clutter every avenue
of verbal communication.  Most of them muddle the
message.  Yet I love them.  I love them as a dermatologist
loves pimples.  On the page, they flash red lights;
spoken, they set off buzzers in my ears.  I copy them—
along with other verbal litter—onto scraps of paper
which I have not yet learned to organize.  Many are
lost; resupply, however, is good.  The people, the
press, the air, they are all generous—to a fault.  In
company, my wife usually senses when I am about to
say the wrong thing.  If close enough, she nudges me,
unobtrusively and usually gently.  But after I say it,
her nudge, usually not gentle, is no longer a warning.
It is too late.  Yet you will hear statements like, &ldquo;I am
warning you in advance.&rdquo;  &ldquo;In advance&rdquo; is a sick
appendix: surgery is indicated.  Advertisers continually
offer &ldquo;free gifts.&rdquo;  Since a gift is a free offering, &ldquo;free
gift&rdquo; translates to &ldquo;free free offering.&rdquo;  Do not, however,
be carried away by propriety.  Take the gift,
even if it is free free.

More phrases that did not know when to stop:

*toxic poison*
*it will recur again*
*he voluntarily signed a note of his own volition:* Spoken by
an immigration officer.  Of course it was uttered in the
official monotone and length which denotes objectivity
and a dutiful presentation of every detail.

*the bottles split and burst*
*the market will take a dive down*
*at least ten years ago or more*
*new innovation*
*returned back*
*let us join together in prayer:* I must admit that it is better
than to join apart.  How much more effective is &ldquo;Let us
join in prayer&rdquo; or, simple and powerful, &ldquo;Let us pray.&rdquo;
Let us—for the language.

*internationally acclaimed all over the world*

I have thrown a boomerang.  My friends now collect
redundancies for me.  That much is good.  But they
have also developed incredibly sharp ears for the ones
I commit.  I am beginning to suspect that there is no
one to throw the first stone.  Why—in varying degrees,
of course—are we all so afflicted?  Perhaps we work
overtime in order to make certain that others understand
our brilliant thoughts.  Perhaps we fear that if
we stop talking we will have to start listening.  Perhaps
it goes back to those teachers who were more interested
in how many pages we filled than in what we
said.

But nothing is devoid of grace.  Years ago a Milwaukee
optometrist displayed a sign that many have
since imitated: EYES EXAMINED WHILE YOU WAIT.  I
must tell my barber about that.

## The Rhetoric of Real Estate
*John E. Kahn, London*

British speakers complacently mock the American
penchant for high style in low contexts.  American
menu-prose is a favorite target:

>*Ol' Smokey-burger:* puts the ham back in
hamburger—a sumptuous half-pound of melt-in-the-mouth
char-broiled ground steak from our
own prime corn-fed herd, nestled within a gently
toasted sesame-spangled bun, topped with a
lavish layering of sizzling hickory-smoked ham,
and garnished with a generous farm-fresh side
salad swathed in our own famed &ldquo;seventh
heaven&rdquo; dressing.  Memorably mouthwatering—a
real hamdinger.  (A homemade example, this—
exaggerated perhaps, but not uncharacteristic if
my memory of American diners is anything to go
by.)

As one well-known British TV commentator put it,
chewing bemusedly on a regulation American burger,
&ldquo;Where has all the flavor gone?—into the menu, it
seems.&rdquo;  Only Americans could write that way, the
British smugly think—or used to think.

If that ever were true, it certainly is not true now.
In trying to emerge from its long and cherished economic
complacency and to imitate successful American
marketing techniques (well and good), British
business is shedding its linguistic complacency too,
imitating American copywriting techniques (not so
good).  It is sad for a speaker of British English to
discover that the British are no more resistant to the
blandishments of yukspeak, are in the main no more
linguistically sophisticated than their &ldquo;poorly spoken&rdquo;
American cousins.  If no one ever loses a buck by
underestimating the taste of the public, the same, it
now appears, applies to a quid.

The stylistic field I want to survey is that of (real)
estate agents, specifically the pen-portraits of London
flats in their brochures.  Estate-agent code is a familiar
joke, of course: *conveniently located for local transport
facilities* = 'directly overlooking a major railway
junction'; *offering the purchaser a delightful opportunity
to decorate according to his own taste* = 'appallingly
sleazy'; *would benefit from some minor structural
improvements* = 'falling down,' and so on.

But it is hyperbole rather than euphemism that
the estate agent's copywriter excels at.  Here is a typical
gush, from a recent brochure:

>A stunning first floor apartment located in this
unique detached Gothic residence in this most
sought after treelined Avenue.  Sumptuously
appointed throughout this stylish and ingeniously
converted apartment features 2 magnificent
reception rooms and an absolutely breathtaking
roof garden.  Only an immediate viewing shall
suffice.

All that is missing is a few exclamation marks (and
hyphens, and a comma).

A word on estate-agent grammar, or lack of it: If
my aunt were a man she'd be my uncle, and if the typical
estate-agent copywriter were Randolph Quirk or
William Safire he or she would earn a living in some
way other than by working for an estate agent.  Nevertheless,
how indulgent should one be of the following
extract?—the first sentence in the first brochure I pick
up from the heap in front of me:

>Set in one of the areas finest mansion blocks, we
offer a well maintained 5th floor apartment in
ready to move into condition which includes
carpets and curtains.

The missing apostrophe from *area's* you might put
down to a typing error; the missing hyphens from
*well-maintained, 5th-floor*, and *ready-to-move-into*
you might ascribe to the pandemic mishandling of
those simple punctuation marks; the misrelated clause
at the beginning and the dubiously related clause at
the end are not so easily shrugged off: they are the
faults of pretension rather than ignorance, and the
illiteracy of pretentiousness is the vulgarest and most
reprehensible.  Another diverting example of grammatical
and stylistic laxity:

>...could equally appeal to buyers seeking either
a conversion or purpose built flat.  Undoubtedly
the quite spectacular 41' triple sized reception
together with the excellent location are the main
features this fine home affords.

Insert the missing hyphens.  Omit the *equally* (or else
introduce a second object of *appeals to)*.  Insert
another *a* after *or* for the sake of parallelism in the
*either-or* construction.  Change *together with* to *and* to
make a plural subject and thereby justify the plural
verb *are*.  Change *features* to *attractions*.  And then
cross the whole thing out, and start again.  (&ldquo;A cucumber
should be well sliced, and dressed with pepper and
vinegar, and then thrown out, as good for nothing&rdquo;—
Dr. Johnson.)

It is pointless flaying the grammar of estate-agent
prose any further.  All of ungrammatical life is there.
In general, if you are ever in need of a citation to illustrate
some particular grammatical failing (&ldquo;the
locale's most premier roads&rdquo;; a *due to* for an *owing to*,
and so on), you would do well to begin your search by
scanning listings from a few London estate agents.

Likewise for lexical confusion—*comprises* for *consists
of, quietude* for *quiet*, and so on.  In general,
estate-agent vocabulary is at once fascinating and
depressing.  On the one hand, abstraction, lack of
imagination, plodding clich&eacute;s, recourse to routine jargon—*feature,
situation, facilities, characterful, just a
stone's throw from*...  &ldquo;Representing excellent
value,&rdquo; the last-quoted blurb had begun, &ldquo;a family-sized
character-filled apartment...&rdquo; (my hyphens).
On the other hand, purple prose, dramatic clich&eacute;s,
high-flown epithets: &ldquo;...nestling on the 3rd floor of
this pristine mansion block,&rdquo; the item continues.  Both
*nestling* and *pristine* occur unsettlingly often, *pristine*
sometimes apparently being used in its controversial
modern sense of 'clean and tidy' rather than in its traditional
sense of 'original and uncorrupted.'

Another commonly misused word is *deceptively:*
in fact, I have never seen it used correctly in an advertisement.
Here are just two examples of its faulty use:

>The property is semi-detached and late Victorian
and forms part of the former Bath House, and is
deceptively spacious and interesting inside.
[brochure listing]
>
>A small recently built cottage that is located in a
deceptively quiet location and has its own private
patio garden.  [advertisement in *The Times*]

Used correctly, *deceptively* in effect negates the adjective
or adverb following it (in much the same way that
*apparently* does): *a deceptively simple contract* is
really a complicated contract.  There is an idiomatic
preference for favorable adjectives (*a deceptively simple
contract* is a far likelier collocation than a *deceptively
complicated contract):* furthermore, advertisers
would naturally tend to shun any unfavourable adjective
in their listings, regardless of its function.  On both
counts, the phrases *deceptively cramped and dull
inside* and *a deceptively noisy location* would be
avoided.  But what the copywriters should have written,
in conveying the contrast between appearance
and reality, was not the unintended (though doubtless
inadvertently accurate) *deceptively spacious and interesting
inside* and *a deceptively quiet location*, but
something like *spacious and interesting inside in spite
of first impressions* and *a surprisingly quiet location*.

Another misused word I keep coming across is
*trendy*.  In British usage, this has become a subtly pejorative
adjective (American dictionaries please note),
along the lines of *arty—* closer in meaning to 'faddish'
than to 'fashionable.' (As a noun, *trendy* is quite glaringly
disparaging.)  Nevertheless:

>Located only minutes from fashionable
Hampstead and Belsize Park with their transport
facilities and trendy shops and nightlife, we are
pleased to offer this ground floor conversion.

Missing hyphen, misrelated participle, and bathos
apart, this sentence founders on the embarrassing misconception
of the tone of *trendy*.  One is reminded of
the promises of Zimbabwe's Prime Minister Robert
Mugabe to &ldquo;crack down on dissidents.&rdquo;  In current
English, *dissident*—whether noun or adjective—is an
honorific rather than derogatory term: what governments
&ldquo;crack down on&rdquo; is *subversives, terrorists*, and
perhaps *agitators* and *counterrevolutionaries*.  *Dissidents*,
however, like *freedom fighters*, are &ldquo;given support
by&rdquo; the people or foreign powers.

Tone-deafness is again exemplified in the following
extract:

>Beautifully aspected at the rear of this
magnificent Edwardian mansion with superb
views onto the communal gardens, we offer a
pristine first floor luxury conversion oozing with
character.

That *oozing* says more than the copywriter knew,
perhaps.

After *nestling*, the copywriter's favorite participle
for describing a conversion (that is, any of a set of discrete
apartments built within a house that was formerly
a single home) is *hewn:*

>One of a quartet of stunning new conversions
hewn from a quite magnificent Victorian house
and finished to a degree of luxury rarely seen.

*Carved* and *sculptured*, equally inappropriate, sometimes
replace *hewn* in such contexts, but *hewn*
remains the most popular by virtue of its appealingly
archaic ring.  Archaism is much in vogue.  In an extract
quoted earlier, the words &ldquo;Only an immediate viewing
shall suffice&rdquo; convey a confident authority—presumably.
In another advertisement, the declaration &ldquo;Positioned
only seconds from Olde Highgate village&rdquo;
appeals to one's taste for the picturesque and antique
(or makes one's gorge rise).  Perhaps the most frequently
used archaism is *whilst*.  It typically indicates
either some pseudo-contrast (as though this were an
exciting feature of the property) or some actual incongruity
in the building (as though this didn't really matter).
First, the &ldquo;advantagenous&rdquo; pseudo-contrast:

>The accommodation is spacious and is in keeping
with the traditional theme whilst being in very
good order throughout.

Then, the &ldquo;trivial&rdquo; incongruity:

>Whilst retaining a fine Victorian facade, the
property has a contemporary and somewhat
futuristic interior, and is peacefully set in one of
the Village's most historic quarters.

Note, by the way, the non sequitur introduced by the
second *and* here.  This spurious *and* is another hallmark
of the exuberant estate-agent copywriter.

Purple prose is especially risible when the copywriters
fail to sustain it.  A propensity for bathos is the
Achilles heel of these novelists *manqu&eacute;s*.  I have quoted
one example of this failing, at the discussion of *trendy*
above.  Here is another delightful example:

>This Edwardian residence was converted 2 years
ago and offers the finest accommodation
currently available.  Offering superb entertaining
rooms, a fabulous floodlit rear garden and a
parking space.

Finally, three tricks of estate-agent rhetoric: reinforcement
through tautology; the camouflaging of
confessions; and irrelevant detail.

1\.  Two examples of redundancy have already
been quoted—the *equally* in

>...could equally appeal to buyers seeking either
a conversion or purposes built flat

—and *located* in

>A small recently built cottage that is located in a
deceptively quiet location.

Consider, as a further example, the emphatic—and
otiose—*both* in the following extract from a brochure
(with an excruciating archaism thrown in as a bonus):

>In this quiet and idyllic position twixt both
Hampstead and Belsize Villages, a huge family
sized apartment...

2\.  The camouflaging of confessions takes various
forms.  Since the copywriter sometimes has to acknowledge
&ldquo;imperfections&rdquo; (serious drawbacks) in the property,
if only to retain some credibility with the clients,
he might as well take the opportunity of displaying his
talents.  Euphemism has already been mentioned:
&ldquo;Ideal for the DIY [Do-It-Yourself] enthusiast&rdquo; is a
beautiful example I have just noticed in the latest brochure
sent to me.  Rather subtler is the bland, toneless,
apparently offhand mention of the drawback as one
incidental factor among many:

>The flat features its own balcony off the reception
room and requires some cosmetic improvements.

(Again the non-sequitur *and*.)

>The flat has been superbly fitted and includes
fitted carpets.  Reception 25'6 by 12'9, unusual
shaped room.  Kitchen 9'6 by 7'2, fully fitted
units...

Don't complain when you discover that the living
room is designed on the model of the letter Z, and has
concave walls: we did specify that it is an &ldquo;unusual
shaped room.&rdquo;  What, you didn't notice?

Cleverest of all is to turn the disadvantage to
advantage.  The best form of defense is attack.  Couch
a confession in the style of a boast, and the punter will
cheer rather than hiss.  The most common example, I
believe, is the (mandatory) legend on some cigarette
advertisements in Britain: &ldquo;Every packet carries a government
health warning.&rdquo;  One's subliminal response
to this phrasing is &ldquo;Wow!,&rdquo; as if the wording had been
&ldquo;Every packet carries a free raffle ticket.&rdquo;  Here, from
an estate agent's brochure, is a more sophisticated
example:

>Benefitting from a sun-kissed west facing garden
with direct access from the reception, this
interesting conversion with original cornicing and
marble fireplace will tempt anyone wishing to
put only minor finishing touches in order to
create a truly fine home.

(That *wishing*, rather than *willing*, is a stroke of
genius.)

A common ploy in camouflaging a confession is
the substitution of *and* for *though*.  The word *though*
is in fact taboo in estate-agent prose: never concede
openly, is the watchword.  So:

>The accommodation is in superb decorative order
and would ideally suit those seeking additional
living space as opposed to a 2nd bedroom.

For *and would ideally suit* read *though it would better
suit*.

3\.  And here, lastly, is an example of the irrelevant
detail, struck from the flint of the copywriter's
imagination in the heat of his creative frenzy:

>Presenting a marvelous facade of immense
character, an enchanting Victorian home just
halfway between the rolling acres of Hampstead
Health and the fine shopping and transport
facilities of the High Street.

It's the *rolling acres* that slays me.  Do they take us for
fools, these copywriters?  Yes—and presumably, for
the most part they're right.

## Antipodean English: *In Praise of Creative Error*
*George L. Turner, University of Adelaide*

Not all error is praiseworthy.  In an earlier issue of
VERBATIM [VI,1], I wrongly identified South Australia's
*three-cornered jack* with *Bathurst burr* (genus
*Xanthium)* instead of *spiny emex* (genus *Emex)*.  There
is no delight in an error like that.  One just wishes it
unwritten.  But when a child describes two films as &ldquo;a
very clutching film of romance&rdquo; and &ldquo;a bloodlusty
adventure&rdquo; there is a kind of manic poesy in the words
that creates a delight never imagined by the writer.

So it is with the traditional school &ldquo;howler.&rdquo;  It
releases us momentarily from the strictness of linguistic
propriety, in an imaginative Joycean spelling like
*horrorscope* (with its eerie nightmare prognostications)
or in the extravagant action of *The dog raced down
the street emitting excited whelps*.  Precarious indeed
are the lines dividing our meanings.  We insist that
*writing* cannot be written *writting*, or *written writen*
and children take no notice.  Serves them right then if
we laugh when they produce *The American Indians
had very few domestic comforts apart from some
coarse mating on the floor*.  I am reminded of an
acoustically unsatisfactory staff club in a university
where you could hear an echoing version of the conversation
at every table but your own.  On a blackboard
outside it was aptly referred to as *Dinning
Room*.

There are many good arguments for standardized
spelling in a society like ours, but the possible misconceptions
arising from a dangerous similarity of words
is seldom considered.  Yet spelling alone may preserve
major distinctions.  In New Zealand a word borrowed
from Maori, where it means 'house' or 'shed' is *whare*
pronounced in an Anglicized way to rhyme with
&ldquo;sorry,&rdquo; and now meaning 'beach house or holiday
house.'  The boy who wrote *Dad thought Mum looked
tired so he hired a whore for the holidays* was only following
analogy in his spelling.

A class was asked (don't ask me why) to copy
down a sentence *Sir Walter Raleigh approached, and,
unbonneting, bowed to Queen Elizabeth*.  In one
recension the unfamiliar word appeared as &ldquo;unbuttoning.&rdquo;
And what teacher's notes in what context could
have led one examinee to coin a word *dumbstruck*,
which another candidate heard as &ldquo;bumstruck&rdquo;?

It is very difficult to manufacture a howler (my
examples are all genuine).  Elizabeth Jolley, in the
novel *Miss Peabody's Inheritance*, has a school typist
produce *The copulation in the public schools is increasing
at an alarming rat*.  It seems a little contrived,
though I did know a Dutchman who talked of the
&ldquo;Public&rdquo; Library.  I have no prejudice against the
Dutch, by the way; it is pure chance that one of the
items in my collection of public examination howlers is
*a creature dragged from the Netherlands*.

It is bad luck for a young writer whose words
chime differently in an adult mind.  American readers
can perhaps make something of a quotation &ldquo;How like
a fawning Republican he looks.&rdquo;  Sometimes indeed
the adult is responsible for a ludicrous touch which he
himself chooses to give to an innocent expression—
&ldquo;Polonius was shot through the arras,&rdquo; perhaps, or a
newspaper headline &ldquo;Police in dark on two girls.&rdquo;
(Two girls were missing.)

Teachers tempted to swap howlers are sometimes
deterred because it appears to be ridiculing students.
There is no doubt a danger of that, and yet a good
howler is as much a criticism of the language as the
student.  Sometimes a word (like *morale)* is too similar
to another word for a safety (*I would like to be a nurse
to cheer up patients with low morals*).  Sometimes,
admittedly, we detect a Daisy Ashford innocence
about life: *She asked him to marry her.  Sebastian
kindly accepted the offer*.  Sometimes no more than
memory is at fault and creative skill goes into filling a
gap.  One's heart goes out to the student whose memory
of a line from Keats went astray and was heroically
recovered with only partial loss of face in &ldquo;Season
of fruits and mellow wistfulness.&rdquo;

Even when grammatical patterns are not standard,
an inexperienced writer may show a creative skill
or syntactic inventiveness in a sentence like *Australia
has wild life such as koalas which are trying to be
saved by setting up reserves*.  It is not only the inexperienced
who can be caught with a misrelated participle,
but the result is seldom as dramatic as the sentence in
a schoolboy's story: *The hurricane swept through the
town in which I had lived for twenty-five years causing
chaos and smashing buildings and factories*.

Teachers also can stumble over double meanings.
One was showing slides after her return from studying
abroad.  When she came to pictures of the Roman
forum she said, &ldquo;And here are the statues of the vestal
virgins, except some of them that have been knocked
off.&rdquo;

Behind the howler is a sincere desire to communicate.
Sometimes it is merely a sense of tone or period
that is lacking: (*Othello had troubles because he was
an ethnic or They went to the Forest of Arden for a
different lifestyle)*.  Written language has many pitfalls
and we do not always analyze them or help the
apprentice to avoid stumbling over them.  It is often
possible to look at the same passage as a ludicrous
gaffe and as a reasonable attempt to definite an unfamiliar
thing in a still unfamiliar form of the language.
This passage was ridiculed but is not really inaccurate:
*The poem &ldquo;Ballad&rdquo; is a ballad and therefore it has no
author.  It was written when nobody could read or
write, so they used to do it by singing*.

Also ridiculed was the contradiction *The cannibals
lived in the uninhabited jungle*.  I began to grin
myself, but my grin turned a little wry when I recalled
mentioning Giles's 1872 &ldquo;discovery&rdquo; of Ayers Rock to
my son who works among people to whom Uluru, or
Ayers Rock, has been a religious center for about forty
thousand years.

## Mine Eye May Be Deceiv'd
*James C. Felty, Wolfville, Nova Scotia*

>Yes; quaint and curious war is!  
You shoot a fellow down  
You'd treat if met where any bar is,  
Or help to half-a-crown.  
—Thomas Hardy: &ldquo;The Man He Killed&rdquo;

Any novice in prosody would be quick to point
out that *down/crown* is a *perfect* (or *true)
rhyme*, but unless Thomas Hardy's ex-soldier
was speaking with, perhaps, a &ldquo;Wessex&rdquo; accent, *war/
bar* is less than perfect: it is an *eye rhyme*.

Two words rhyme when their accented vowels
and all succeeding sounds are identical.  Because of the
sometimes bizarre nature of English orthography,
words which, to the eye, should *not* rhyme, to the ear
*do* rhyme: *journal/colonel; busy/dizzy; who/Sioux;
blubbered/cupboard*.

The reverse process is also common: there are
many words in English that look as if they should
rhyme with one another but do not.  These are called
*eye* (or *sight) rhymes*.  (They should be distinguished
from the heteronyms previously discussed by Donald
Drury in VERBATIM [IX, 3 and X, 1]: heteronyms have
different pronounciations but, because of their *identical
spellings*, they would never, strictly speaking, be
taken for rhymes.)

Rhyme, in the history of literature, is a relatively
recent phenomenon.  It was not a device which was
integral to Greek, Roman, or early Anglo-Saxon poetry.
By the time of Chaucer, however, rhyme was
well-established.  Scholars speculate that its rise to
prominence came about through its use in the Catholic
Church as a mneonic aid in religious ceremonies.

To historians of the English language, rhyme has
proved to be a useful key in determining how words
were pronounced at different times and in different
places.  Thousands of examples could be cited, but this
excerpt from Dryden's *The Hind and the Panther* (I:
445-447) should suffice:

>Without respect they brush'd along the wood,
Each in his clan, and, filled with loathsome food,
Ask'd no permission to the neighb'ring flood.

Three words which once contained the same vowel
sound have, over a period of three hundred years,
parted company.  Strictly speaking, Dryden's use of
*wood/food/flood* does not constitute an eye rhyme
because at the time that he used these words, they
actually did rhyme.  If the words were used today in a
similar manner, however, they would constitute eye
rhymes.

>Coleridge's Ancient Mariner says (II: 53-56):
>
>And every tongue, through utter drought,  
Was withered at the root:  
We could not speak, no more than if  
We had been choked with soot.

In this instance Coleridge is making use of a genuine
eye rhyme.

I suppose that most word lovers are addicted to
making lists and notations of curiosities they encounter.
Eye rhymes have been a consuming interest of
mine for years.  I cannot say exactly what precipitated
this mania, but I do know the first example which
went into my notebook: *mint/pint*.  Dozens of other
items have been added to the list since then.  I doubt
that my list even approaches completion.  My teaching
and writing duties have never allowed me the time to
search an unabridged dictionary in a methodical manner;
with such perseverance this list might be several
times longer.

The eye rhymes below have been alphabetized
from that vowel after which all remaining letters are
identical.  Most of my items are in pairs, but there are
a few triplets and one sextuplet—or septuplet, if I am
granted a Scottish pronunciation given in the *OED*.  In
many cases I have let one word arbitrarily represent
one or more other words.  For instance, *come/dome*
could as easily be *some/home*.  Some examples are a
touch obscure.  Some, depending on the reader's dialect,
can be made to rhyme.  And I'm never completely
happy when I include a proper noun.  On the whole,
though, the list illuminates another of those curiosities
which make the English language a constant source of
wonder.

>*A*
>
>rabot/sabot  
games/Thames  
gasp/wasp  
face/pace (prep.)  
ran/wan  
bass (voice)/pass  
ache/cache  
sand(er)/wand(er)  
caste/waste  
taco/Waco  
canes/manes (souls)  
fasten/hasten  
pad/wad  
hanger/manger  
chat/what  
paddle/waddle  
pant/want  
latch/watch  
bade/wade  
canton/wanton  
later/water  
Hades/shades  
car/war  
bather/father/lather  
baffle/waffle  
garble/warble  
patio/ratio  
raft/waft  
card/ward  
cattle/wattle  
bagged/ragged  
garden/warden  
mature/nature  
ague/vague/Prague  
are/care  
daughter/laughter  
paid/plaid/said  
cares/lares  
lavage/savage  
bake/sake (alcohol)  
scarf/wharf  
cave (beware)/gave  
baked/naked       
farm/warm              
gavel/navel           
balance/valance          
barn/warn           
haven/raven (prey)             
(v&amacr;—)            
harp/warp          
slaver (drool)/waver           
hall/shall           
marry/starry/quarry            
taxes/axes (plural of *axis)*       
mallet/wallet          
cart/wart          
gallop/wallop           
gas/has/was           
axis/taxis          
callow/wallow          
base/rase          
quay/say           
ally/rally          
baseline/vaseline           
player/prayer          
salve/valve          
cash/wash           
pays/says           
rename/sesame  
>        
>*E*
>
>be/re (musical note)  
ease/lease      
here/there/were             
sea/yea           
beast/breast           
erring/herring           
bead/head           
beat/great/teat           
despite/respite          
deaf/leaf           
breath/wreath            
fetched/wretched                         
beak/steak            
beer/freer              
ether/tether             
leaked/peaked               
height/weight            
petty/pretty            
(sickly)            
demise/premise           
brevet/chevet            
deal/real (money)            
demon/lemon            
devil/evil           
dean/Sean           
lenses/menses             
few/Jew/sew        
fear/wear       
Nepal/sepal           
fey/key          
beard/heard          
>
>*I*
>
>hi/mi        
climber/limber           
fir/pir            
chic/tic           
primer (school-book)/timer           
his/this   
licked/wicked        
list/Christ              
die/Brie            
imply/simply           
distress/mistress                        
died/Lied (song)            
bind/wind (air)            
lithe/withe           
lien (spleen)/mien            
finger/ginger/singer            
give/hive           
drier/tier            
stingy/stringy             
shrieve/sieve          
mint/pint           
onion/Orion        
>
>
>*O*
>
>go/to  
brooch/pooch  
fosse/posse  
broad/load  
food/flood/wood  
cost/post  
koan/loan  
hoof/roof  
both/moth  
does (verb)/hoes/shoes  
cool/wool  
bother/mother  
door/poor  
pouch/touch/mouch  
colder/solder  
choose/loose  
bough/cough/though/through/hiccough/rough/sough (Scot. pronunciation)  
golf/wolf  
boot/foot  
doll/poll  
coped/moped (motorbike)  
holly/wholly  
color/dolor  
cord/word  
mom/whom  
cores/mores  
foul/ghoul/soul  
Roman/woman  
cork/work  
could/mould  
bomb/comb/tomb  
form/worm  
pound/wound (injury)  
come/dome  
lorry/worry  
omen/women  
gorse/worse  
pour/sour/your  
don/son  
mort/wort  
bourse/course  
ponder/wonder  
forte (music)/torte  
mouth/your  
bone/done/gone  
forth/worth  
clover(r)/lover(r)/move(r)/    
donkey/monkey   
chose/dose/lose   
donor/honor  
Moses/roses  
novel/shovel  
cow(er)/low(er)  
bowl/fowl  
>
>
>*U*
>
>hue/rue  
cure/sure  
fuss/puss  
buffet (sideboard)/tuffet  
bury/fury  
but/put  
bused/fused  
butch/hutch  
rugged/slugged  
bush/rush  
lumber/plumber  
humor/rumor  
hunger/plunger
>
>
>*Y*
>
>cyan/Ryan

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Feminist Dictionary*](https://www.amazon.com/Feminist-Dictionary-Cheris-Treichler-Kramarae/dp/0863580157)
Cheris Kramarae and Paula A. Treichler, (Pandora Press
(Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul), 1985), x + 587pp.

Where to begin?  With the unpleasant little entry
for *lexicographer?*  With the nasty piece on *dictionary?*
with the inaccurate definition of *grammar?* the somewhat
silly entry at *language?*  It is hard to tell.  It is, in
fact, hard to tell if this is really a dictionary in the
usual sense of the word: much of it is a book of quotations
(mostly) from the writings of militant feminists.
It is universally condemnatory and bitterly sarcastic, a
relentless diatribe against men, males, the masculine
gender and, particularly, all who are seen to purvey
language as the medium of oppression.  As an expression
(= 'outpouring') of propaganada, it is well done;
as a dictionary and what we usually mean by that
term, it is Biercian—but totally devoid of humor or,
indeed, any compensatory qualities to mitigate its
viciousness.  Were I a woman, perhaps I might not feel
so angry with it, but I should probably be made angry
by it.  As a man, I am irritated by its provocations,
which would annoy any man by blaming all men for
the injustices women have undoubtedly suffered
throughout the ages.  Language undergoes semantic
change under myriad influences, many of which are
poorly understood.  If such change can be accelerated
by propaganda, I have no objection to that.  I object to
the notion that change can be legislated.

There are some aspects of this book that are good,
some that are bad and, possibly, self-defeating.  The
worst in the latter category is the continual confusion
between lesbianism and feminism—at least insofar as I
understand their concepts and practices.  Lesbianism
has to do with women being sexually involved with
other women; I don't really much care what people do
with each other sexually—whether they are men or
women—as long as they don't interfere with the sexual
pursuits or inclinations of others.  Feminism, as I
understand it, is something entirely different, being a
matter of moral and civil right; that many who
espouse feminism are also lesbians may be unfortunate
for The Cause and has given it a somewhat warped
perspective and aspect.  There are, of course, other
aspects to feminism—psychological, linguistic, sociological,
etc.—and *A Feminist Dictionary* treats them
all.  What is objectionable about it, and what sets it
apart from what most people expect from a dictionary
or other reference work is its proselytizing, strident
tone: the reader gets the feeling that the book is
screaming at him.

As for the pronoun of reference *(him)* in the preceding
sentence, it is the epicene one; on the other
hand, there may be few women (and no feminists)
who would react with the same measure of revulsion
as a man to the tone of the book.

Looking at the book from an entirely different
point of view—that is, not as a dictionary but as a collection
of statements on the many topics it covers—it
must be said to be an extremely useful documentation
of the views of feminists on those topics, which range
from *A, abbess*, and *Abominable Snowmen of Androcratic
Academia* through an incredible variety of
entries that few people are likely to know enough
about to look up, to *zugassent* &ldquo;Term used by George
Noyes Miller (1845-1904) for the male continence program
practiced at Oneida, New York, a utopian community
in which members regularly analyzed sex roles
and discussed their utopian visions of sex and class
equality.&rdquo;  Set into a framework provided by the editors/authors,
the &ldquo;definitions&rdquo; consist almost entirely
of quotations, for which a full bibliography is provided
(pp. 515-87).

While it is conceivable that someone might look
up entries like *pronoun* (and other language terms),
*Ms, dike*, and some others, it seems less likely that a
user might expect to think of or encounter *PMZ* (&ldquo;Post
menopausal zest.&rdquo;), *quilting*, or *Grandmother Turtle*.
Thus, the book may be regarded as a series of short
and long items that are to be read as such: it is only a
bit peculiar to encounter such matter in alphabetical
order.  As documentation, *A Feminist Dictionary*
records an enormous amount of information in a relatively
small compass.  Occasionally, that information is
a bit distorted, though it is not easy to tell to what
purpose.  For example, the entry on *Random House
Dictionary* reads as follows:

>Edited by Jess Stein (1967), was financed inhouse
by a publishing corporation interested in
profit.  Though dictionary-making in the U.S. has
always been competitive and motivated by
economics as well as scholarship, the *Random
House Dictionary* embodies some of the
consequences of purely commercial lexicography.
(James Sledd 1972)

It is not clear what these comments have to do with
feminism or even lexicography.  There may be some
complimentary and some unkind things to be said
about the *RHD* and its treatment of issues that arouse
feminists to militant rage, but they are scarcely worthy
of repetition out of the context of the subject at
hand.  In defense of the *RHD* it must be acknowledged
that, whatever its shortcomings, it has a better reputation
and has better withstood the test of time than its
critics.  There are few other seemingly gratuitous
entries in the book, but they are in the minority.  All in
all, viewed as a social document, *A Feminist Dictionary*
is an outstanding piece of work that collects into
one convenient volume the cogent, intelligent comments
of feminists alongside the irresponsible ravings
of the lunatic fringe, all of which must (apparently) be
regarded as representative of *feminism*.  As a dictionary,
*per se*, it is a disaster, but only a minor one.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Hawaij in the Washing Machine
*N.C. Nahmound, Jerusalem*

Jerusalem is a linguist's delight.  Within the city
limits one can find not only all the existing European
languages, but also most of those of the Middle
East as well.  In addition to Amharic and three
variations of Persian, on any given day at the Old City
*souq* one can hear Arabic from Iraq, Yemen, and
North Africa, like a counterpoint against a background
of the local dialect.  There is also 'written,' or
classical Arabic, of course, which is used on the radio
but not in workaday conversations in the *souqs* and
*casbahs*.  Its pronounciation, closely adhered to
throughout the Middle East, purrs with a grace and
rhythm that are conducive to poetry.

The Maghr&eacute;bi, or North African dialect is a different
kettle of fish.  Although we Anglo-Saxons refer
to all Arabic-speaking countries as the &ldquo;Middle East,&rdquo;
that is quite a relative view; a resident of, say,
Bagdad, looks at North Africa as the western part of
the world.  The word *Maghr&eacute;bi* means *western*.
Maghr&eacute;bri, now widely spoken in Israel, was introduced
by the Jews who came from Morocco, Tunisia,
and Algeria in the early 1950s.  Maghr&eacute;bi has none of
the euphonious features of literary Arabic.  Like
Czech, it is nearly vowelless.  It jolts along, rattling
teeth and jarring jaws like an intercity bus taking the
stones and potholes at 65 mph.
Compare:

>As-saf&aacute;rjal kan n&aacute;zal l'ess&uacute;bbak
(Literary Arabic)  
L'sf&racute;zl kn&nacute;tzl l'ls&racute;zm (Maghr&eacute;bi)  
The quince is falling on the window. (translation)

*Nearly* vowelless, that is, meaning the aeiou
familiar to speakers of English and Spanish.  There is
one vowel in Magrh&eacute;bi, however, that seems to occur
without fail every time the larynx, pharynx, and epiglottis
are exhausted from trying to pronounce a series
of five or more consonants.  This &ldquo;last-straw&rdquo; letter is
the &ouml;, a sort of *u* sound, as impossible to describe as it
is to pronounce.  Something like it can be heard occasionally
in German and Hungarian but never, never in
literary or Middle Eastern spoken Arabic.  I feel my
facial muscles assume most unusual positions as I take
a deep breath to get out at least an approximate &ouml;, to
the unabashed delight of my conversation partners.

As can be readily imagined, such a state of affairs
complicates word identification for the beginner.  As
phrase after phrase zips by, endings and beginnings of
words melt into one another until all that has gotten to
you is something like &ldquo;brdbrdbrdbrd.&rdquo;  When I started
plucking a recognizable word here and there out of a
sentence in flight, I still had to put it through a mental
computer for decoding, a lengthy process which
entailed reinstating its vowels.  This I did by imagining
the word written in Arabic letters on a mental blackboard
and chalking in the vowel signs.  (Learning languages
by ear does not come easy after thirty-five
years of learning them by the visual method.)

Jewish Maghr&eacute;bi Arabic cannot be learned by the
visual method anyway, at least not in Israel, since
there is no written material on the subject for the
beginner.  Thorough investigation of the North African
shelves at Jerusalem's Sephardic studies library yielded
only three stodgy, erudite volumes, none of them
geared to my level.  The next stop after leaving this
august institution was ... the kitchen.  Since the
motive for undertaking my present project was to be
able to participate more fully in activities with neighbors
and sisters-in-law, what more natural setting for
a housewife's research?  So, whenever I went visiting, I
took along a pencil and notebook.

&ldquo;*Esh h&aacute;da?*&rdquo; ['What is this?'] I would ask as I
helped peel vegetables.

&ldquo;Khiz&ouml;, ['carrots']; bdl&zcaron;&aacute;n ['eggplant']; dr&scaron;&ccaron;&uacute;meh
['garlic'].&rdquo;  I put down the potato-peeler long enough
to scribble my new etymological discoveries.  Pretty
soon the notebook thickened, and I began to burble
intelligible (albeit far from grammatical) sentences on
the order of &ldquo;The farmer threw the cow over the
fence, some hay.&rdquo;  These apron-clad linguistic seminars
were never boring for either side, it goes without saying;
indeed, the hilarity still remains at a constant
high, judging by the reactions to an American accent
wrapped laboriously around familiar words and expressions.

The highlight of my last such visit to a sister-in-law
was the *haw&aacute;ij* in the washing machine.  In the
Yemenite dialect, *haw&aacute;ij* is a mixture of spices that
goes into soup.  To the Moroccans it means *clothing,
laundry*.  Thus when I was told that *haw&aacute;ij* went into
the washing machine with detergent, my immediate
reaction was &ldquo;Wow, that's going to be an exotic-tasting
load of laundry!&rdquo;

I set up my English-Arabic lexicon by subject,
with index tabs headed *Family, Shopping, Food, Furniture,
Clothing*, etc., a collection of the basic topics
of conversation indulged in by homemakers everywhere.
The verb section of the notebook grew rapidly,
too, as bits of conjugations fit together and fell into
place like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.

But my word lists are not all serious.  In the back
of the notebook I keep a little running list of words
which appeal to me for various reasons.  Some are
poetic, others whimsical.  Still others just plain tickle
the funny bone.  Three of my current entries seem to
have a rather wintry flavor:

>*Brrrd* means just what it sounds like: '*cold*.'
*Akhc&ccaron;&uacute;*, on the other hand, is not a sneeze; it
means 'sister.'
*Wldkhc&ccaron;&uacute;*, one of the prizewinners for
uninterrupted consonant strings, means
'nephew' (literally, 'sister's son'.)
Then there is *wahdlh&aacute;za—whatchamacallit*.

I believe in memorization, and I make up my own
exercises:

>*L't&racute;bia g&lacute;&scaron;t al'l'z&racute;bia*.  
The baby is sitting on the rug.

I also collect proverbs:

>Krd ind um&ouml;acute; aj&iacute;j kt&sacute;r mul gh&aacute;zlah.  
'A monkey in its mother's eyes is more beautiful
than a gazelle.'

Learning a language is not just the ho-hum of conjugations.
Words can be as full of historical surprises as a
shard in the hand of an archaeologist, and Jewish languages
are particularly wealthy in this regard.

Wherever there was a ghetto the Jews were certain
to have their own lively *lingua franca*.  Their
isolation from the surrounding environment; their
Talmudic studies in Hebrew and Aramaic; their peregrinations
from one country to another—all these
conditions contributed to the creation of interesting
and quite internationalized vocabularies.  The Jewish
Maghr&eacute;bi dialect, for instance, absorbed many words
from the non-Arab tribes that have lived in North
Africa from before the Arab conquest in the seventh
century.  Words like *khiz&ouml;;* the pronounciation that
makes vocal cords feel like a tangled mass of spaghetti;
and the infamous &ouml;, probably all came from that
source.

The Spanish Inquisition brought a large wave of
new residents to the Jewish quarters of North African
cities and towns, and they brought with them words
which got stuck permanently in the language: *medi&aacute;sat
(medias)* 'stockings'; *escuela* 'school'; *sueldo* 'money';
*s&aacute;pat (zapatos)* 'shoes' are common examples.

*&ldquo;S&aacute;fi, s&aacute;fi!&rdquo;* exclaims a guest, refusing a second
helping.  I was surprised when I learned the origin of
that one: *&Ccedil;a suffit* 'That's enough,' an absorption from
the recent French occupation of North Africa.

Since the great influx of North Africans into Israel
during the Fifties, Maghr&eacute;bi has taken on modern
Hebrew words.  A sister-in-law gestured toward her
silent TV set and said &ldquo;Punch.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Some of the programs do make one feel like it,
don't they?&rdquo;  I murmured.  Then it dawned on me that
she meant *puncture*, a word introduced into modern
Hebrew during the British Mandate.  The original
meaning was, of course, 'flat tire,' finally extended to
mean 'anything that is out of order.'

The last historical development I had noticed (in
certain corners of my neighborhood) are some of my
own American chickens coming home to roost.  By
now, our apartment house and the client&eacute;le of Elgr&aacute;bli's
grocery store are used to hearing certain interjections
from my native California: OK, *well, hi, bye
bye, wow, oh yeah*.  But the other day I heard a brand
new word, or so I thought: *c&uacute;cusah*.  This turned out
to be the feminine singular form of *coocoo*, another of
my words.  A perfect description, I decided, of how I
feel after an hour of Maghr&eacute;bi Arabic.


#### EPISTOLA {Burt Hochberg}

Stephen Hirschberg's interesting article on words
derived from games [XII, 3] includes the translation of
*checkmate* as 'the king is dead.'  The source of this
chess term, the Persian words *shah* and *mat*, are often
thus erroneously translated, no doubt because of the
existence of *mat* both in Arabic, where it does mean
'dead,' and in Persian, where it means 'abandoned,
helpless, defeated,' (from Old Persian *mandan* 'to
remain').  [Persian is an Indo-European language, Arabic
a Hamito-Semitic language.—Ed.]

The error stems also from the fact that the Arabs
introduced chess to the Western world, and it has been
assumed that the Arabs' language of chess was Arabic.
But *shah mat* was used by Persian chess players long
before the Arabs learned the game from them and
adopted—without translating into Arabic—the Persian
chess terms.

The game itself proves the point: a checkmated
king, though under attack and having no means of
escape, never actually &ldquo;dies&rdquo; (is captured).  Moreover,
the figurative meanings of *to checkmate* are 'to
thwart, arrest, stop, block, counter,' etc.—but not
'to kill.'

Mr. Hirschberg also includes *behind the eightball*.
In my opinion, this should always be spelled *8-ball*
because what appears on said ball is the figure &ldquo;8.&rdquo;

*[Burt Hochberg, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alan Frank}

As a computerphile, I found Philip Howard's
mention of quinquagrams [XII,2] an obvious challenge.
Using *Webster's Second New International*, the
word stock of which is available on my machine as
dictionary of reference, I discovered several sets, as
follows:

>adlsu: udals, sauld, lauds, duals, Aldus  
aeglr: regal, large, glare, ergal, argel  
aelrs: seral, reals, laser, earls, arles  
aemns: samen, names, manse, enams, amens  
aenrs: snare, rasen, nares, earns, Anser  
aenst: teans, stane, nates, etnas, antes  
agnor: rogan, organ, nagor, groan, argon  
eglos: segol, ogles, loges, goels, egols  
inors: S-iron, rosin, ornis, noirs, irons  

Of particular interest are the second and seventh
examples, which do not use plurals.  I was also able to
find three hexagrams, the second of which is an extension
of one of the quinquagrams:

>aehnst: thanes, snathe, nathes, hasten, enhats, Athens  
agnors: sarong, rogans, organs, nagors, groans, argons  
einrst: trines, sinter, retins, niters, insert, estrin

*[Alan Frank, Medford, Massachusetts]*

## Paring Pairs No. 23

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of
the matchings have been completed, one numbered item
will remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our
answer is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of VERBATIM*.

(a). Privilege to worship as they please.  
(b). Skirt the issue of whether the drink's worth a groat.  
(c). Counterfeit coin doesn't smell right.  
(d). Hypochondriac's favorite drink?  
(e). Sailor coils rope on phony featherbed.  
(f). Source of pork sausage?  
(g). Destiny and the sick poorly celebrated.  
(h). Participated in strike against fabric of society.  
(i). Official in charge of depravity.  
(j). Sailor's worst way to commit peccadilloes.  
(k). Poor finale at the Sabbath.  
(l). Holding on till end of story.  
(m). Formerly, strolling, sauntering.  Now, jogging?  
(n). Yielding to feeble hebdomadal necessity occasioned by tiny genuflecting parts.  
(o). This rogue knocks the big chive.  
(p). They've gone off on this fellow who's been in the sun.  
(q). Infantile golfers gum on about this.  
(r). An Oxonian decemvirate held together by these?  
(s). Pole on which earth rotates rests on turtle, according to myth.  
(t). Spain is where it's at—not Don Carlos.  
(u). Legal clause favors eyesight.  
(v). Support Mussolini, the fruit—or vegetable?  
(w). Bennett Cerf, a Sharply humorous chap.  
(x). Loaded deck cannot supply bridge pincers.  
(y). A person could die laughing.  
(z). According to Beaufort, knocking the H—-out of a hoop skirt is breaking wind in a force 8.

(1). Aces.  
(2). Ale.  
(3). Bad.  
(4). Cent.  
(5). City.  
(6). Dons.  
(7). Down.  
(8). Duce.  
(9). End.  
(10). Fake.  
(11). False.  
(12). Fart.  
(13). Farthing.  
(14). Gale.  
(15). Feted.  
(16). Gaits.  
(17). Gent.  
(18). Gripping.  
(19). Ground.  
(20). Hog.  
(21). Ill.  
(22). In.  
(23). Kneed.  
(24). Laughter.  
(25). Man's.  
(26). Pagan.  
(27). Pain.  
(28). Pin.  
(29). President.  
(30). Pro.  
(31). Pun.  
(32). Rap.  
(33). Rein.  
(34). Rite.  
(35). Sat.  
(36). Scallion.  
(37). Scent.  
(38). Sham.  
(39). Sin.  
(40). Tale.  
(41). Tan.  
(42). Tee.  
(43). Ten.  
(44). Terra.  
(45). The.  
(46). Thing.  
(47). Vice.  
(48). Vision.  
(49). Weak.  
(50). Wee.

## Answers for Paring Pairs No. 22

(a). Normally a tasty thirty-two.  (44,41) Tooth Sum.  
(b). Two-bit gee-gee.  (34,25) Quarter Horse.  
(c). Twenty-five pesetas here?  (30,34) Latin Quarter.  
(d). Sherwood Forest potty.  (31,27) Little John.  
(e). Fred Astaire's beer hall.  (42,36) Tap Room.  
(f). Reverse into the boondocks.  (3,46) Back Water.  
(g). Watch out at the theater!  (38,43) Show Time.  
(h). Quartette of southern ladies is timely.  (22,5) Four Belles.  
(i). Desist—unless you're loaded, Dad.  (22,4) Four Bear.  
(j). Jason found them periodically strange.  (24,7) Harpies Bizarre.  
(k). Pitch horseshoes into the mold.  (10,26) Cast Iron.  
(l). Former publicity man now works for freight company. (19,2) Express Agent.  
(m). Down east seamstress in cloaca maxima.  (32,37) Main Sewer.  
(n). Are quarks, etc., edible?  (20,11) Fission Chips.  
(o). Nuder area.  (9,48) Buffer Zone.  
(p). Churchill's method for removing wrinkles from the draperies.  (26,16) Iron Curtain.  
(q). Netting a crafty place.  (45,8) Tulle Box.  
(r). Spartan tatting fiend.  (29,18) Lace Demon.  
(s). Reach for the skies!  (1,39) A Spire.  
(t). Get twenty-four sheets of paper.  (1,35) A Quire.  
(u). Montezuma takes his revenge on Indians, too. (17,6) Delhi Belly.  
(v). Monkey's fist is abhorrent to pacifists.  (13,33) Crew's Missile.  
(w). Torturous embroidery.  (14,47) Cruel Work.  
(x). Choreographed podiatry.  (21,47) Foot Work.  
(y). Fossil fuel or regal fool?  (28,12) King Cole.  
(z). Fixed by a Saturday night special.  (40,23) Staple Gun.

The correct answer is (15) Curse.  The winner was
Shirley Bentley, Peoria, Illinois.


#### EPISTOLA {John M. Balsam}

Re: &ldquo;Danger!  Letter Loose!&rdquo;  [XI,2] and &ldquo;Patterned
Words and Phrases&rdquo; [XII,3], I saw the following
beauts a few years ago on a bulletin board at
Radio Station KIXI in Seattle where I was working at
the time.  It was wire service copy:

>Bullstery conditions are refarted in the Midwest.  
The Apollo astronauts are now reunited in the
shit which will bring them home.

Above the word *shit* some droll staffer had written
&ldquo;About 2 billion dollars worth.&rdquo;

Concerning the various shock terms discussed, I
heard my mother describe a relative as coming home
from World War I shell-shocked, i.e., 'rendered
insane by combat conditions.'

*[John M. Balsam, Las Vegas, Nevada]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Winter: Mitten, tanned hides turning up here and there (12)  
10\. Have dinner, hiding staff's blunder (7)  
11\. Doctor proud to take in United Nations assembly (7)  
12\. Spring: Sign in hedges, perhaps (10)  
13\. Times are changing at beginning of season (4)  
15\. The girl's back to have a bite—make leftovers (6)  
16\. Last to supply weapons to ring in time of peace (8)  
19\. You and I at ends of some movies (8)  
20\. Embodiment of a Virginia sailor (6)  
23\. Right and proper intent (4)  
25\. Summer: Tan acquired by one middle-grade nobleman (10)  
27\. Plant spine catching in boastful gambler (7)  
28\. Movie shows doctor with patient's heart and blood vessel (5-2)  
29\. Autumn: Hike around a boulder for trick (4,1, 4,3)

**Down**

2\. Street vendor in northeast Leewards assaulted (10)  
3\. Strive to accommodate a piano master (6)  
4\. Peddler's boat filling a yard and more (8)  
5\. Gave lessons in speech and tense (4)  
6\. Cherry that is up and down (5)  
7\. Composed for share of fifty pestas (7)  
8\. I get high, maintaining top of blood pressure reading (6)  
9\. Drunk's hallucinations around bumpy dry times (8)  
14\. Deterrence of poverty's beginning?  No, it never comes up (10)  
17\. Infuriated by part of Sardou tragedy (8)  
18\. Large snake—what's more, one wrapping a prisoner (8)  
19\. Waiter scattered bit of poison for bug (7)  
21\. Fat Pole holding up lunatic (6)  
22\. Stop strike getting old (4,2)  
24\. Board train after bad review (5)  
26\. Pop star's beginning to raise ruckus (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. AMBIVERT (*anag*.).  
5\. RIAL-TO (LAIR *rev.*).  
10\. LACERATES.  
11\. S-AGES.   
12\. VINY-L  
13\. ABORIGINE (*anag*.).  
14\. RAMPANT.  
17\. EL(LIP)SE.  
18\. FISSURE (*homophone*).  
20\. M(I-DYE)AR.  
22\. LA-AUNDRESS.  
23\. PU-MA'S (UP *rev.*)  
25\. OF-TEN.  
26\. G-REENGAGE.  
27\. SESTET (*anag*.).  
28\. I(DEAL-IS)T.

**Down**

1\. ALL OVER (*hidden*.).  
2\. BA(CO)N.  
3\. VI(R)AL  
4\. RETRACT (CARTER *rev*.).  
6\. INSTILLED (*anag*.)  
7\. LAGNIAPPE (*anag*.).  
8\. OB-SCENE (BO *rev*.).  
9\. ASH-ORE.  
15\. MOS(QUITO)S.  
16\. A-BUNDANCE  
18\. F(EL)LOWS  
19\. EMERGE (*hidden*).  
20\. M(ISLE)AD.  
21\. RESPECT (*anag*.).  
23\. P(AND)A.  
24\. MIAM-I (MIAM *rev*.).

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v13n2_Autumn_1986)