--- 
title: "VOL XIII, No 1 [Summer, 1986]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Canting Heraldry
*D. H. B. Chesshyre, Chester Herald of Arms*

Heraldry emerged in Europe towards the middle
of the 12th century as a means of identifying
knights and noblemen, particularly in battle and in
tournament.  We do not know how these early warriors
chose the emblems for their shields, but in due
course canting arms, or *armes parlantes,* devices
involving a pun on the owner's name or occupation,
became fashionable.  According to Professor G.J.
Brault, an expert on early blazon, they were rare in
the 12th century.  They were certainly not rare by the
13th century, and it is an interesting exercise to work
through medieval rolls of arms seeing how many puns
one can detect.  Sometimes they are obvious, but in
other cases they have been obscured by changes in the
meanings of words.

As far as the word *cant* itself is concerned, it is
said to derive from the Latin *cantus* 'song,' though it
has some less attractive overtones: for instance it can
mean 'a whining manner of speaking,' 'a secret or
peculiar language of a class, sect, or subject,' or 'the
jargon of thieves and beggars.'  Its punning connotation
seems to be restricted to the realms of heraldry
and perhaps arose because the cant of heralds was generally
assumed to include puns.  An alternative term is
*allusive heraldry,* but this is even less satisfactory, as
coats of arms can include references to items or events
without any play on words: for example the skull in
the arms of Zephaniah Holwell, who survived the
Black Hole of Calcutta.  We must therefore be content
with the word *canting* for arms which include pictorial
puns.

Returning to the 13th century, in the &ldquo;obvious&rdquo;
category we can place the arms of Eleanor of Castile
(died 1290), Queen of Edward I and daughter of Ferdinand
III, King of Castile and Leon, who bore *quarterly
1 &amp; 4 a castle, 2 &amp; 3 a lion.*  Also Odinel Heron
*(Azure three herons Argent)* and Thomas Corbet who
bore *Or two ravens (corbies) sable,* which conveys to
me something of the primitive flavor of the old folk-song
&ldquo;The Twa Corbies,&rdquo; in which the sinister black
scavengers plan to feast on the body of a newly slain
knight.  Then there are the *hammers (martels)* of Martell,
the *oak* of Oksted, the three *pike (lucies)* of Lucy,
and the *horseshoes (fers)* borne by Montgomery as the
tenant of Ferrers.

Among the less obvious puns I would mention the
coat of Robert Muschet *(Azure 3 sparrowhawks Or),* a
*musket* being a male sparrowhawk; that of Nicholas
de Kennet *(Gules 3 dogs Argent),* a *kennet* being a
small hunting dog (French *chienet*); the *gurges* or
*whirlpool* in the arms of Gorges; the *degr&eacute;s* or *steps* in
the barry coat of Grey; the *cross voided (crev&eacute; au
coeur)* of Crevequer; the six annulets *(VI points)* of
Vipont; and the sharply *pointed fusils* in the arms of
Montagu (alias Mont-aigu or de Monte Acuto) and in
those of Percy.  In the latter case there may be a double
allusion: being *piercing* they suggest the name Percy,
and if seen as *mill-picks* they recall the 12th-century
Picot de Percy.

There must surely be other 13th-century canting
coats with earlier roots.  For instance, 12th-century
seals in the Archives Nationales in Paris for members
of the family of Candav&eacute;ne, Comtes de St. Pol, all
include garbs or sheaves which one assumes to be of
*oats,* as a pun on the surname *(l'avoine* = 'oats').
Then there is the familiar coat of Bar of Bar-le-Duc,
which includes two *barbels* (fish).  The version which
appears in several popular books on heraldry shows
the banner borne by John de Bar at the Siege of
Caerlaverock Castle in Scotland by King Edward I in
1300, but it has much earlier precursors.  A single barbel
appears on a coin of Henry I, Count of Bar, in
1180 and on his equestrian seal of 1189; while the seal
of his brother Thibaut I, also dating from 1189, shows
two barbels back to back.

There were many other medieval canting coats
but I shall mention only a few.  The family of Setvans
or Septvans bore three *vans* (winnowing fans), illustrated
on the shield and surcoat of Sir Robert de
Setvans on his brass of about 1305 at Chartham
Church in Kent.  Inspired by this example I asked a
modern artist to include butterflies and winnowing
fans in the illuminated border of the grant of arms to a
current client of mine, Mr. Alan Buttifant.

Queen's College, Oxford bears three *eagles* in
honour of its founder, in 1340, Robert Eglesfield, confessor
to Queen Philippa, wife of Edward III.  There
are many other ornithological puns in the heraldic
repertoire, including the *swallows (hirondelles)* of
Arundel and the *kingfisher* crest of Fisher.  I was recently
responsible for a grant of arms to the English
conductor Sir David Willcocks, whose shield includes
two *cockerels* each supporting a *wheel*.

Intricately carved *rams* may be seen in the chantry
chapel at St. Albans which commemorates Abbott
Ramryge (died 1524), and other allusive beasts
abound in heraldry, including three *bears* (safely muzzled)
for Barham, a *camel* for Camel, and two *elephants*
supporting the shield of Lord Oliphant.  Fish
are likewise a common source for the punster and
apart from the barbels and lucies already mentioned,
we find *eels* for Ellis, *trout* for Troutbeck, *gudgeon* for
the French family of Goujon, a *dolphin* between three
*ears of wheat* for John Fyshar (&ldquo;fish-ear&rdquo;), Bishop of
Rochester, and of course the *dolphin* in the arms of the
Dauphin of France.

Some writers have been scornful of canting heraldry
and many of the more obvious puns do indeed
seem to insult the intelligence.  Nevertheless, the practice
has a venerable history, and I have no doubt that
it will persist as long as heraldry survives.  When
designing new arms it is difficult to resist a pun if an
obvious one presents itself, and many of the examples
to be found in the records of the College of Arms seem
almost inevitable: a *robin on a sun* for Robinson; a *rat*
LEFT: John Fysharl
for Ratton; three *rabbits* for Hopwell; three *apples* for
Sweetapple; *per bend grady* (i.e., in the form of steps)
for Stairs; a *hedgehog*
*(h&eacute;risson)* for many a
Harris or Harrison.  One
of my favorites is the coat
for Dodge, recorded at
the heraldic visitation of
Kent and other counties
in 1531, which includes a
woman's *breast (dug)* distilling
drops of milk.

Sometimes, however,
a grantee prefers not
to impose on his descendants
a canting coat, particularly
if he considers the suggested charges to be
crude or undignified.  When Jesse Boot (founder of the
famous chain of chemist's shops) was knighted in
1909, he was granted arms consisting of a chevron
between three black *boots* with smart red tops, soles,
and heels.  When he became a Baronet in 1919, the
boots acquired *spurs;* but when he was made a Peer
in 1929, with the title of Baron Trent, the boots disappeared
and were replaced by more traditional heraldic
emblems (two galleys and a rose).

I rather enjoy heraldic puns and I encourage my
clients to accept them.  I was the agent for a recent
grant to Sir Herbert du Heaume, formerly a senior
official in the Indian Police, whose arms include two
*helmets*.  On the same theme I have another client,
Mr. Paul Holmer, lately British Ambassador to Rumania,
whose name is thought to derive from the
Norman *haulmier* meaning 'helmet maker,' and accordingly
a single *helm* takes pride of place in his
shield.  In order to take full advantage of the punning
opportunities afforded by his surname, we included in
the crest a *homing pigeon* with a sprig of *holm oak* in
its beak!  Another modern coat which may provoke a
groan is that granted in 1977 to Dr. Claude Bursill,
which includes three *burrs*, or teasels, and the heraldic
ordinary known as a fess, which resembles a horizontal
slab or *sill*.  One of the tricks of the trade favored by
some heralds is to use terms which do not resemble the
surname, so that the enthusiast can have the pleasure
of working out the pun for himself.  Sometimes the
motto is made to join the game: for example, QUERCUS
ROBUR SALUS PATRIAE 'The strength of the oak is the
safety of our country' for a family of Oakes, with an
*oak* tree for their crest; and QUO SPINIOSOR FRAGRANTIOR
'The more thorny, the more fragrant' for a family of
Ross whose crest is a hand holding a sprig of *rose*.

So far I have discussed mostly the formal heraldry
of shield and crest; but there is also the most casual
sphere of badge and rebus where pictorial puns have
always been the order of the day.  There is not room
here to discuss the subtle differences between badge
and rebus so I will merely give some examples.

The badge attributed to the Plantagenet kings of
England was a spring of broom *(planta genista)* and
during Henry VIII's marriage to Catherine of Aragon
he symbolized the link between England and Spain by
means of a badge combining the English *rose* with the
canting *pomegranate* of Granada.

Familiar examples of the rebus are the *owl* with a
scroll in its beak bearing the letters *dom* for Bishop
Oldham in his chantry at Exeter, and the human *eye*
with a branch (or *slip*) of a tree for Abbot Islip in
Westminster Abbey.  Another device used by the latter
was a *man falling from a tree* (&ldquo;I slip!&rdquo;)  We are back
to fish with the attractive rebus of William Pickering,
the 19th-century publisher (a *pike* with a *ring* and a
scroll bearing his Christian name); a final example is
Kruger Gray's elaborate rebus for the late Lieutenant
Colonel George Babington Croft Lyons, which includes
St. *George*, a *babe* in a *tun* and two *lions* in a
*croft!*  The Colonel was a notable antiquary who died
in 1926, leaving money for an ambitious new dictionary
of British arms, of which I am one of the editors.

## Mafia, Cosa Nostra, Camorra, 'Ndrangheta and Mammasantissima
*George Bria, Pound Ridge, New York*

Street vendors hawk *arance mafiuse* ('fine oranges')
in Palermo and a frisky horse or pretty girl are
*mafiusi,* too; but where does the *mafia* come in?  A
true mafioso, if his lips are not sealed by *omert&aacute;,* may
say he belongs to the *onorata societ&aacute;* ('honored society')
or is *un amico* ('a friend') or *un amico degli amici*
('a friend of friends'), but shrugs off *mafia*.

Omert&aacute;, the code of silence, stems from Sicilian
*omu (uomo*, Italian; *homo*, Latin) and thus connotes
'manliness.'  Real men are supposed to settle their own
accounts and keep quiet.  Informers are despised in
many places besides Sicily, but the mafia may dispatch
them with a *lupara* ambush and sometimes with
cement overcoats in Manhattan's rivers.

*Lupara* (from *lupo* 'wolf') are heavy shotgun pellets
(not the shotgun itself, as often mistakenly translated)
used for hunting wolves.  Someone whose fate is
simply to disappear—like U. S. Teamsters leader
James Hoffa, a presumed gangland victim in 1975—is
said to have received the *lupara bianca* ('white lupara')
treatment.

Protected from such an end by 200 Federal marshals,
Joseph M. Valachi made history in language as
well as crime in 1963 when he added *Cosa Nostra* to
the world's vocabulary.  Valachi, a convicted murderer
who sang about the inner workings of the mob, told
U. S. Senate investigators that his crime brothers never
said *mafia* among themselves but called it *la cosa
nostra* ('our thing').  This was news in Italy where *cosa*
can signify just about anything and has multiple idiomatic
couplings—*cosa pubblica* the 'State or government';
*far le sue cose* 'go to the toilet'—but where *cosa
nostra* had not theretofore been synonymous with
*mafia*.  Italians nevertheless instantly accepted the
term as meaning the mafia in America, and it is so
identified to this day in the Italian press.  Cosa Nostra
indeed may qualify as a peculiar American hybrid,
U. S. mobsters of Italian extraction having possible
antecedents in the Neapolitan Camorra or Calabrian
'Ndrangheta as well as the mafia.  A coincidence, but
in U. S. gangland's hall of fame, Al Capone, was by
origin a Neapolitan, Charles &ldquo;Lucky&rdquo; Luciano a Sicilian,
and Frank Costello (born Francesco Castiglia) a
Calabrian.

Had Valachi said *cosca* instead of *cosa,* he would,
curiously, have been using classic mafia coinage.
What in U. S. terminology is known as a mafia &ldquo;family&rdquo;
is called a *cosca* in Italy, *cosca* being the 'tightly
bound leaves of an artichoke.'  Internecine mafia warfare
is called a war of the *cosche* (plural of *cosca*),
while an *alliance of cosche* is known as a *consorteria.*
The Italian press has also adopted the English *gang*
and *clan* as variants of *cosca.*

Italian newspapers nowadays like the simple English
*boss* for a mafia leader and use it more than *capo
dei capi* 'chief of chiefs' or *mafia don*, still beloved
of some U. S. writers.  A *mammasantissima* 'holiest
mamma,' sometimes used in Italy for the big chief,
hasn't made it yet to America.  But *uomo di rispetto*
'man who commands respect' and *pezzo da novanta*
'big shot' (from a fireworks display), still appear ritually
in writings about the mafia on both sides of the
Atlantic.

English *killers,* as in Hemingway's famed short
story, is much used in Italian publications to describe
those gangland operatives enshrined in American journalese
as &ldquo;hit men.&rdquo;  A current favorite in the Italian
journalistic lexicon is a *pentito,* (from *pentirsi* 'to
repent'), a person who regrets his sins and turns state's
evidence.  Besides mafia, the mob in Italy is also
known as *piovra* 'octopus' (its tentacles reaching everywhere),
*Mano Nera* 'black hand' (the famed mark
adorning death-threat letters), and the *onorata societa.*
But clearly *mafia* is an outsiders' term and not the
members' own label for the criminal group.  It may be
spelled &ldquo;maffia&rdquo; as well as &ldquo;mafia&rdquo; in Italian; the &ldquo;o&rdquo;
in *mafioso* becomes &ldquo;u&rdquo; *(mafiuso)* in Sicilian dialect.

Theories abound on the origin of the word in Sicily,
with its many cultures over the centuries and its
inbred mistrust of foreign rule and authority, including
that of mainland Italians.  Some scholars believe
*mafia* comes from Arabic *m&#92;?&#92;afah* 'protected force'
*mahais* 'a braggart,' or *M&aacute;afir*, an Arab tribe that
ruled Palermo.  Others see links to the Greek *omorphie*
'handsome,' the French *mauvais* 'bad,' the Piedmontese
*malaffare* 'shady deed,' and the Tuscan *maffia*
'poverty or misery.'

One (probably fanciful) version traces the
word back to the Middle Ages and the *Vespri Siciliani*
(Night of the Sicilian Vespers), a revolt against French
rule that broke out at the hour of Vespers on Easter
Tuesday 1282.  *Mafia* supposedly was an acronym for
*Morte Ai Francesi Italia Anela* 'Italy wants death to
the French.'  Another seemingly far-out acronymic
explanation jumps to 19th-century patriot Giuseppe
Mazzini and would have it: *Mazzini Autorizza Furti,
Incendi, Avvelenamenti* 'Mazzini authorizes thefts,
arson, poisonings.'  Another theory is that a *mafia* was
a cave in which the Carbonari, 19th-century revolutionaries,
hid.  Or, says another theory, *Maffia* or
*Maffio* was just the name of a founder of the secret
society.

Giuseppe Pitr&eacute;, a turn-of-the century scholar of
Sicilian folklore, believed the word stemmed from a
dialect expression for beauty or excellence—the
mafiusi oranges, or horses or girls—acquired the association
with manly carriage or bravery, and thence
became the name of the secret society.

The current *Encyclopaedia Britannica* traces the
origin of *mafia* as an organized group to Sicilian landowners
in Napoleonic times who hired toughs to keep
down rebellious peasants.  According to this theory,
the toughs formed an organization among themselves
that eventually became more powerful than the
landowners.  On the other hand, the *Oxford English
Dictionary [OED]* says *mafia* connotes a &ldquo;spirit of hostility
to the law&rdquo; prevailing in Sicily but labels as erroneous
the idea of its being an organized secret society
existing for criminal purposes.

With no such doubts about its existence, some
Italian writers capitalize *Mafia* to describe the secret
society and use a small &ldquo;m&rdquo; for the state of mind or
attitude toward the law.  Thus you can be *mafioso*
without necessarily being a *Mafioso.*  The prestige
Turin daily *La Stampa* uses a small letter for both.
The *Associated Press Stylebook* capitalizes *Mafia* and
*Mafiosi* and defines them as &ldquo;the secret society of criminals
and its members&rdquo; but adds, &ldquo;Do not use as a synonym
for organized crime or the underworld.&rdquo;  Some
Italian-Americans have campaigned against such a
synonym, perceiving it as having derogatory fallout
for all Italians.  In English, *mafia* has also acquired the
meaning of 'powerful clique or coterie,' like the *Irish
mafia,* constituting President John F. Kennedy's inner
circle, or the *opinion mafia,* applied to pundits of a
certain persuasion.

A Sicilian dialect play, *I Mafiusi della Vicaria,* by
Giuseppe Rizzotto (1863), appears to have been the
first published use of *mafia* with a criminal connotation,
the *Vicaria* being a Palermo jail.  Through the
centuries, jail seems to have been the general headquarters
of the *camorra,* the Neapolitan (and quite
distinct) version of the mafia.  Etymologically, *camorra*
is also elusive.  The *OED* mentions &ldquo;a kind of
smock-frock or blouse&rdquo; and &ldquo;Irish rugge or mantle&rdquo;
and suggests the Naples society got its name from &ldquo;a
species of short coat worn by members.&rdquo;  Most scholars,
however, see a Spanish connection.  One theory
claims *camorra* derives from Raimondo Galmur, a
17th-century Spanish adventurer, jailed in Naples,
who organized convicts into a society that gained
political control of the prison and spread its power
beyond bars.  Others say similar criminal associations
existed in Spain and that the concept emigrated to
Naples with Spanish domination of southern Italy.
*Camorra* is a Spanish word in current usage, meaning
a 'quarrel.'  There's also a verb form, *camorrear* 'to
quarrel.'  According to one theory, *camorra* entered
Spanish from Arabic *kumar* and once meant 'gambling
or a game of chance.'

Aside from expertise in the extortion and protection
rackets—and lately in drug-smuggling activities
rivaling those of the mafia—the camorra was renowned
in earlier times for the *sfregio,* a knife or razor
cut inflicted on the face of a victim, marking the person
for life.  A person so scarred was called a *sfregiato.*

Scholars of the *'ndrangheta*—a dialect name for
the Calabrian mafia—believe the word may be of
Greek origin, deriving possibly from *andras* 'male' or
*andraghia* 'wise men' or from the verb *andragazeo* 'I
act as an honorable man.'  The *'ndrangheta* specializes
in kidnapings.  The most notorious was the 1973
abduction of oil heir J. Paul Getty III, whose right ear
was cut off and sent to a newspaper during negotiations
leading to his eventual release for a reported $2.7
million ransom.

'Ndrangheta will never be loved by headline writers,
whose favorite is the three-letter *mob.*  This term
has long-time underworld connotations, and was once
applied [*OED*] to gangs of pickpockets working in
concert.

## Let Us Pick Your Brains
*Louis Phillips, New York City*

Subway riders in New York City have been
receiving small cards that list terms used by professional
pickpockets.  How well do you know the world
of dips and cannons?  Can you match each term to its
correct definition?

1\.  dip           
2\.  mark          
3\.  stall         
4\.  tip           
5\.  wire          
6\.  whiz          
7\.  prat          
8\.  breech        
9\.  cannon        
10\.  lushworker   

a.  crowd  
b.  a person who takes money from sleeping drunks  
c.  an organized gang of pick pockets  
d.  side pocket in a pair of pants  
e.  rear pants pocket  
f.  the victim  
g.  the crook who takes property out of pockets  
h.  to place one's hand into a purse or pocket  
i.  the pickpocket  
j.  accomplices used by a pickpocket to distract the victim

*Answers to Pick Your Brains*

1\. h   
2\. f  
3\. j  
4\. a  
5\. i (or g)  
6\. c  
7\. e  
8\. d  
9\. g (or i)  
10\. b

## Horsing Around with the English Language
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

In modern life, horses are no longer crucial in
helping us to hunt, do battle, draw vehicles,
round up livestock, or deliver mail.  Nevertheless, our
equine friends still figure prominently in the words
and phrases we use in our everyday conversations and
writing.

&ldquo;Horsefeathers!&rdquo;  you respond, bridling at my suggestion
and working yourself into a lather.  &ldquo;Now hold
your horses, you horse's ass.  You're just trying to spur
me on to the end of my tether and beat a dead horse.&rdquo;

The meanings of the horsy expressions in the
paragraph above are generally clear, but *horsefeathers*
deserves an etymological exegesis.  Rows of clapboards
are laid on roofs to provide flat surfaces for asphalt
shingles, called &ldquo;feather strips.&rdquo;  Oldtimers in New
England and New York, nothing the feather-like pattern,
called the clapboards horsefeathers.  Why the
*horse* in the word?  Because the boards were large, and
large things sometimes attract the designation *horse,*
as in *horse chestnut, horsefly,* and *horse mackerel*.  But
why has *horsefeathers*—like *tommyrot, balderdash,*
and *poppycock*—become a three-syllable explosion of
derision?  Because it is a euphemism for a shorter barnyard
epithet.  Check your dictionary and you'll discover
a paddock of additional, more disguised words
that descend from the world of horses, including *cavalier,
cavalcade, chivalry, henchman, hippopotamus,
marshal,* and any variation of the name *Philip*.

The time has come for us to talk some horse sense.
I'm full of horsepower and feeling my oats.  I'm
champing (not chomping) at the bit and eager to give
free rein to horsing around with the English language.
So prick up your ears and listen to how often we
compare people with horses—disk jockeys, coltish
lasses with ponytails, dark horse candidates who are
groomed to give the frontrunners and old war horses a
run for their money, and work horses who, although
saddled with problems of galloping inflation, can't
wait to get back in harness each Monday at the old
stamping (not stomping) ground.

Now, straight from the horse's mouth, here is a
glossary of less obvious equine expressions that are stabled
in our language.  Learning the origins of these
phrases will help you to see that English is really a
horse of a different color.

We often call an exasperatingly entangled situation
*all balled up.*  The spheroids in this case are the icy
balls that become packed under the hooves of horses
when they are driven over soft winter snow or during
spring thaws.  As the footing becomes treacherous, the
horses may fall, singly or in teams, producing a state
of chaos that is vividly *all balled up.*

When is a holiday not a holiday?  When it's a *busman's
holiday.*  This expression originated with the
close relationship between horse teams and their drivers
back in the last century, when London (omni) buses
were horse-drawn.  The regular driver would often
spend his day off riding as a passenger alongside the
substitute driver in order to check on his replacement's
handling of the horses and treatment of the riders.
That is why a vacation or day off from work spent
doing the same activity as one's usual work is called a
*busman's holiday.*

A *charley horse* is a muscular cramp in the leg or
arm of an athlete.  Fanciful explanations for the origin
of this compound include one story that the first
victim was a lamed racehorse named Charley and
another that a limping horse of the same name used to
drag a roller in the Chicago White Sox baseball park.

One of the most subtle allusions to horses is the
word *cinch,* meaning a 'sure thing.'  When a cowboy
mounts a half-wild cow pony, he buckles the saddle on
tight with a strong cinch strap.  He bets his life on the
cinch, so it has to be a sure thing.  Through the semantic
process called generalization, any sure thing has
become a *cinch.*

When an adventure fails badly, particularly after
an auspicious beginning, we say that it has *come a
cropper.*  This expression is a figurative extension of the
jargon of horse racing and polo playing that means &ldquo;to
tumble headlong from a horse.&rdquo;  A crupper (from
French *croupe* 'hindquarters') is a leather loop passing
under a horse's tail and buckled to the saddle.

When we are kept waiting, we *cool our heels,* a
figure of speech that dates back to the early 17th-century
expression *to cool one's hoofs*.  Here the reference
is to the saddle horse which, during a long trek,
would have to stop intermittently and lie down in
order to cool its overheated hoofs.  Closely related is *to
kick up one's heels*, originally referring to a horse out
in the field that frisks with the careless abandon of a
colt.

*To curb one's anger* and *to curry favor* are two
more embedded phrases that we trot out from the vanishing
world of horses.  A curb is a type of bit that
exerts severe pressure on a horse's jaw, and the act of
currying is the cleaning and grooming of a horse's coat
with a curry comb.

See, we've only got through the letter *c* in our galloping
glossary, and we're running out of room.  So
let's leap forward to the letter *h*:

A *hackney* once signified &ldquo;a horse or carriage for
hire,&rdquo; which is why cab drivers in New York are sometimes
called *hackies*.  And it is whence we derive the
terms *hack writer* and *hackneyed expression.*  Like the
hackney carriages and small, half-breed hackney
horses, hack writers and hackneyed clich&eacute;s, like *at this
point in time* and *dead as a doornail,* are cheap and
easy for anyone to rent out and abuse.

In the 14th century, persons of lofty rank were
mounted on high horses—great, heavy chargers used
in tournaments or battles.  Hence, *get off your high
horse* means 'stop putting on arrogant, superior airs.'

Is *hobby* a shortening of *hobbyhorse?*  In a word,
yes.  The connection is that some people pursue their
hobbies with the same child-like zeal that romper
roomers ride their hobbyhorses.

When is a choice not really a choice?  When it's a
*Hobson's choice.*  Thomas Hobson (1544-1631), the
owner of a Cambridge livery stable, gave his customers
the dubious choice of taking a horse in its proper
turn or taking none at all.  To prevent the ruin of his
best mounts, Hobson tolerated no picking and choosing,
insisting that each rider take the next horse in
line, the one nearest the stable door.  Thus, when
somebody offers you a *Hobson's choice*, you are really
being offered no choice at all.

In this space, I've tried to lead a horse to language,
and make you think.  I hope that I haven't ridden
roughshod over you and that you won't look a gift
horse in the mouth.  A horse is roughshod ('roughshoed')
when the nails of its shoes project, allowing for
more sure-footed progress but also damaging the
ground over which it gallops.  Thus, *to ride roughshod*
over people means to advance oneself ruthlessly at
their expense.

*Don't look a gift horse in the mouth* is one of the
oldest proverbs known.  It has been traced back to an
A.D. 420 Latin text of St. Jerome, who labeled it a common
saying.  The age and health of a horse can be
ascertained by examining the condition and number of
its teeth.  Although an animal may appear young and
frisky, a close inspection may reveal that it is *long in
the tooth* and ready for the glue factory.  Thus, it is
considered bad manners to inspect the teeth of a horse
that has been given you and, by extension, to inquire
too closely into the cost or value of any gift.  But if you
are buying a horse from a trader, you are advised to
determine its age and health by examining the teeth
*straight from the horse's mouth,* the precise source of
this article.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'Easy writing makes curst hard reading,' said Alexander
Pope.&rdquo; —Martin F. Nolan (in *Washington Journalism
Review*, December 1984, p. 52).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'Easy writing,' Hemingway once said, 'makes hard
reading.' &rdquo; —Glen Evans (in *The Complete Guide to
Writing Non-Fiction*, Writer's Digest Books, 1983, p.
25).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Easy writing's curst hard reading.&rdquo; —Attributed to
Richard Brinsley Sheridan by the *Oxford Book of Quotations*,
1944.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'Easy writing,' said Sheridan, 'is sometimes d——d
hard reading.' &rdquo; —Thomas Carlyle (in *Memoirs of the
Life of Sir Walter Scott*, London and Westminster
Review, 1837).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Easy writing's vile hard reading.&rdquo; —Richard Brinsley
Sheridan (in *Clio's Protest*, 1795).
[Submitted by H. Wendell Smith, Canyon Lake,
Calif.]

## Akeries and Eaneries
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University (quondam)*

Two groups of establishments, mostly real or conceivable,
may be designated by names, mostly unreal,
rhyming with *bakery* for one set and with *beanery* for
the other.  The object is to match the definition or
description with the pertinent name.

*A.  Akeries*

1\.  Friends' seismographic station   
2\.  Painless (?) dentist's office    
3\.  Beauty parlor                    
4\.  Vampire-queller factory          
5\.  Funeral parlor                   
6\.  Auto repair shop                 
7\.  Hula school                      
8\.  Rou&eacute;s' hangout            
9\.  Nest of vipers                   
10\.  Photographer's studio           

a.  fakery  
b.  rakery  
c.  snakery  
d.  takery  
e.  quakery  
f.  shakery  
g.  wakery  
h.  stakery  
i.  brakery  
j.  achery

*Akeries Matchings:*

1\. e  
2\. j  
3\. a  
4\. h  
5\. g  
6\. i  
7\. f  
8\. b  
9\. c  
10\. d

*B. Eaneries/E(e)neries*

1\.  Young folks' hangout                
2\.  Academic abode                      
3\.  Vegetable store                     
4\.  Supply house for Levi's             
5\.  Place to take bankrupt husband      
6\.  Reducing salon                      
7\.  Assemblage of Scrooges              
8\.  Female monarchs' club               
9\.  Film-set factory                    
10\.  Nursery school                     

a.  greenery  
b.  weanery  
c.  meanery  
d.  leanery  
e.  scenery  
f.  queenery  
g.  teenery  
h.  deanery  
i.  cleanery  
j.  jeanery

*Eanery Matchings:*

1\. g  
2\. h  
3\. a  
4\. j  
5\. i  
6\. d  
7\. c  
8\. f  
9\. e  
10\. b

## Unusual Place Names in Canada
*Marc A. Schindler, Gloucester, Ontario, Canada*

A widely repeated observation currently in vogue
in Canada is that after more than a century of
searching for our national identity, we've finally
found that our identity consists of not having an identity.
If language is a major key to a country's soul,
there are hints that this sardonic remark may have an
element of truth.  There is no such thing, linguistically
speaking, as a uniquely Canadian place name, but one
can distill from the large variety of different types of
place names borrowed from imported or aboriginal
cultures at the very least a unique combination (or
mosaic, to use a clich&eacute; with special meaning in Canada)
of unusual or interesting place names.  Although
this article does not even attempt to deal with the
complete range of unusual place names, it should serve
as an introduction.  I offer eight categories:

*1: The Whimsical Names of Newfoundland*

Newfoundland was probably first visited by Europeans
in the 11th century when Norsemen discovered
it, but was not visited regularly until the early 16th
century, when the Portuguese discovered the rich fishing
grounds in the vicinity.  It was apparently the Portuguese
who coined the name *Labrador*, meaning a
'farmer.'  Today's district of Labrador, which consists
of the mainland portion of the province of Newfoundland,
is about as suitable for farming as Greenland is
green.  So much for early efforts at public relations!

Eventually the French touched down here and
there on *Terre-Neuve*—even today the islands of St.
Pierre and Miquelon, which are geographically part of
Newfoundland, still belong to France—but it was the
great flood of Irish and working-class English who
immigrated to Newfoundland in the 19th century who
gave the province its existing dominant culture.  Newfoundland's
place names reflect the whole mixture.
Many names are mixed French and English: *Bay
L'Argent, Bay de l'Eau, Barasway de Plate, Rouge
Harbour, Channel-Port-aux-Basques,* and *Port-auPort.*
If the last sounds like a redundancy or a reduplication,
how about this feat of bilingual redundancy:
*L'Anse aux Meadows (Anse* is a meadow).  L'Anse aux
Meadows has become famous in recent years as the site
of an early Norse settlement and is now a UN cultural
heritage site.

What Newfoundland is really famous for, though,
is its truly whimsical names.  A selection of my favorites
follows:

>*Halfway Tucks*     
*Cupids Crossing*  
*Juniper Stump*     
*Pick Eyes*  
*Blow Me Down*      
*Heart's Content*  
*Spread Eagle*      
*Heart's Desire*  
*Tickle Bay*        
*Heart's Delight*  
*The Tickles*       
*Little Heart's Ease*  
*Tickle Cove*       
*Come-by-Chance*  
*Leading Tickles*   
*Ireland's Eye*  
*Chimney Tickle*    
*Little Seldom*  
*Happy Adventure*   
*Whale's Gulch*  
*Joe Batt's Arm*    
*Nicky's Nose Cove*  
*Muddy Hole*        
*St. Jones Within*  
*Tumbledown Dick*    
*Nameless Cove*  
*Island*

There used to be a town called *Gayside*, but because
of the evolved (devolved?) meaning of *gay* in North
America, the local residents recently had the town's
name changed to *Baytona*.  Fortunately for enthusiasts
of unusual names, disgruntled residents of the birthplace
of Shannon Tweed, *Playboy's* 1982 Playmate of
the Year, were not successful in changing the name of
their town.  It remains *Dildo,* Newfoundland.

*2: The &ldquo;Multiplying&rdquo; Place Names of Nova Scotia*

As in New England, Nova Scotia seems to have been
dealt only a limited number of place names, which then
made do, with auxiliary words, for daughter settlements
and suburbs.  Two of the most profligate &ldquo;multiplying&rdquo;
place names are *Margaree,* on Cape Breton Island, and
*Pubnico,* in Shelburne County.  *Margaree* has spawned
*Margaree Harbour, Margaree Centre, Margaree
Valley, North East Margaree, Margaree Brook,
South West Margaree,* and *Upper Margaree.*  I am
not sure if the United Empire Loyalists of Shelburne
County were more fecund than the Scots of Cape Breton
or just less imaginative, but here are the metastases of
*Pubnico: East Pubnico, West Pubnico, Upper West
Pubnico, Middle West Pubnico, Lower West Pubnico,
Pubnico Point, Centre East Pubnico,* and *Lower
East Pubnico*.

*3: Genitive Forms of French-speaking Quebec*

It has been pointed out before that French place
names have associated genitives which sometimes do
not appear to resemble the place names in any way,
shape, or form [e.g., Elisabeth Larsh Young, &ldquo;In
Praise of Irregularity,&rdquo; VERBATIM, XII, 1].  Admirers
of Gallic unpredictability will be happy to know
that this tendency was brought over to *le nouveau
monde* as well, by the French settlers in Canada, with
some unique twists.  I can understand why someone
from Bois-Franc is called *un(e) Silvifranc (-franque)*
(consider the Latin roots), but it totally escapes me
why someone from the north shore town of HavreSt.-Pierre
is *un(e) Cayen(ne).*  Other genitives derived
from Latin abound: Pierrefonds/*P&eacute;trifontain(e)*,
Saint-Etienne/*St&eacute;phanois(e)*, etc.

An interesting Latin genitive is that of *Salaberry-de-Valleyfield,*
a town on the St. Lawrence near the
New York and Ontario borders which, when settled
by the English, was originally known simply as *Valleyfield.*
In French a Valleyfielder is known as *un(e)
Campivallensien(ne),* which is straightforward enough
if you know where the English words *campus* and *vale*
come from, but the situation was confused in the
1970s when the nationalist Parti Qu&eacute;becois government
went around francisizing as many &ldquo;English&rdquo;
names as it could, so they added the &ldquo;Salaberry-de-,&rdquo;
resulting in a reference to a completely nonexisting
person.

Some French-Canadian genitives can be described
only as small acts of mercy.  If you wonder why a
hockey player from Saint-Stanislas is called *un Koska,*
you'll be glad to know that it is probably because even
*les Koskas* get tired of saying the complete name of
their village, *Saint-Stanislas-de-Koska-de-la-Rivi&eacute;redes-Envies.*

In the north of Quebec *(Nouveau Qu&eacute;bec)* there
are many Inuit (&ldquo;Eskimo&rdquo;) settlements, but fortunately
the long arm of Quebec's language police does
not extend that far; Inuktitut, the Inuit language, has
its own rules for forming genitives.  For example,
someone from Inukjuak is an *Inukjuamiuq,* and a
native of *Kangiqsujuaq* is a *Kangiqsurjararmiuq.*

*4: The Alphabetical Railroad Hamlets of Saskatchewan*

They say that Saskatchewan is so flat you can
stand on a sardine can and see the U.S. border.  My
childhood memories seem to consist almost entirely of
interminable hours on the hot dusty highways of
southern Saskatchewan, stopping periodically for pee
breaks while Dad scraped the dead crickets off the
windshield.  A lot of grain elevators and telephone
poles seemed to zip by but we never seemed to get
anywhere.  Thus I can empathize with the builders of
the Grand Trunk Railway (now part of Canadian
National) who had to dream up names for the little
railway station hamlets stretching out along great
straight lines of steel track from Portage la Prairie,
Manitoba, to Edmonton, Alberta.  What more worthy
notables to name towns after than company VIPs?  In
order to give every bigshot a chance, they named the
towns in alphabetical order, starting at the eastern terminus
of Portage la Prairie, then proceeding northwest
through Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, ending in Edmonton.
They managed to exhaust the letters of the alphabet
at least three times.  I will not repeat the whole
sequence here, but here is the second A-Z stretch,
which includes Hubbard, Saskatchewan, where my
own great-grandparents homesteaded.  The sequence
isn't perfect any more because some of the towns have
since disappeared (indicated by a dash), or have been
renamed (indicated by the present name in parentheses):

*Atwater, Bangor, Cana,* (Melville), (Birmingham),
*Fenwood, Goodeve, Hubbard, Ituna, Jasmin,
Kelliher, Leross, (Lestock)*, —, —, *Punnichy, Quinton,
Raymore, Semans, Tate,* (Nokomis), *Venn, Watrous,
—, Young, Zelma*.

*5: Anglicized Amerindian Names of Alberta*

In common with the Plains Indians names of the
U.S. prairies, Canadian prairie Indian names were
often translated literally into English, resulting in a
unique type of place name.  Examples in Alberta and
to some extent Saskatchewan, including one or two
contributed by European settlers are: *Wild Horse,
Manyberries, Medicine Hat, Smoking Tent, Whiskey
Gap, Seven Persons, Stand Off, Crowfoot, Bearspaw,
Buffalo Pound, Dogpound, Moose Jaw, Westward
Ho, Red Deer, Sweathouse Creek, Crowchild, White
Elk Night, Starlight, Two Guns,* and the former name
of Regina, *Pile o' Bones.  Whiskey Gap* is a town in a
gap in the Milk River Ridge of the Rocky Mountain
foothills through which U. S. whiskey traders from
Fort Benton, Montana, smuggled alcohol to their
secret trading post near modern-day Lethbridge,
known as *Fort Whoop-Up.  Whoop-Up* was closed
down by the Northwest Mounted Police in the 1880s
when those scarlet-coated precursors to today's Royal
Canadian Mounted Police were sent west to assert
Canadian sovereignty over the prairies.  *Stand Off* is a
Hutterite colony on the Blood Indian Reserve near the
Mormon settlement of Cardston.

*6: The Tongue-twisting Names of British Columbia*

I am really impressed with the names of the
Pacific Northwest Amerindians.  I cannot pronounce
many of them, but it is fun trying!  From the Halkomelem
Salishan we have *Yakweakwioose, Aitchelitch,
Lukseetsissum,* and *Puckatholetchin;* from their
Thompson Salishan neighbors: *Inklyukhinatko* and
*Unpukpulquatam;* from the Coast Tsimshiam: *Tsemknawalqan*
and *Nishanocknawnak;* and for dessert,
*Quan-skum-ksin-mich-mich,* courtesy of the Nass-Gitksan
Tsimshian.

*7: Place Names of the Inuit*

After practising on Pacific Coast place names, I
grit my teeth, loosen up the old uvula and try these
Inuit names: *Tuktoyaktuk* and *Umingmaktok* from the
District of Mackenzie, Northwest Territories.  *Tuktoyaktuk*
was immortalized by oil workers who sported
T-shirts with a phony university crest and the legend,
&ldquo;Tuk U.&rdquo;  Igloolik and Pangnirtung are in the District
of Franklin, N. W. T., where the latter settlement
serves as the port of entry to Auyuittuq National Park
on Baffin Island.  Finally, these grand-daddy tongue-twisters
from northern Quebec: *Kuujjuaq* (mercifully
known in English as Fort Chimo), *Inoucdjouac, Umingmaoautik,*
and *Kangiqsualujjuaq.*

*8: &ldquo;Be-of-good-cheer-my-backside&rdquo;: Names given in
moments of despair*

Perhaps you can imagine the endless ennui interspersed
with dashes of pure horror experienced by our
early northern explorers and settlers.  These courageous
heroes exacted occasional revenge at the expense of our
toponymy, as evidenced by *Deception* (Quebec), *Resolute*
(N. W. T.), *Ruin Point* (N. W. T.), *Terror Point*
(N. W. T.), *Stormy Point* (Nfld.), *Mistaken Point*
(Nfld.), *Breakheart Point* (Nfld.) and this expression of
anguish by some anonymous Irish immigrant wife:
*Harbour My God Point* (Nfld.)  It is a shame that the
Canadian toponymic committee does not recognize
exclamation marks as being a legitimate part of place
names!

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Hobson-Jobson: A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases*](https://www.routledge.com/A-Glossary-of-Colloquial-Anglo-Indian-Words-And-Phrases-Hobson-Jobson/Burnell-Yule/p/book/9781138971899)
Henry Yule and A. C. Burnell, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1985), second edition, xlviii + 1021pp.

>*HOBSON-JOBSON* ... an Anglo-Saxon version
of the wailings of the Mohammedans as they beat
their breasts in the procession of the *Moharram*—
*&ldquo;Y&amacr; Hasan!  Y&amacr; Hasan!&rdquo;*

First published in 1886, this book is not only a
monumental early work of lexicography but fascinating
reading matter.  It should be pointed out before
going any further that the authors' scholarship in etymology
may be called into doubt by later research,
notwithstanding the publication, in 1903, of a Second
Edition of which this is a reprint, but the citational
evidence and the definitions, with their encyclopedic
commentary, make for an extremely valuable work
that ought to be on the shelf of anyone with an interest
in the English language and, especially, in the acquisition
of loanwords.  Citations abound, and they are not
the brief sort that provide mere evidence for the existence
of a form at a particular date: many make for
engaging reading in themselves.

>*BANG, BHANG,* s. H. *bh&amacr;ng*, the dried leaves
and small stalks of hemp *(i.e. Cannabis indica)*,
used to cause intoxication, either by smoking, or
when eaten mixed up in a sweetmeat (see MAJOON).
*Hash&#92;?&#92;sh* of the Arabs is substantially the
same; Birdwood says it &ldquo;consists of the tender
tops of the plants after flowering.&rdquo;  *Bhang* is
usually derived from Skt. *bhanga*, 'breaking,' but
Burton derives both it and the Ar. *banj* from the
Old Coptic *Nibanj,* &ldquo;meaning a preparation of
hemp; and here it is easy to recognise the
Homeric *Nepenthe*.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;On the other hand, not a few apply the word to
the henbane *(hyoscyamus niger)* so much used in
medieval Europe.  The K&aacute;m&uacute;s evidently means
henbane, distinguishing it from Hash&iacute;sh *al har&aacute;f&iacute;sh*,
'rascal's grass,' *i.e.* the herb Pantagruelion
... The use of Bhang doubtless dates from the
dawn of civilisation, whose earliest social pleasures
would be inebriants.  Herodotus (iv.c.75)
shows the Scythians burning the seeds (leaves and
capsules) in worship and becoming drunk upon
the fumes, as do the S. African Bushmen of the
present day.&rdquo;—(*Arab. Nights*, i. 65.)
>
>1563.—&ldquo;The great Sultan Badur told Martin
Affonzo de Souza, for whom he had a great
liking, and to whom he told all his secrets, that
when in the night he had a desire to visit
Portugal, and the Brazil, and Turkey, and
Arabia, and Persia, all he had to do was to eat a
little bangue ...&rdquo;—*Garcia*, f. 26.

There follows another columnful of citations, too
lengthy to reproduce here.

It should be made clear that this is a dictionary
that describes the variety (or varieties) of English used
in India.  While it is true that scores of words admitted
into Anglo-Indian were imported into England by
colonials and thence into the English language, many
of those catalogued in *Hobson-Jobson* either never
earned their passage or, perhaps because they referred
to cultural matters and objects that had no counterparts
in western life, lost whatever currency they
might once have had.  The authors collected, also,
imported words that occurred in Anglo-Indian; *banjo*
is included, for example, with these words:

>
>... Though this is a West- and not East-Indian
term, it may be worth while to introduce the
following older form of the word:
>
>>1\. &ldquo;Permit thy slaves to lead the choral
dance To the wild *banshaw's*
melancholy sound.&rdquo;—Grainger, iv.

Many of the words described are not Indian in
origin but derive from Arabic, Persian, Portuguese,
and other tongues spoken by traders whose settlements
antedated those of the British.  Thus, *betel* is traced to
Malayalam, *beri-beri* to Singhalese, *bulbul* ('nightingale')
to Persian, *calash* to French (from Slavic?), *cassowary*
to Malay, *catamaran* to Tamil, *hooka* to Hindi
(from Arabic), *Mandarin* to Portuguese; but, as is to
be expected, the great majority are derived from one
or another of the dialects of the subcontinent.  It
should be mentioned, too, that some attempt is made
to provide etymologies for placenames, but these tend
to be speculative.

This review cannot give the flavor of the work
without an example or two.  In the etymological note
for CANDY (SUGAR-) appears the following intelligence:

>A German writer, long within last century,...
appears to derive *candy* from Candia, &ldquo;because
most of the sugar which the Venetians imported
was brought from that island&rdquo;—a fact probably
invented for the nonce.  But the writer was the
same wiseacre who (in the year 1829) characterised
the book of Marco Polo as a &ldquo;clumsily
compiled ecclesiastical fiction disguised as a Book
of Travels.&rdquo;

And, in the matter of the use of *boy* for 'servant,'
*Hobson-Jobson* suggests that it probably does not come
from English at all, for there are several cognate
forms, *b&omacr;y&iacute;, b&omacr;vi, bhoi, bh&umacr;&imacr;*, derived from Malayalam,
Tamil, Hindi, and Mahrathi, which mean
'palankin-bearer'; moreover, the citations antedate
any possible involvement with speakers of English.

Yule's Introductory Remarks make an excellent
essay, in which a number of words from diverse
sources are conveniently listed together.  There is also
an Index that lists headwords as well as all of the variant
forms for which citations are given.  This is truly a
welcome reprint of a book that has become increasingly
hard to find in the antiquarians' shelves and
catalogues.

*Laurence Urdang*

[Editor's Note: A review of this book appeared in
a recent [XII,2] issue of VERBATIM; the reviewer
regarded it less than favorably.  Henri du Chazaud has
sent us the following review to even the score, and we
thought it useful and interesting to publish it as well.
One might say that the book will thus have received
&ldquo;mixed reviews&rdquo; within the same periodical.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*French-English Dictionary of Modern Colloquial French*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780415058933/Dictionary-Modern-Colloquial-French-Rene-0415058937/plp)
Ren&eacute;-James H&eacute;rail, and Edwin A. Lovatt, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1985).

I appear to be one of those &ldquo;not-so-few&rdquo; consulters
of dictionaries who take the trouble to read prefaces,
both in English and in French; in the case of this
*Dictionary of Modern Colloquial French*.  I found it to
be a very useful exercise before &ldquo;plunging headlong&rdquo;
into its 8000 or so headwords.

The fundamental importance of this underworld,
or unconventional language—which is being more and
more widely used because of the increasing permissiveness
of the media and of literature in general, where
this type of language received its first seal of approval—has
been well grasped by these authors who
have not only found a way of penetrating the mysteries
of this secret language in French, but have also
been able to come up with good English equivalents.
This presupposes a perfect knowledge of both languages
and, even more important, of both cultures in
general and in particular; on top of this, rapid publication
of the material is called for, something which is
not easy to achieve even in one's mother tongue,
because the colloquial language changes so quickly
these days in response to the fast-changing world of
fashions and techniques.  In addition, the main users
(and creators?) of slang belong in a relatively narrow
age-band, that of &ldquo;youth,&rdquo; and the communicationgap
does not make the researcher's task any easier.

If one wishes to avoid the problem of a turn of
phrase leading to an awkward situation, one must be
aware of the need to avoid hapax legomena and too
specialized terms.  The authors have managed here, by
juxtaposing texts and contexts in a graded way over
three registers, to help the reader avoid these pitfalls;
he is also helped to tackle in an appropriate manner
the new &ldquo;mainstreams&rdquo; of our culture, like pop music
and comic books.  The authors have avoided the use of
the rather arbitrary and superfluous labels such as
&ldquo;vulgar,&rdquo; &ldquo;obscene,&rdquo; &ldquo;popular,&rdquo; etc.  The information
passed on to the reader is thus improved, and his freedom
and responsibility are safeguarded.

Nothing should be taboo for today's lexicographer,
but this does not mean that anyone can claim to
be exhaustive, especially in the area of *argot* which is,
of necessity, a secret language, one which is in a constant
state of evolution.  When a word of *argot* passes
into common usage it ceases to belong to *argot* but
comes to enrich the colloquial language.  Later still,
perhaps, it will come to form part of the standard language.
The reader of this work must not be put off if
he does not find all that he is seeking, despite the vast
number of words and expressions given, since a volume
like this is only elaborated over many years (ten
in this case), and the colloquial language researcher's
task is akin to the spinning of a veritable spider's web
of language.

The problem of choosing the final list of words for
such a dictionary is a difficult one.  Should such-and-such
an obscenity be left out?  And where does obscenity
begin and end?  Who would take offense at hearing
the words *feuille* or *p&eacute;tale de rose?*  Is this a technical
term or a poetic one?  Is it obscene or just slightly rude?
Yet again it must be said: only the context and the
actual usage of the speaker can decide.  Should such-and-such
expression be included?  It seems obsolete, yet
&ldquo;in the swing of things&rdquo; at the same time.  The authors
have, perhaps regrettably, taken the cautious path,
yet they have produced a wealth of material which is
all the richer for being bilingual.  The English and
French speaker will make many discoveries in his own
language as well as in the other.

The method adopted for the choice of the entries
and for the arrangement of the material within each
entry makes this elegantly presented dictionary a very
handy manual to consult as it offers the maximum of
specific information with the minimum of clumsy
detail.  It is a unique reference work in its field, but it
is also a useful book to take on one's own travels to
help while away the hours agreeably.  They say that
their book &ldquo;should be taken as living proof that French
humour is translatable, that vulgarity knows no national
boundaries, that 'risqu&eacute;' puns and 'ripe' jokes
are just as common on both sides of the Channel and
the Atlantic&rdquo;; in other words, the English are no more
stilted than the French, and &ldquo;what is vulgar today
may perhaps no longer be so tomorrow, and what was
vulgar yesterday is scarcely any longer so today.&rdquo;

Rather than select a few examples for illustration,
I shall leave the reader to appreciate for himself the
surprise and even amusement he will get from this fine
collection of unconventional French and English.

*Henri du Chazaud*

## Antipodean Newsletter: *Where Words Run Widdershins*
*G. W. Turner, University of Adelaide*

This really is an antipodean newsletter.  As I look
out of a window in the week before Christmas I see
the grass on the Adelaide Hills bleached in the sun.  It
has passed from the green of winter through golden
brown to what women might think of as a sort of ecru,
almost white, the only white Christmas we will ever
have in South Australia.

In the southern hemisphere the months are out of
phase with the seasons.  An introduced language with
its associations formed in the northern hemisphere
does not match experience.  Even Australian dictionaries
do not always adjust; one of them defines *midwinter*
as 'about Dec. 22.'  Similarly, *midsummer's day* is
defined as June 24, perhaps more forgivably since we
hardly use the term here and are more likely to meet it
in English contexts where it refers to a quarter day
and the feast of St. John the Baptist.

Failure to give southern-hemisphere dictionary
meanings to *midwinter* and *midsummer* can only be
oversight which a moment's thought will correct.  The
same is true of *vernal equinox* when an Australian dictionary
dates it circa March 23.  But these are obvious
and striking differences between the hemispheres;
more subtle ones require sharper attention and more
strenuous thought.

In both hemispheres the sun rises in the east and
sets in the west.  If you look at the setting sun in either
hemisphere, the direction to your right is north and
south is to your left.  So far, so good.  But during part
of the year (depending on where you live), if you look
towards the midday sun you look south in the northern
hemisphere, north in the southern hemisphere.  Therefore
the sun moving from east to west appears to move
in a clockwise direction (left to right) to the northernhemisphere
observer but anti- (or counter) clockwise
(right to left) to us.

The *Concise Oxford Dictionary* defines a phrase
*with the sun* as 'clockwise.'  This would not do in the
southern hemisphere (the phrase appears not to be
used here).  More interestingly, the old (especially Scottish)
word *widdershins* or *withershins*, etymologically
suggesting 'a contrary direction,' similarly refers to a
movement against the apparent course of the sun and
therefore considered unlucky or unnatural.  The word
is not unknown to Australians since a very well-known
poem, &ldquo;Bullocky,&rdquo; by Judith Wright, tells how the
bullocky (driver of a bullock team) &ldquo;weathered all the
striding years till they ran widdershins in his brain.&rdquo;
The poet here, as elsewhere, may exploit the eerie
associations of the word, but a lexicographer has to
remember that here, if *widdershins* still means anti-clockwise,
the sun runs widdershins every day.

The word draws attention to an inbuilt ambiguity
in our language and literature and the traditions of
our culture.  In South America also, where, as here,
Orion's belt falls upwards and the man in the moon
hangs upside down above the bundle of sticks he is
reputed to carry, the seasons are out of phase with tradition,
and I am told that monasteries with a very
severe rule have been obliged to relax the restrictions
of Lent because it coincides with the heavy work of
harvest.  In Europe, religion and nature were in harmony;
in our hemisphere, an imported religion and
nature are opposed.

It is doubtful whether Australians would have
thought it obvious—were it not for an inherited linguistic
classification—to divide the year into four distinctive
seasons.  In Northern Australia there are two
seasons, the dry and the wet; and even in the south no
burgeoning buds or falling leaves celebrate spring or
autumn except for some introduced trees.

Probably, as time goes on, nature will increasingly
assert itself over tradition.  Already Christmas
seems more suitably celebrated at the beach or with
light meals rather than a heavy Christmas pudding.
The celebration of Guy Fawkes night on November 5
started too many fires in tinder-dry early summer
grass to survive.  With the name *cracker night* it was
transferred to May 24 (Commonwealth Day, formerly
Empire Day) and is now usually replaced with public
fireworks displays.

Antipodeans live with a divided consciousness.
Northern hemisphere nature invades our literary and
traditional consciousness, while the world outside our
libraries confronts it with an opposite rhythm.  In
return we gain a more than usual awareness that there
are places and ways different from our own.

## Misquotations
*Norman W. Schur, Weston, Connecticut*

In his mercilessly denunciatory poem *English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers*, Byron wrote of critics
&ldquo;with just enough of learning to misquote.&rdquo;  Some
twenty centuries earlier, Publilius Syrus, in his *Sententiae*
(Maxims), advised: &ldquo;Better be ignorant of a
matter than half know it,&rdquo; a sentiment echoed in Jefferson's
*Notes on the State of Virginia* when he wrote,
&ldquo;Ignorance is preferable to error,&rdquo; and again by Dickens
in *Sketches by Boz:* &ldquo;A smattering of everything
and a knowledge of nothing.&rdquo;  Pope, in his *Essay on
Criticism*, capped it all with &ldquo;A little learning is a
dangerous thing,&rdquo; itself usually misquoted &ldquo;A little
*knowledge*....&rdquo;  Oscar Wilde wrote: &ldquo;A poet can
survive everything but a misprint,&rdquo; and he might have
added, &ldquo;or a misquote&rdquo;; and even that witticism is
often misquoted, &ldquo;A poet can survive *anything*....&rdquo;
So let us proceed to a dismal collection of grating misquotations.

&ldquo;The best laid schemes o' mice an' men,&rdquo; wrote
Burns, &ldquo;Gang aft a-gley,&rdquo; echoing the truth expressed
a hundred years earlier in Ihara Saikaku's *Japanese
Family Storehouse:*  &ldquo;There is always something to
upset the most careful of human calculations,&rdquo;
and anticipating the modern Murphy's Law (known
in Britain as &ldquo;Sod's Law&rdquo; and in France as &ldquo;La
loi d'emmerdement maximum&rdquo;).  But poor Burns's
&ldquo;schemes&rdquo; are all too often misquoted &ldquo;plans,&rdquo; and the
contractions &ldquo;o' &rdquo; and &ldquo;an' &rdquo; usually come out as &ldquo;of&rdquo;
and &ldquo;and.&rdquo;  (Even *Bartlett* distorts the &ldquo;an' &rdquo; to &ldquo;and&rdquo;!)

&ldquo;Water, water, everywhere,&rdquo; groaned the ancient
mariner, &ldquo;Nor any drop to drink.&rdquo;  The &ldquo;Nor any&rdquo;
comes out as &ldquo;And not a&rdquo; as an improvement on Coleridge
most of the time.

Portia, in *The Merchant of Venice,* cries: &ldquo;How
far that little candle throws his beams!&rdquo; but &ldquo;his&rdquo;
becomes &ldquo;its&rdquo; and &ldquo;beams&rdquo; turns up as &ldquo;light&rdquo; on the
lips of some who would quote the Bard and should
know better.  And in the same play, the Prince of
Morocco never said, &ldquo;All that *glitters* is not gold&rdquo;; *glisters*
was the word.  Gray got it right, in his *Ode on
the Death of a Favourite Cat,* when he swiped the
line from Shakespeare: &ldquo;Not all that tempts your
wand'ring eyes/And heedless hearts, is lawful prize;/
Nor all, that glisters, gold.&rdquo;

Does pride go before a fall?  No: according to
*Proverbs,* XVI, 18, &ldquo;Pride goeth before *destruction,*
and an *haughty spirit* before a fall.&rdquo;

It is in *King John* that Salisbury says to the king:
&ldquo;To gild refined gold, to *paint* the lily/ ... Is wasteful
and ridiculous excess.&rdquo;  Nothing about gilding lilies.

And Everett never wrote about &ldquo;Great oaks&rdquo; or
&ldquo;Big oaks:&rdquo; what he said was &ldquo;*Tall* oaks from little
acorns grow.&rdquo;

&ldquo;How doth the little busy bee/Improve each shining
hour,&rdquo; exclaimed Watts, but it's the &ldquo;busy little
bee&rdquo; we keep hearing about.  And it isn't money that is
the root of all evil: Paul, in his *First Epistle to Timothy,*
rightly said:  &ldquo;The *love of money* is the root of all
evil.&rdquo;

Finally, Holmes never said, &ldquo;Elementary, my
dear Watson.&rdquo;  He addressed his friend and colleague
as &ldquo;my dear Watson,&rdquo; and when he felt unduly
praised, he said, &ldquo;Elementary,&rdquo; but he never put the
two together.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Stories Behind Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780824207182/Stories-Behind-Words-Origins-Histories-0824207181/plp)
Peter R. Limburg, (H. W. Wilson, 1986), x + 288pp.

Still another book containing informal, brief
essays on the origins of English words, this time 285 of
them arranged into seven loose thematic categories
(Mood and Character, Democracy and Aristocracy,
Religion, Sorcery and Superstition, Eating and Drinking,
Dress, and Names That Have Entered the Language).
There is an index, but it lists mainly the 285
headwords, not their cognates or the forms from
which they derive.  Thus, *glamour* is in the index but
not *grammar, trousers* but not *trews,* though the latter
in each case is discussed in the text.  On the other
hand, *denim,* discussed under *jeans,* does not have its
own entry but appears in the index.  As there is no
stated rationale for these aberrant treatments, they
must be chalked up to sloppiness.  There is a five-page
entry for *cardigan*, which tells me more than I ever
wanted to know about the word.

The style is informal, occasionally folksy, and I
found nothing factual to quarrel with—but then I was
so bored by the whole enterprise that I confess to having
given it short shrift.  It is beyond me why publishers
continue to publish books of this sort rather than
responsible scholarly work on etymology, which is so
much needed.  The &ldquo;packaging&rdquo; is attractive; the price
is intimidating; the value dubious.

In defense of *The Private Lives of English Words,*
by Louis G. Heller et al., published by Gale Research
in the U.S. and Routledge & Kegan Paul in the U.K.,
it must be said that that work is scholarly, that it has
not only a good index (of *all* words, cognates, and
sources) but several useful appendices, and that it has
as its central theme words that have changed their
meanings drastically since their entry into English.
The recent spate of books listing informal etymologies
seems to be devoid of such rationale: the purpose of
a thematic arrangement in a book on etymology
eludes me.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary of Cliches*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/156684/dictionary-of-cliches-by-james-rogers/9780345338143)
James Rogers, (Facts on File, 1985), 305pp.

On several occasions I have started writing an
article on the importance of &ldquo;white noise&rdquo; in communication.
The world, awaiting that extraordinary
piece of scholarship, couched in deathless prose, will
have to be disappointed, as I have consistently encountered
problems after the first few pages.  The idea
behind the article is simple to delineate; but, as everyone
knows, an article must take up a fair amount of
space to give its subject some weight: no one pays heed
to an idea that is set forth in a short paragraph—no
matter how good it may be.  Therefore, the reader
should not be deceived by the brevity of the theory
that follows; though I readily acknowledge that it
needs support beyond that which mere intuition can
provide, such support is hard to come by considering
the sparse facilities I have to hand—a pen and
paper—and it will have to remain for others to test the
validity of my argument.  The reader is asked to bear
in mind that what follows is, at bottom, intuitive,
which is to say that it reflects what is common sense
(to me).

I am of the opinion that the human mind is capable
of assimilating only a limited amount of information
in a given time interval.  Clearly, the amount varies
with the attention span, intelligence, and other factors
concerning the individual as well as with the
familiarity the individual has with the subject matter.
For instance, my attention span for the subject of botany
or flower arranging is quite limited; another's
attention span for a subject related to mathematics
may be extremely short, and so on.  To be sure, the
ability to assimilate information depends on many factors,
of which interest in the subject is merely one.
Others are the language (or other medium) in which
the information is presented, the speed of presentation,
etc., as well as the receiver's reaction to the presenter:
a Gorgon speaking about the most fascinating
subject on earth could turn any audience to stone.  But
these variables, in a properly conducted experiment,
could be controlled—George Miller: Are you listening?—and
we might then turn to the more important
aspects of the theory.

The sum of the preceding point is that given certain
conditions, people need a certain amount of time
to understand certain kinds of information; above, I
used *assimilate* for *understand:* what I mean is 'absorb,'
'know well enough to be able to use' information.

Let us go on to the next point, best made by illustration.
Everyone—especially everyone in academia—
has experienced the enormous difference between listening
to a learned paper prepared for oral delivery by
someone adept at such writing and one delivered
orally that was written for publication in a journal.
There is little point in going into the details of the differences,
which we all know: suffice it to say that it is
often impossible to understand the latter, especially if
it deals with an arcane subject; the best examples of
the former can be encountered by watching &ldquo;Nova&rdquo; or
some other such program on TV, Disney's &ldquo;Nature's
Half Acre,&rdquo; and the like.  Such information-packed
presentations are carefully prepared, with visual
materials as support, by people who seem to have a
pretty good feel for how much information (and what
kind) a person can absorb.  The success of these presentations
is testimony to their writers' ability to gauge
properly the capacity of a wide segment of the population
to assimilate such information, regardless of age,
education, and so forth.  A few people are bored by
such matter, undoubtedly, but most seem to enjoy it
and to learn from it.  If we try to characterize what it
is that makes material &ldquo;prepared for oral delivery&rdquo; different
from material prepared for publication (in a
journal), we are ineluctably led to the conclusion that
it must be written in a certain way.  That may seem
obvious to many, but what is not immediately apparent
is the set of criteria that apply to such writing.
Some scholars, Louis T. Milic of Cleveland State University
among them, have for many years been doing
research in the branch of linguistics that deals with
that question and related ones.  It is called stylistics.
But from my understanding of stylistics, it is more
often used in analyzing and comparing texts than in
synthesizing them, and I am not sure that the criteria
of simplicity—if that is what we are discussing—have
been satisfactorily identified.  There are a number of
ways in which simplicity can be achieved, but from
what I have seen, it would seems that they must be
considered as guidelines more than as hard and fast
criteria.  They include recommendations regarding
high-frequency words, convoluted syntax, the use of
nested relative clauses and other modifiers, and so
on—all quite valid, but scarcely definitive.

None, as far as I know, has concerned itself specifically
with &ldquo;white noise,&rdquo; which, applied to language,
I should define as empty words, phrases,
clauses, even sentences that enable a listener to &ldquo;recover&rdquo;
from a heavy, concentrated barrage of information.
(It may enable the speaker to do so, as well,
but these comments have to do with the understanding
of information by a receiver.)  The obvious examples
are *y'know, Do you see?, You know what I mean?,*
and other utterances that are either meaningless or
that allow the brain to recover from a preceding utterance
that (presumably) contained a message of some
import.  This white noise, if overdone, leads to pretty
vapid conversation, and we all know how much of
that there is about.  But if it is not done enough, the
resulting concentration of information can be overwhelming.

There would seem to be some sort of obsession
about clich&eacute;s in the national mind, if we judge by the
popularity of game shows.  Many people win many
dollars daily by responding to questions or clues with
answers that require no more knowledge than the ability
to fill in the blanks of clich&eacute; structures like the following:
&ldquo;To die is 'to kick the &mdash;' &rdquo;; &ldquo;In Washington,
the President lives in the '&mdash;House' &rdquo;; &ldquo;Margaret
Mitchell's book about the South was called '&mdash;
with the Wind,' &rdquo; and so on.  Virtually anyone who is
alive these days can answer questions like that, and it
is beyond me what sort of special talent or knowledge
it takes.  These questions are the trivia of trivia.

Take, for example, *The $100,000 Pyramid*, in
which a contestant and a partner (usually an actor or
actress badly in need of publicity and promotion) are
paired together.  One is given a list of seven words, one
at a time, and is supposed to provide the other with
clues that will allow all of the words to be guessed
within 30 seconds.  The contestant picks the category,
which, for the purpose of this illustration might be
cutely called &ldquo;Strike me pink&rdquo;; the television viewer is
shown the word to be guessed, but it is unclear
whether the studio audience sees it, too.  Here is a typical
exchange:

>Clue 1: &ldquo;Roses are &mdash;, Violets are blue.&rdquo;  
Clue 2: &ldquo;The President lives in the &mdash;House.&rdquo;  
Clue 3: &ldquo;An old English song is named &mdash;
*Sleeves.*  The color of grass is&mdash;.&rdquo;  
Clue 4: &ldquo;When something is perfectly clear, you
say 'It is there in &mdash; and white.' &rdquo;  
Clue 5: ...Need I go on?

There are several game shows, broadcast daily
on a nationwide basis, that are based on the contestants'
ability to provide similar information; though
the structures of the shows differ, all pay hundreds—
some thousands or tens of thousands—of dollars.  Of
course, the &ldquo;game&rdquo; aspect and the characteristic that
gives such shows the appearance of moving along
quickly, thus building excitement, lies in the speed
with which the contestant can come up with the correct
answer.  And it must be assumed that shows of this
kind would not be on television at all if they weren't
popular.  Yet, it makes one wonder whatever became
of *Information Please* or even its feeble-minded imitator,
*Dr. I. Q.* (&ldquo;I have a lady in the balcony, Doctor.&rdquo;
&ldquo;A box of Snickers to that lady if she can answer this
question: 'Who is buried in Grant's Tomb?' &rdquo;)  Even
Groucho Marx's *You Bet Your Life* had humor: these
modern shows are vapid, and their only attraction is
watching people walk off with money, cars, refrigerators,
and other accoutrements of American covetousness
for knowing little more than how to speak their
own language.  Greed turned *The $64 Question* into
*The $64,000 Question,* and greed created the problem
of dishonesty that banished the show from television.

All of the foregoing is a somewhat long-winded
introduction to a point I wished to make about the
book under review in order to emphasize that the
clich&eacute;s (which I prefer to spell with the accent) covered
are not merely a trivial exercise and may well
provide investigators with a convenient catalogue of
examples of white noise.  The prime clich&eacute;s mentioned
above, as well as *There you go, Good-by, How are
you?, Pleased ta meetcha, Howdy do?, Have a nice
day*, etc. are not in the book; but that is understandable,
for, as white noise, they are quite boring, virtually
devoid of meaning, and of unimportant origin.
On the other hand, some of them are essential to
politeness in society, and it is doubtful that many consider
*Please* and *Thank you* to be dispensable clich&eacute;s.
Although most of us would agree that the elimination
of clich&eacute;s like *lets no grass grow under his feet, letter
perfect, lick your chops, lie low, life and soul of the
party,* and *life of Reilly* (just to list those appearing on
one page of Rogers's book) would improve any written
material, I am not sure that their presence—unless
used to excess—would be quite so obtrusive in spoken
colloquy.  Such matters are often a matter of taste, and
there are those who would hold that any form of language
liberally salted (if not peppered) with clich&eacute;s is
to be avoided.  The accomplishment of such an end,
while possibly commendable, may yield so highly distilled
a pattern of utterances as to make conversation
(and its comprehension) difficult.  At the very worst,
one might have to concentrate on what others are saying,
which, in the present climate of triviality, may be
a useful exercise.

Beyond the usefulness of the list, Rogers provides
meanings and origins of the clich&eacute;s selected for entry.
It is conceivable, I suppose, that learners of English as
a foreign language, who are unable to distinguish
between a clich&eacute; and a well-turned phrase, might
need to know their meanings, but it is beyond me of
what use the book is otherwise.  The &ldquo;origins&rdquo; are often
merely citations.  Though they might be early, they are
not consistently so, and, unless a specific quotation
from Shakespeare or Milton or Pope can be adduced,
one is hard put to accept the citations as origins, per
se.  Also, some of those I spotted cannot be said to be
the origins of the clich&eacute; and may be nothing more than
the earliest citation for its metaphoric extension.  For
example, *get your second wind* contains an 1830 quotation
for a metaphoric use of the phrase *second wind,*
and Rogers quite properly points out that the &ldquo;phenomenon
got the name..., which is almost literally
descriptive, long ago.&rdquo;  In fact, many of the entries
do not contain information about the origin of the
expression treated—How could they?—and, instead
have an example of it in use.  What I think is a shortcoming
is the failure, say in an entry like *food for
thought,* to mention, after an irritatingly literal definition,
the word *ruminate*.  I hasten to say that it is not
Rogers's fault that definitions of clich&eacute;s are irritating:
the fault lies in the necessary task he has set for himself
of stating the obvious.  To a great extent, all general
dictionaries contain definitions that are &ldquo;irritatingly
obvious&rdquo;: although guesses of the number of words
known to an educated speaker range from 10,000 to
30,000, it is seldom that such estimates take account of
the multiple meanings that words like *set, take, run,*
etc. may have.  Thus the number of senses known to a
speaker probably far exceeds the number of mere
words counted.  Because general dictionaries—that is,
those not dealing with a specialized subject area—
purport to be descriptions of the lexicon of the language,
they have entries for words that few if any
native speakers are ever going to look up: *the, a/an,
but, for, in*, etc.  And such entries occupy a relatively
large amount of space.

Students of the genre should be referred to Frank
Sullivan's *New Yorker* pieces about Dr. Arbuthnot, the
Clich&eacute; Expert, and to the articles by Joe Queenan,
&ldquo;When Everything Was Everything,&rdquo; and Barbara
Hunt Lazerson, &ldquo;Patterned Words and Phrases,&rdquo; in
VERBATIM XII, 3.

This book may one day be of great value, but that
day is not likely to come for the native speaker of English
till he finds many of the clich&eacute;s unfamiliar in
meaning.  Try to explain (if you know) the meaning of
*23 skiddoo!* to anyone who doesn't know it.  See?  It
isn't obvious, is it?

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Lexicography: An emerging international profession*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780719018527/Lexicography-Emerging-International-Profession-Fulbright-0719018528/plp)
Robert Ilson, ed., (Manchester University Press in association with the Fulbright Commission, London, 1986), xiv + 167pp.

Lexicographers, burdended for more than 200
years by the definition imposed by Samuel Johnson
who described us as &ldquo;harmless drudges,&rdquo; are finally
out of the closet—at least, that is one way of interpreting
the subtitle of this book.  With the &ldquo;information
explosion&rdquo; following WWII, dictionaries assumed a
role in society far more important than any they had
ever enjoyed earlier; with the increasing application of
computers to sort and analyze the source materials
used by lexicographers and, later, to drive automatic
typesetting devices that made their production considerably
less expensive than before, dictionaries proliferated,
creating work for those who have well-organized
minds and a sufficient measure of assiduity
to sustain them in the often wearying plod from A to
Z.  Even respectable linguists have come forth in the
past forty years to confess their interest and involvement
in lexicography.  In the late 1950s, the number of
full-time, active, professional lexicographers working
in the English language numbered about half a dozen,
but that, of course, excluded the editors who worked
on pronunciation, etymology, definition, and the various
other elements that go to make up the information
contained in monolingual dictionaries; at a recent
meeting of Euralex, the European Association of Lexicographers
(which has members everywhere), there
were about 350 participants.  Though many who
attended may not have been full-time professional lexicographers
(we have our groupies, too), it may be
assumed that for various reasons not all of the professional
lexicographers in the world attended.  At a
guess, including bilingual lexicographers, I should put
the current number at about 500, worldwide.  That is
still a relatively small clique, but clearly an enormous
increase over any earlier estimates.  Lexicography is a
profession like any other: it demands a thorough background
in many aspects of a highly specialized and
often abstruse subject (linguistics) as well as an artistic
ability with language combined with a systematic turn
of mind.  The creative, artistic imagination of the lexicographer
to a great extent helps determine his proficiency,
just as those attributes serve as criteria for
truly proficient doctors, lawyers, engineers, and people
in other professions.

There are good, mediocre, and bad dictionaries,
though the critic, in classifying them, ought always be
aware of any constraints of cost and market that might
have been imposed by the publisher.  Works of fiction
and other works of nonfiction are either good or bad,
and publishers seldom interfere with their scope or
length; reference books are another matter: publishers
usually set budgets for them, and the sales managers of
publishing companies often impose strict guidelines of
page length and format, for many dictionaries are tailored
to particular markets.

Of the many companies that have published dictionaries,
only a handful maintain a regular, full-time
staff devoted to the continued tracking of the language,
the updating and revision of dictionaries that
are kept in print, and a regular program of publication
of new works.  Thus, there have sprung up a few
independent, professional compilers of dictionaries
and, usually, other kinds of reference books who are
employed by companies wishing to publish or revise a
specific work.  In general, originating a new dictionary
or revising an existing one is an expensive undertaking.
*Webster's Third Unabridged,* which cost about $3.5
million to prepare in 1961, would probably cost several
times that today; even by its publication date in
1966, the *Random House Unabridged,* about half the
size of *Webster's Third,* had cost some $3.5 million,
and its revision alone would probably cost that much
today.

From all those millions, one might expect that lexicographers
are pretty well off.  The facts, alas, are
quite different: many publishers who yield, however
reluctantly, to paying considerable amounts to compositors
and printers and paper manufacturers for the
production of a major dictionary become unconscionably
penurious when it comes to paying lexicographers.
Moreover, contrary to popular opinion, lexicographers
almost never receive royalties on the sales of copies of
the better-selling dictionaries, though they are able,
now and then, to make royalty deals on lesser works,
especially, outside of the United States.

A major dictionary is a very profitable enterprise
for the publisher who succeeds in establishing it in the
marketplace, hence, the dictionary has become an
institutionalized money-spinner for some of them.  An
American college dictionary, for instance, could sell
between 300,000 and 500,000 copies a year, which is
quite respectable.  On the other hand, such dictionaries
are very competitively priced: just think of the average
novel of about 300 pages (about 200,000 words) selling
for $20.00; then consider the average college dictionary
of about 1700 pages (about 3,000,000 words) involving
an investment in the seven figures and selling for
$15.00; it requires little calculation, taking into account
the useful life of the dictionary—roughly ten years—to
realize that such books are the biggest bargain on earth.

*Lexicography* barely touches on these matters,
nor, indeed, do I suggest that it should.  It is an interesting
and well-edited &ldquo;report&rdquo; of a Colloquium held
in London in September 1984.  Fifty-four invited lexicographers
and lexicographic groupies from thirteen
countries met, gave papers, commented on papers,
and exchanged ideas under the auspices of the United
States-United Kingdom Educational (Fulbright) Commission.
I attended an earlier planning session organized
by Professor Sir Randolph Quirk, then Vice-Chancellor
of the University of London, the entire
event having been thought up by John Herrington,
outgoing Executive Director; the Colloquium and this
book are a tribute to him and to the many years of
work he did in London in behalf of the Fulbright
Commission.

The papers, which are interesting and useful—not
the usual turgid academic gobbledegook foisted on
scholars who convene mainly to give their own papers
rather than hear others'—range from a few on the history
of lexicography, the training (but not the care
and feeding) of lexicographers (and users!), some blue-sky
projections, &ldquo;Dictionaries of the next century&rdquo;
(Professor Richard W. Bailey, University of Michigan),
and a number of &ldquo;Final&rdquo; recommendations
and concluding remarks by Dr. Gabriele Stein and
Herrington.

The book is eminently readable, thanks both to
the sensible papers of the participants and to the judicious
editing by Ilson, no mean lexicographer himself.
If you want to read about some of the matters that
command the attention of lexicographers and those
involved in lexicography, you couldn't find a better
introduction to their concerns.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Names and Games: Onomastics and Recreational Linguistics*](https://www.amazon.com/Names-Games-Onomastics-Recreational-Linguistics/dp/0819153508)
A. Ross Eckler, ed., (University Press of America, 1986), xvi + 281pp.

*Word Ways* is the quarterly devoted to puzzles,
solutions, games, language curiosities, and wordplay.
If those are the aspects of language that interest you,
you should be a subscriber.  (Write to A. Ross Eckler,
*Word Ways*, Spring Valley Road, Morristown, NJ
07960, for information.)  It is quite different from
VERBATIM in content and appearance, and the two are
not in the least competitive.  *Word Ways* is by far the
best periodical of its kind.

Eckler has compiled (to quote the subtitle of this
book) &ldquo;An anthology of 99 articles published in Word
Ways, The Journal of Recreational Linguistics [,] from
February 1968 to August 1985.&rdquo;  As the title suggests
and the Table of Contents bears out, the book deals
with Names of People, Names of Places, and Other
Names; and the 99 articles are more or less evenly distributed
among these headings, each of which is further
divided into subcategories like &ldquo;Palindromes,
Acrostics and Telephonics,&rdquo; &ldquo;Names of Imaginary
People,&rdquo; &ldquo;Numerical Place Names,&rdquo; &ldquo;Brand Names
and Trade Names,&rdquo; and thirteen others.  Many of the
articles are concerned with anagrams, which I find
rather tedious.  However, I must be alone in that
regard if one comes to consider the amount of anagramming
going on in the cryptic puzzles of the
world.  Besides, anagrams seem to offer their enthusiasts
an outlet for their shifty energies similar to the sort
release that must be felt by numerologists: there is a
kind of logomancy involved in anagrams.  I am not
prejudiced against anagrams, but I do feel that there
are an awful lot of them about and I find it difficult to
sustain interest.  The same goes for palindromes (of
which there are, obviously, fewer).

Although the book is a bit heavy with such items,
they are by no means overwhelming, and, even if you
are a subscriber to *Word Ways*, you ought to have a
copy of *Names and Games* if only to have such a
wealth of material on onomastics in one place.
Though I realize that an Index would have been
impractically vast, it would still have proved a useful
adjunct.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;... the golden bowl ... is surrounded by the figurines
of Faith, Hipe and Charity ...&rdquo; [From *The Times*,
July 4, 1985, p.l.]

## When You Say It in Other Words...
*Zellig Bach, Lakehurst, New Jersey*

The playful spelling devices &ldquo;A as in heal,&rdquo; &ldquo;C as
in scene,&rdquo; &ldquo;K as in Knot&rdquo; [&ldquo;A Play on Words,&rdquo;
VERBATIM, XII, 1], reminded me for some reason of
my friend Irving Peterson.  Mr. Peterson is a healthy,
robust man in his early 40s.  Never a sick day in his
life.  Never saw a doctor (nor did a doctor ever see
him).  Last year he purchased, strictly for his personal
use, a word processor, and he became thoroughly
fascinated with the many magnificent facilities his
software offered—insertions, deletions, margin justification,
paragraph reforming, moving parts of a sentences
or entire blocks of typed matter to new places in
the text, etc., and all of this without having to erase or
retype the entire &ldquo;document&rdquo; (as they call it in computerese).
He found new energies and reasons to start
a wide correspondence with old chums from his H. S.
days, from college, and with many other old friends
from whom he had not heard in ages.

Mr. Peterson does not know the touch system
and, naturally, has to hunt-and-peck, looking for each
key before striking.  But his fingers are very chubby,
and every time he strikes a key he inadevertently also
touches the adjacent key.  As a result he has to delete in
practically every word the extra unwanted letters.

For these three reasons—typing his letters, checking
the typed matter on the monitor, and then continually
correcting it—he spent hours and hours of his
evenings at the word processor.  He also developed
severe eyestrain.  His wife, as well as his friends at the
office, suggested that he go for an eye examination.
&ldquo;It's a good idea,&rdquo; they said, &ldquo;especially after 40.&rdquo;
Although initially reluctant to see a doctor (&ldquo;for the
first time in my life,&rdquo; Mr. Peterson kept saying) he
made an appointment with an eye specialist.  The ophthalmologist
inquired into the nature of his eyestrain,
his line of work, and after examining his eyes with
various instruments, asked him to read the Snellen
Chart on the wall, first with the right eye, then with
the left.  Mr. Peterson rattled off all the letters with
either eye in no time:

&ldquo;Just amazing,&rdquo; the doctor said.  &ldquo;If it were not
for one single error, the same error several times—you
read *k* each time there was an *f*—you would have been
letter-perfect.  Just to make sure, let's check your eyesight
once more.  However, to rule out any possible
practice effects, please read the chart this time from
the smallest letters at the bottom upwards.&rdquo;  The procedure
was repeated, again first with one eye, then
with the other.  But, lo and behold, Mr. Peterson made
the very same mistakes again: each time there was an
*f*—a total of four times—he saw a *k*.

The doctor turned on the light in the examination
room, and shook his head in disbelief.  After scribbling
some notes in the patient's file, he said:  &ldquo;In all my
years of practice I encountered many patients with
perfect 20/20 vision.  But never before did I have a
patient with 20/10 visual acuity.  Just amazing!  Such a
unique case should be written up in the 'Annals of
Ophthalmology.' &rdquo;  Then, after a moment of silence:
&ldquo;But there is one thing that puzzles me, Mr. Peterson.
Why is it that every time you come to the letter *f* you
see *k*?...&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Florence Goldman}

Referring to &ldquo;Caveat Viator&rdquo; [XI, 4], the expression
&ldquo;Ah, no&rdquo; should be avoided in Czechoslovakia, as well as in
Italy.

Reading the article, I remembered with a grin an incident
I witnessed some years ago in a hotel lobby in Prague.
An American businessman returned to the hotel after an
ardous day of negotiations.  The concierge kindly inquired
if he wanted to have dinner sent up to his room.  The American
mulled it over and finally said, &ldquo;Ah... no.&rdquo;  He then
disappeared into the elevator.

Twenty minutes later, he was back, trying to find out
why a vast tray of food had been delivered to his room.

&ldquo;Because you wanted it, sir,&rdquo; said the concierge.
&ldquo;No,&rdquo; the American protested.  &ldquo;I said I *didn't* want it!&rdquo;

They stared at each other in bewilderment until I stepped
forward to solve the mystery.  &ldquo;Ano&rdquo; in Czech means 'yes.'

*[Florence Goldman, New York, New York]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We will oil your sewing machine and adjust the tension
in your home for $1.00.&rdquo;  [Heard on Radio KBOR in
Brownsville, Texas on June 5, 1985.  Submitted
by Max R. Tyner, McAllen, Texas.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our manager was held hostage at gun point for six
hours in a police auction.&rdquo;  [From the May 31, 1985 issue of
Sh'ma.  Submitted by Claire Lee, Cincinnati.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Homophones &amp; Homographs, An American Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Homophones-Homographs-American-Dictionary-Hobbs-James/30575758727/bd)
James B. Hobbs, (McFarland &amp; Company, 1986), viii + 264pp.

I have had occasion to use books similar in subject
matter to this one and have in my library many of
those listed in the Bibliography.  My general criticism
of some of them is that they do not cover the language
thoroughly.  It would appear, from those few that are
comprehensive (like the work at hand), that there are
about 3,500 homophones, about 600 homographs, and
about 100 words that are both.  Yet some of the books I
have seen list only a fely a hand of the first, which
seems to me too casual a treatment of the subject to
make the result worthwhile.  My other criticism of
most of the other books is that their organization is
poor and interferes with the best uses to which such
books can be put.

Hobbs, who teaches at Lehigh University, in
Pennsylvania, has done quite a thorough job of it,
beginning with a discussion of the meanings of *homophone,
homograph, homonym*, ... and a few rare
alternatives.  He then goes on to discuss, albeit briefly,
how languages deal with homophones (especially): the
answer is that ambiguity seldom arises because most
homophones (and, for that matter, homographs) are
distributed differently in the language—that is, *oar* and
*ore*, though both nouns, are rarely confused because
they occur in quite different contexts; neither is likely to
be confused with *or*, which has a different grammatical
distribution.

There follows a dictionary of homophones of 217
pages, well laid out, easy to use, and thoroughly cross-referenced.
Beginning on page 220 there is a 30-page
dictionary of homographs.  Appendix I consists of several
listings—&ldquo;Unusual Groupings&rdquo;—of four or more
one-syllable homophones (note *air, are, e'er, ere, err,
eyre,* and *heir*), three or more two-syllable words, and
so forth, as well as a list of words (like *mole*) that are
both homographs and homophones.  Appendix II is a
short annotated Bibliography.

Homophones may cause one kind of ambiguity,
but homographs cause another, and, till relatively recent
advances in parsing systems for computer processing
of natural language, they made machine translation
something less than successful.  A word like *axes*,
for instance, was indistinguishable as the plural of *ax* or
of *axis; lead* can be a metal or a verb, and so on.

Hobbs's book is a very useful one—at least for lexicographers,
other linguists, and writers of readers for
those learning English, either as a native or a foreign
language.  Inevitably, I have some criticism: loanwords,
some of which have a high frequency in English, seem
to have been either overlooked or deliberately omitted
(I cannot tell which), so one doesn't find *lox* 'smoked
salmon'/'liquid oxygen,' *or* 'gold' and *d'or* '(made) of
gold,' etc., though *piqu&eacute;, coup&eacute;, bouch&eacute;*, and other
items are listed.  These are not vital, but one would
hope to see them included in a second edition.

*Laurence Urdang*


### OBITER DICTA: *Halley's Comet and the Power of Conventional Usage*
*Frank R. Abate*

In a discussion of the return of Halley's Comet on
the ABC program &ldquo;Nightline,&rdquo; newsman Ted Koppel,
the show's very able and usually unflappable host,
bowed to the pressure of convention on the issue of the
pronunciation of the name Halley.  Mr. Koppel revealed
that the Halley family of England, astronomer
Edmund Halley's descendants, pronounce their name
&ldquo;HAW-lee&rdquo; and took this as his justification for using
said pronunciation in favor of the more widely heard
&ldquo;HAL-ee.&rdquo;  He rightly attributed the oft-heard pronunciation
&ldquo;HAY-lee&rdquo; to the influence of rock 'n' roll's Bill
Haley, whose popular combo &ldquo;Bill Haley and the
Comets&rdquo; seems to have greatly reinforced, on the
strength of the high frequency of the use of its name in
the popular culture, the alternate pronunciation of
Halley with a long a, notwithstanding the difference
in the spelling.  In any event, Mr. Koppel, having laid
out the fruit of his research, went on to use the pronunciation
&ldquo;HAWL-ee&rdquo; several times, apparently feeling
justified by the family pronunciation.

After cutting away to a taped report, during
which another correspondent spoke several times of
&ldquo;HAL-ee's&rdquo; Comet, Mr. Koppel returned saying, &ldquo;All
right, so be it, 'HAL-ee's' Comet.&rdquo;  Despite his findings
on the Halley family pronunciation, and his own self-confidence,
Ted Koppel could not go against the established
trend that seems to favor the pronunciation
&ldquo;HAL-ee&rdquo;; he used this pronunciation through the rest
of the show, as did his guest experts.

This is a clearcut example of how convention
operates in language, in this case affecting a pronunciation
by a man who abandons the suggestions of his
own research to fall in line with common usage.  In no
way do I wish to appear to be criticizing him for this.
The point is that what becomes recognized as the
established usage of the day—be it a pronunciation, a
new meaning, a peculiar spelling, or whatever—
generally carries a great deal of weight and influence,
such that the forces of reason and propriety are overwhelmed.

Recognition of the power of conventional usage in
language is a keynote of the approach known as
descriptive linguistics.  Language, in its function as a
medium for communicating ideas, necessarily is subject
to the dictates of convention.  If a particular usage
comes to be established in the broad community of
language users, the railings of purists, schoolmarms,
editors, or TV commentators will be likely to have little
effect on that usage.  Language does not necessarily
operate according to the strictures of logic, reason, or
authority.  As Mr. Koppel is aware, convention seems
to be favoring the pronunciation &ldquo;HAL-ee,&rdquo; and it is
quite futile to go against such a trend.  Those who
wrangle with language convention do so at the risk of
being written off as pedants, stick-in-the-muds, or
elitists.

## English English: *Philately*
*Philip Howard*

English is the putty language, infinitely flexible
and accommodating to new words and new
uses.  But at least there are some certainties in it.  When
we come to the etymology of most words, we can say
with certainty that this is the derivation.  Or can we?

There was an agreeably surrealist misprint and
wrong derivation in *The Times* the other day, when
we reported that a woman had tried to hold up a bank
with &ldquo;an imitation Biretta pistol.&rdquo;  This unusual
Roman Catholic weapon is evidently related to the
French miter-shaped, multiple-barreled machine-gun
of 1870 known as *une mitrailleuse*.  It was a sporting
attempt at spelling.  In fact there is an old Italian firm
at Cardone, which has been making guns for more
than 300 years.  It is an honorary member of the Tercentenarians'
Club; and its name is Beretta.

There is certainty in language for you.  *Biretta* is
the square cap, of different colors according to grade,
worn by papist clergy.  *Beretta* is the lethal little handgun
carried by private eyes, James Bond, and other
professional killers.

We can be almost as certain as this about the
roots of most words.  Take *philately* for example, the
magpie 'obsession to collect postage stamps.&rdquo;  There is
surely no doubt about its daft but elegant etymology.

I always took it to be straightforward and reasonably
well-known.  Came into English from French
around 1865.  Herpin defines *philat&eacute;lie* in 1864 as: 'Le
collectioneur de timbres-poste.'  Derivation from
Greek *philo*- 'lover of something or other' plus *ateles*,
meaning 'free from tax or payment.'  *Ateleia* means
'exemption from payment' in Greek, taken from *a*-'without'
and *teleia* 'payment, charge, tax.'

The Greek *ateles* was taken as a reasonable equivalent
of 'free' or 'franco,' which used to be stamped on
prepaid letters, before the introduction of the impressed
receipt stamp, and its successor, the little
adhesive label with perforated edges that always
refuse to tear in the right place.

Postage stamps themselves may be pitiful little
sticky toys.  British ones were better value and got the
mail through quicker when they carried invariably the
head of the sovereign, instead of all these trendy new
pictures.  But they represent a noble ideal, that the
mail must get through.  As the Persian King of Kings
arranged, before the Ayatollah Khomeini took over
the posts: &ldquo;Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom
of night stays these couriers, the postmen, from the
swift accomplishment of their appointed routes.&rdquo;  I
would not go so far as that about the United Kingdom
postal service today.  But philately is a harmless, if silly
hobby; and its name is soundly derived.

No,—whoa, there, just a minute, Philip.  Hang
about.  Look the word up in the big Greek dictionaries.
And you will find: &ldquo;*philoteleia* and *philateleia*—
the love of collecting stamps.&rdquo;  The word *philoteleia* is
the correct derivation in Greek, although it derives
from the French *philat&eacute;lie*, which is wrong etymologically.
However, it has been adopted by nearly all
European countries.

&ldquo;*Philoteleia* magazine was established in 1924,
and is published by the Greek Philotelic Society,
which was founded in 1926.&rdquo;

If the Greek dictionaries are right, the British
have raped the Greek language, as well as pinched the
Elgin Marbles from the Parthenon.  Of course English
and any language reserve the right to change the
meaning and form of words they borrow from other
languages.  That is the nature of a living language.
Pedants who insist that we must use words that we
borrow from French in their native meanings, and
ditto for words from other languages, do not understand
how language works.

But in this case the difference is between black
and white, 'amateurs of free from tax things' and
'amateurs of taxes.'  You would think that the Greeks
should be allowed to pronounce on what their own
language means.  Can it be that the well-established
English and French derivation is wrong?  Can it be
that the Greek lexicographers don't know their alpha
from their omega?  Can it be that both *philately* and
*philotely* are both right, and that tax and no-tax are
equally good in the whacky world of postage stamps?  I
think we should be told.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Abbreviations Dictionary: Augmented International Seventh Edition*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780444008077/Abbreviations-Dictionary-Sola-Ralph-0444008071/plp)
Ralph De Sola, (Elsevier Science Publishing Co., 1985), xviii + 1240pp.

The dust jacket promises &ldquo;over 23,000 new and
augmented entries, with a grand total of over 250,000
definitions; Bafflegab (euphemisms), British and Irish
County Abbreviations, Citizens' Band Call Signs, Dysphemistic
Place-Names, International Vehicle License
Letters; Prisons of the World and Their Toponyms,
Rules of the Road at Sea, and much more....&rdquo;
Defined in the Introduction are *abbreviations, acronyms,
anonyms, contractions, eponyms, exonyms,
geographical equivalents, initials, nicknames, place
name pseudonyms, short forms, signs, slang shortcuts,
symbols*, and *toponyms*.

As can be seen, this goes beyond a mere dictionary
of abbreviations; if it were only that, it could be as
large as *Acronyms, Initialisms, and Abbreviations Dictionary*,
published by Gale Research Company at
$170.  The comparison between the two must be made,
and there is no gainsaying that the latter is more
extensive and complete.  But its sheer size and price
make it more suitable for public libraries than for filling
a niche in a home reference library, for which De
Sola's book seems ideal.  Offices that cannot afford the
Gale work will also find the *Abbreviations Dictionary*
a handy reference, replete with all sorts of useful
information.  But we cannot allow a book to escape
our clutches without one adverse comment, so here it
is: missing is what might be called (if there were prizes
for such things) &ldquo;The Acronym of the Year 1984-85,&rdquo;
namely *WYSYWYG* (pronounced &ldquo;wizzeewig&rdquo;).
Referring to an image on the screen of a computer in
comparison with what one gets in the printed-out text,
it stands for 'What You See Is What You Get.'

## Puzzle

1. Who was known as the Word King?
2. What is a nickname for the xylophone?
3. What does QANTAS stand for?
4. Who was the Bard of the Stumblebum?
5. What was the Baron Munchausen's real name?
6. What does DIRT stand for?
7. If *iud* stands for 'intrauterine device' what does IUD stand for?
8. Why is Haydn's String Quartet in D (opus 76, no. 2) nicknamed the *Quinten*?
9. If your airline ticket destination is FNG and your baggage goes to FIG, how far away is your toothbrush?
10. If a job applicant told you he spent five years studying at Lovelady, would you hire him?
11. What is Europe's northernmost city?
12. What is Europe's southernmost city?
13. If someone offered you a full-time job on a YGN, would you accept?
14. You are in a sailboat and your fairy godmother offers you a choice between an *Irish hurricane* and a *yalca:* which do you choose?

## Answers

1. Eric Partridge.
2. woodpile.
3. Queensland and Northern Territories Aerial Services.
4. Nelson Algren.
5. Rudolf Erich Raspe. (Do you believe that?)
6. Department of Industrial Relations and Technology (Australian).
7. Institute for Urban Development.
8. *Quinten* refers to the fifth form or grade in Austrain schools.
9. About 800 miles: *FNG* is the airport designation for Fada Ngourma, Upper Volta, *FIG* that for Fria, Guinea.
10. It depends what for: *Lovelady* is a maximum security prison for felons north of Huntsville, Texas.
11. Hammerfest, Norway.
12. Nicosia, Cyprus.
13. That's up to you: *YGN* is the designation for a non-self-propelled garbage scow.
14. I'd prefer the former, 'a dead calm'; the latter is a 'snowstorm in the northern Andean passes, in Peru.'

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Pinckert's Practical Grammar*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/pinckerts-practical-grammar-lively-unintimidating/author/pinckert-robert/)
Robert C. Pinckert, (Writer's Digest Books, 1986), 232pp. 

The buying of books on usage, how to improve
one's writing or language in general, and on how to
get ahead by acquiring a larger vocabulary must be
something like buying lottery tickets: the dream is
there, either of incredible social or financial success or
of writing the great American novel.  The key to it all
is the mastery of the language, and the book at hand is
always the secret method for finding the magical key.

*Writer's Digest* is a periodical that caters to those
who dream about being published, and their publication
of *PPG* is entirely appropriate.  The problem lies
in the fact that getting published has only little to do
with writing &ldquo;proper&rdquo; English: it has everything to do
with writing *good* English.  Many years ago—about
thirty, come to think of it—Random House received
every week of the year some 500 unsolicited manuscripts.
(In publisher's jargon, an unsolicited manuscripts
is one that does not come in through a literary
agent or an editor's personal contact with the author.)
Today, the number may be twice that.  I looked at
quite a few of them out of curiosity and found that
few had to be read past the first page to determine
that they were unpublishable.  It is impossible to retail
here all of the reasons why this was so immediately
obvious, but it was.  True, once in a while, something
of value surfaced from the sea of semi-literate muck,
but that was—and, I assume, still is—a very rare
event.

It probably goes without saying (but I shall say it
anyway) that in order to write at all one must have
some control over grammar, spelling, and all the rudiments
of language.  Often, those who can speak reasonably
well and even with some eloquence are totally
incapable of writing down their own words.  In a very
limited way, Pinckert deals with that—and the occasional
unacceptability of writing the way one speaks—
in his justaposed lists of Informal/Formal usages.  I
disagree with some of his examples, but that is not
important.  What is important is that as far as I know
or can imagine, no one has ever learned how to express
himself by reading a book: books like *Fowler, Perrin*,
even *PPG* do not yield up secrets.  They are useful as
reference books but, like reference books, one must
know enough to understand the need to look up something,
what to look up, and how to find it.  Someone
recently phoned to complain that *supersede* was not in
the dictionary.  Of course it is there!  It's not listed as
&ldquo;supercede&rdquo; and wasn't findable in that part of the
dictionary, that's all.

The media today are bulging with all manner of
writing, much of it good, much of it bad, most of it
nondescript or not worthy of classification.  Because of
the sheer number of magazines, newspapers, radio
programs, and television shows, millions upon millions
of words are gobbled up and spewed out daily.  Never
before in history has so much verbiage been so much
in demand—notwithstanding (and not including)
revivals, reissues, and reruns.  Clearly, that means
more writers are needed than ever before, and with
volume comes mediocrity.

How do all these people learn to write, whether
adequately or well?  They learn by reading, and by
reading the good stuff, much of which, believe it or
not, abounds in the English language.  Only after years
of reading should one try to write, and then only
with a severe critic at hand to review what has been
written.  English teachers in secondary schools (if not
earlier) and teachers of special writing courses in universities
are supposed to fill this need, but one is given
to wonder whether the standard of their criticism is
what one likes to believe it once was.  The good old
days are always, somehow, the better days, especially
in retrospect.  I am under the impression that teachers
are so completely occupied trying to instruct nature
students in the rudiments of writing basically clear,
expository prose that they have no time to pay attention
to art.  And, after all, it is art that makes a writer
good, not the ability to decide that a verb should agree
with its noun in number.  Notwithstanding, the
mechanics of language are important, and there are
probably not a large number of good writers—at least
published ones—whose art outshines their bad grammar.

All that said, it is understood that mastery of the
mechanics of language makes one a master of the
mechanics, and not an artist, any more than identifying
red from green makes one an artist.  The analogy of
a skill against a natural ability may be a poor one, but
creative writing is not just writing, any more than
painting a bookcase is painting a portrait that will
hang in even the most modest gallery.

In the context of these admonitions, Pinckert's
(and others') books may be regarded as worthwhile,
but following their precepts is arduous and the practitioner
will inevitably encounter constructions that
are not covered by a work of such narrow scope.
Yet, what is there is useful, provided that it is put to
good use.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This past June an unidentified local priest was barred from a
state prison when he tried to lead a celebration of [the] Mass
with a small vile of red wine.&rdquo;  [From *Institutions, Etc.*
November, 1984, Vol. 7, No. 11.  Submitted by Judi Chamberlin, Somerville, Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Descending on the Seljestad side, the bus will make a short
stop at the Latefoss waterfall, tumbling down the mountainside
in a double avalanche and gently spraying the road.&rdquo;  [From
Fodor's Scandinavia, 1984, p. 315.  Submitted by Steve Bonner
of Rockville, Maryland, who thought this quite a tourist trap!]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Smallest microcassette records memos from your tie.&rdquo;  [From
The Sharper Image catalogue, Fall 1984.  Submitted by C. Steven
Short, Los Angeles, California, who shrugs, &ldquo;Frankly,
I've never received a memo from one of my ties that was worth
recording!&rdquo;]

## Paring Pairs No. 22

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  A numbered
item may be used more than once, and some clues may
require more than two answer items; after all of the matchings
have been completed, one numbered item will remain
unmatched.  That is the correct answer.  Our answer is the
only acceptable one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Normally a tasty thirty-two.  
(b). Two-bit gee-gee.  
(c). Twenty-five pesetas here?  
(d). Sherwood Forest potty.  
(e). Fred Astaire's beer hall.  
(f). Reverse into the boondocks.  
(g). Watch out at the theater!  
(h). Quartette of southern ladies is timely.  
(i). Desist—unless you're loaded, Dad.  
(j). Jason found them periodically strange.  
(k). Pitch horseshoes into the mold.  
(l). Former publicity man now works for freight company.  
(m). Down east seamstress in colaca maxima.  
(n). Are quarks, etc., edible?  
(o). Nuder area.  
(p). Churchill's method for removing wrinkles from the draperies.  
(q). Netting a crafty place.  
(r). Spartan tatting fiend.  
(s). Reach for the Skies!  
(t). Get twenty-four sheets of paper.  
(u). Montezuma takes his revenge on Indians, too.  
(v). Monkey's fist is abhorrent to pacifists.  
(w). Torturous embroidery.  
(x). Choreographed podiatry.  
(y). Fossil fuel or regal fool?  
(z). Fixed by a Saturday night special.  

(1). A.  
(2). Agent.  
(3). Back.  
(4). Bear.  
(5). Bellers.  
(6). Belly.  
(7). Bizarre.  
(8). Box.  
(9). Buffer.  
(10). Cast.  
(11). Chips.  
(12). Cole.  
(13). Crew's.  
(14). Cruel.  
(15). Curse.  
(16). Curtain.  
(17). Delhi.  
(18). Demon.  
(19). Express.  
(20). Fission.  
(21). Foot.  
(22). Four.  
(23). Gun.  
(24). Harpies.  
(25). Horse.  
(26). Iron.  
(27). John.  
(28). King.  
(29). Lace.  
(30). Latin.  
(31). Little.  
(32). Main.  
(33). Missile.  
(34). Quarter.  
(35). Quire.  
(36). Room.  
(37). Sewer.  
(38). Show.  
(39). Spire.  
(40). Staple.  
(41). Sum.  
(42). Tap.  
(43). Time.  
(44). Tooth.  
(45). Tulle.  
(46). Water.  
(47). Work.  
(48). Zone.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Two winners will be drawn from among the correct
answers, one from those received in Aylesbury, the other
from those received in Essex.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send their
answers to VERBATIM, Box 199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20
ITQ, England; all others should send their answers to
VERBATIM, Box 644, Old Lyme, CT 06371-0644, U.S.A.  *You
need send only the one-word solution, on a postcard, please.*

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 21

(a). At death's door from weak drink?  (28,7)  Near Bier.  
(b). Loftier loft for Egyptian priests.  (19,2)  Higher Attic.  
(c). King Kong loved this enchanted skate.  (16,38) Fey Ray.  
(d). According to the paper, 0900EST = 1300GMT; 1300EST=1800GMT.  (23,47) London Times.  
(e). Extraordinary crane for hanging ten.  (5,14) Beau Derrick.  
(f). Dracula maddened by the numbers.  (10,29) Count Off.  
(g). Allons, enfants de la patrie!  (9,33) Come Patriots.  
(h). Passover dance.  (26,3) Matzoh Ball.  
(i). Chinese fast food.  (30,15) Orient Express.  
(j). Palaver at the s&eacute;ance.  (37,40) Rap Session.  
(k). The perverted item is making me squirm.  (51,46) Wry Thing.  
(l). What lads' breath comes in.  (42,31) Short Pants.  
(m). What you won't be awarded if you floss daily. (13,35) Dental Plaque.  
(n). Best thing available for shading overseer's eyes. (45,49) Super Visor.  
(o). Jack, once popular with mother, having traded cow... (18,4) Has Bean.  
(p). Chop up the Greek letter, then eat it.  (27,34) Mince Pie.  
(q). Intensive study of car wrecks.  (12,11) Crash Course.  
(r). Sir Launcelot refuses to budge from Queen Guinevere's bedside.  (21,43) Knight Stand.  
(s). Neatening up the cabinet by delaying consideration of the document.  (41,32) Shelving Paper.  
(t). Where the Eucharist is sold.  (25,24) Mass Market.  
(u). Cape Cod attraction.  (25,1) Mass Appeal.  
(v). Give the scrubwoman the eye and she takes charge.  (8,22) Char Lady.  
(w). Netted mad mackerel in Paris?  (20,39) In Sane.  
(x). Place for fashionable ladies.  (20,50) In Vogue.  
(y). Colostrum from insect bites?  (6,44) Bee Stings.  
(z). Leapin' athletes!  Are the flagstaffs safe in Warsaw? (36,48) Pole Vault.

The correct answer is (17) French.  The winner
was Diane diClementine, Sacramento, California.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The committee's goal is to collect $52 million by 1990,
the 100th centennial of the founding of Yosemite National
Park....&rdquo;  [From the *Daily News*, Van Nuys, California.
Submitted by Otis H. Wade, Los Angeles.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

he grizzly discovery [a dismembered body] was
made.... A civilian witnes opened the suitcase and saw
the upper torso of a man's body.&rdquo;  [From the *Evening Out-look*,
Santa Monica, California.  Submitted by Merrill Sarty, Rancho Park, California.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. VERBATIM cryptic for someone both bold and shy (8)  
2\. Retreat back to theater district (6)  
3\.  Cuts delicate fabric prices (9)  
4\.  Smart people writing lead for Sunday *Times* (5)  
5\.  Plastic twisted at left (5)  
6\.  Native in Boeing air crashes (9)  
7\.  Wild sheep struggle to breathe (7)  
8\.  Shape of track is different around border (7)  
9\.  Crack angler by the sound (7)  
10\. I color in March and 'July (7)  
11\. The French disrobe for washerwoman (9)  
12\. Turned up with Mom's cats (5)  
13\. Decimal, in many instances (15)  
14\. Plum grower's first to agree to a second marriage (9)  
15\. Poem: &ldquo;Tsetse Flies&rdquo; (6)  
16\. Visionary's transaction is in it (8)

**Down**

1\. Sensual love requires grasping everywhere (3,4)  
2\. Meat company breaking prohibition (5)  
3\. Like some diseases from bit of radium in small bottle (5)  
4\. Former president is upset—*Time* to take back assertions (7)  
6\. Deep-rooted lentils I'd torn up (9)  
7\. Strangely appealing gift (9)  
8\. Derek's upcoming scene is fit for censoring (7)  
9\. Volcanic debris and rocks on the beach (6)  
15\. Pesky insects in swamp growth surrounding South American capital (9)  
16\. Plenty to roll under a ball (9)  
18\. Men in train in midst of rushes (7)  
19\. Schemer, generally hiding, to come out (6)  
20\. Key held by crazy fool (7)  
21\. Revere's scepter is broken (7)  
23\. Papa bears and bearlike critter (5)  
24\. Batter raised near one Southern city (5)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Verbatim.  
5\. Bossed.  
10\. No-s-hing.  
11\. Out-rage.  
12\. Stars and Stripes.  
13\. ENDWISE.  
14\. Embers.  
17\. A-muse-D.  
20\. CHORALE.  
21\. Red, White and Blue.  
25\. O-ratio-n.  
26\. B-rough-t.  
27\. (s)elects.  
28\. Frum-IOU-s.  

**Down**

1\. Van-I-shed.  
2\. (P)Ro(u)st-and.  
3\. AMIDS-hips.  
4\. INGENUE.  
6\. OUTER.  
7\. SCARPER.  
8\. Dr-ess-y.  
9\. Mousse.  
15\. B-road-loom.  
16\. Sevenths.  
18\. MEDIATE.  
19\. Do-tin-g.  
20\. C-ham-B'-er.  
21\. Allegro/A-leg-row.  
22\. Gr-o-ove.  
24\. HEIST.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v13n1_Summer_1986)