--- 
title: "VOL XIV, No 4 [Spring, 1988]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Poetic Licenses
*Paula Van Gelder, Los Angeles*

As I inched along a congested roadway the other
day, I found myself behind an otherwise nondescript
white van whose license plate read VAN BLNC.
How clever, I thought, wondering if even at that very
moment, the driver was imbibing white wine and
thinking of outrageous puns.

In recent months, I have made something of a
habit of noting those personalized plates in the Los
Angeles area that I find interesting or amusing.  In
California, plates of this sort are more accurately
known as Environmental License Plates (ELPs), since
the proceeds from this program are used to fund environmental
projects such as wildlife parks.  California's
ELP program is the largest of its kind in the country;
the state's Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) lists
more than a million ELPs in its official compendium,
many of them reflecting the humor and punning talents
of their creators.  Under the California program,
vehicle owners may choose any combination of letters
and numbers between two and seven characters in
length for their plates.  (Prior to 1977, the maximum
number of characters allowed was six.)  The only restrictions
are that the selections must not duplicate
previously issued plates or be offensive or misleading.
Personalized plates seem to reflect contemporary language
and society.  For example, as the *Los Angeles
Times* reported on September 20, 1984, the most
sought-after personalized plate in California in 1970
was PEACE.  In 1984, however, the most common
requests included GO FOR IT, IM A 10, and PORSCHE.

In order to present names, descriptions, or sayings
within the restricted format of a license plate, creators
usually have to resort to some form of language reduction
or wordplay.  Reduction in many cases employs
processes parallel to those used in creating signage
(e.g., *nite, lite, thru, Xing, laff*), classified advertisements
(e.g., *dept mgr, ob/gyn*), or other reduced
forms, such as the call letters of radio stations (e.g.,
KLSX for *classics*.)  In many cases, understanding a
plate is all but impossible without the help of certain
contextual cues.  For example, the point of BORN TAN is
understandable only if one has happened to spot the
driver of the car, a black woman.  Similarly, understanding
RGR8GRM may be easier if one has seen the
older woman driver (presumably, &ldquo;our great gram&rdquo;).
My friend, given only the above plate configuration as
a clue, suggested that the plate might belong to &ldquo;Roger
8-Gram,&rdquo; a local drug pusher.  The place where one
sees a plate may likewise help in interpreting it.  For
example, I glimpsed PERADOX in the parking lot of the
UCLA Medical Center.  Given the location, I guessed
that the car might belong to a couple who are physicians.
Similarly, NATE PT spotted behind a convalescent
hospital, connoted &ldquo;physical therapist&rdquo; for me, rather
than &ldquo;part-time&rdquo; or some other equally plausible, alternate
interpretation of PT.  Sometimes quite a bit of
background information, as well as context, is necessary
in order to interpret a reference.  For example, the
plate NADER 1 (illustrated in *Life* magazine on November
17, 1972) is understandable only if the reader
knows that the make of car so described—a Corvair—was
once described as unsafe by consumer activist
Ralph Nader.

Given all of the possibilities for license plate subject
matter, how do vehicle owners go about creating
their personalized messages?  While most of their strategies
by necessity involve contraction and abbreviation
of forms (to fit into the six-or seven-character limitation),
others involve character substitutions or
additions to achieve the desired result.  ELP strategies
appear to fall into one or more of the following categories.
The plates described below, unless otherwise
identified, are actual ELPs selected from the official
compendium published by the state of California.

1\.  Dropping vowels, particularly schwa and silent
*e*.  This seems to be one of the strategies
most commonly used in ELP formation.  Sample
plates include:

APPLPI
CAMBRDG   
CHPMNK     
EGR2RUN   
IDESGNR
JRNLST    
JZPLAYR   
LTLPAUL
MTRL GUY   
NAVGTOR   
PARALGL   
RDRUNNR    

2\.  Dropping consonants.

MRXIMNT (Mr. Excitement)
MY MSTG3 (on a Mustang)
PONIAC    
SGLFILE   
SKYSKPR   
WYLFIRE   

3\.  Using substitute characters rather than conventional
orthography to represent perceived
sounds.

BEATLZ   
DIDJA3
EXSOLJA    
FSHN BIZ   
ISUPOZE   
JAGWAR   
MYKAR     
ODOKTOR   
SINTHIA
SPSHULI   

4\.  Substitution, addition, or deletion of characters
to represent accent or dialect.

4GWAMA
HAHVAHD
IMNACTA   
IWUVYOU   
OIRISHI   
SHOYL B   
WATEVAH   

5\.  Repetition of characters to represent stress, intonation,
accent, or pronunciation.  It is not
clear, however, which of these plates reflect these
purposes and which reflect merely their creators'
inability to obtain a more traditional or closer
spelling of a name or phrase.  Examples include:

AAHOOGA
BEEEEEP   
BILEEE    
BOOOOOM   
BOOOOZE   
EETALY    
IMKOOOL
OOOOGAH   
RROWRR    
RRRITA    
SOOOLA    
ZOOOOOM

6\.  Combination of numerals and letters.  Some
plate makers utilize alphanumeric forms, creating
hybrid messages that could be written entirely
in numeric or alphabetic characters.  Examples
include:

7\.  Use of numerals and letters as homophones or
near homophones.

a)  Simple: A homophone substitutes for a syllable
or word:

ADVIZ4U   
BGOOD   
BOYIDER
CBIRDGO   
CMY81GO   
EZTOC
ODE4JOY   
RDOG    
T42ME4U
T4U2NV    
UBGD2ME   

Examples using Roman numerals include:

IIGETHR   
IIIWLR
VIIHEVN   

In some cases, plates using such homophones are
wonderfully ambiguous, such as the message
2HIP MD.  Was this car a gift to an orthopedic
doctor or is this the self-description of a &ldquo;too-hip&rdquo;
physician?

b)  Complex: The sound of a homophone, usually
a numeral, is incorporated into another, adjoining
sound.

A2TH4U    
A2THMAN   
CUL8RQT   
DR4A2TH   
H82BL8    
ICALQL8
LB8OVEN
NAVG8OR   
OBFUSC8

c)  Use of character repetition to achieve the
value of the homophone + plural ending.  The
repetition of a character often signals a change
in meaning from that of the character standing
alone.  For example, Y would usually be taken as
a homophone for *why:* YY, however, would probably
be read as *wise.*  Similarly, EE might be used
to represent *ease,* while TT might convey *tease.*
Examples of plates utilizing this technique include:

CBBB   
DR4IIII   
EXQQQME   
IIIIBLU
IMCRAAZ
XUUUUME   

d) Homophonic characters are sometimes used to
represent colloquial or reduced forms in English.

4UNME1   
ADDMUP   
ILBCNU    
IMNACTA   
INDEYE    
LOTZAFN   
N2DRTS
N4GETBL

8\.  Use of abbreviations, initializations, blends,
acronyms, or symbols.

a)  Many conventional abbreviations are commonly
used:

15MAR57   
75BMW
COPYMGR   
DEPTMGR   
GV2UCLA   
LAFD911   
OBGYN2B   
WWIACE

b)  Nonstandard abbreviations include specialized
terms from disciplines such as medicine (CAT
SCAN, CODE3MD); chemistry—e.g., C2H5 (ethyl,
perhaps a pun on the name *Ethel*), C2H5OH (ethanol),
C3H8 (propane); and from the business
world (SASAIR, HJS GRFX, KSCVFM).  There is quite
a lot of overlap in abbreviated forms, leading to
potential ambiguities.  MAC might refer to a Macintosh
computer of Apple Computer, Inc., or to
a Big Mac hamburger at MacDonald's. IRA may
refer to an Individual Retirement Account or to
the Irish Republican Army.  CAT could indicate a
radiological procedure or Salomon Brothers' certificates
of accrual on Treasury securities.

9\.  Use of foreign words, phrases, abbreviations,
acronyms, etc.  All of the processes outlined
above can be applied to non-English words and
phrases as well as to English.  Furthermore,
complete foreign words may occasionally be used
to convey an idea or attitude that is not as readily
served by an English translation.  Examples of
foreign plates include MAIS OUI, NOTABNY ('nota
bene'), JOI VIVR ('joie de vivre'), 2CHE PAS ('ne
touches pas' = 'don't touch'), LA BEL V ('la belle
vie'), BET NOIR ('b&ecirc;te noire'; seen on a black
car), and OISEAU '(bird').

10\.  Use of codes, ciphers, or other techniques for
conveying private messages.  Occasionally, regardless
of the linguistic processes selected by
the plate creator, the message is presented in
such a way that it is hidden, or at least not
readily decipherable.  While this is true for some
of the plates illustrated above, the encoding referred
to here involves manipulating the order of
the characters in some fashion; the resulting
form is unrelated to the expected phonological
or other pattern.  One example of this process
may be seen in the plate for actor William Conrad,
reading DARNOC, i.e., &ldquo;Conrad&rdquo; spelled
backwards (reported in *Newsweek,* March 31,
1975).  This plate illustrates what is technically
referred to as a &ldquo;transposition cipher,&rdquo; one that
does not change any letters of the original message.
Similarly, the plate ETSYBAY appears to be
the name *Betsy* rendered in pig Latin.  Presumably,
many other types of writing in cipher, employing
both alphabetical and numerical characters,
could be used to create ELPs.

As I continue to explore the infinitely varied world
of personalized plates,  I find that they seem to fall into
one or more of the categories outlined above.  However,
given the human penchant for ever more novel forms of
creativity, it will undoubtedly be only a matter of time
before someone, somewhere, comes up with a unique
identifier, created in a completely new and individual
manner.

## Indian Words in English: Resident Aliens and Naturalized Citizens
*Peter Heehs, Wayne, Pennsylvania*

When does a loanword cease to be regarded as a
loanword?  When, that is, does a word borrowed
from another language cease to be considered
an alien?  The process of naturalization is complete
when the word has lost its exotic flavor and is regarded
by most speakers as part of the ordinary lexicon of the
borrower language.  The etymologist can of course still
trace its origin, but as far as anybody else is concerned,
its antecedents are of no consequence.  There are a
number of stages, overlapping but sufficiently distinct,
between complete exoticism and complete domestication.
These can be illustrated by loanwords from
different Indian languages in English.  We have been
borrowing Indian words for more than three hundred
years.  Most of them still have the allure of the exotic
East about them, but many are such solid citizens that
no one would think of asking to see their immigration
papers.

The linguistic commerce between Indian and the
English-speaking world proceeds both ways, and it
arouses the interest of both parties.  At breakfast the
other day, while I was questioning a friend about his
use of Hindi words in English sentences, a gentleman
beside us suddenly announced, somewhat defensively,
that this sort of mixture was after all quite natural.
Not only did he and other Indians use words from their
languages while speaking English, but English speakers
also employed many words of Indian origin.  One
could find them, he said, in the *Oxford Dictionary.*
India has a great reverence for scriptures of all sorts.
Lexicons like Yaska's collection of glosses on difficult
Vedic words have acquired, through centuries of use by
scholars, some of the authority of the sacred texts
themselves.  Certain *koshas* or 'treasuries' of related
words are studied side by side with Kalidasa's dramas
and Bhartrihari's epigrams, and like them have
achieved the status of classics.  And I have heard on
reliable authority that a modern *pandit* (literal sense),
wishing to learn the language of the one-time masters
of India, decided that the best way to go about it
would be to learn the whole *Collins Gem Dictionary*
by heart.

Among scriptures of English there is of course
none so authoritative as the *Oxford English Dictionary,*
so I was obliged to accept my breakfast-table interlocutor's
point as proved.  I was, besides, familiar
with the words he referred to.  They appear periodically
in Sunday-supplement articles.  Who has not
heard the story (probably fictional, as it turns out) of
how *punch* was so named after the *panch* (Hindi,
'five') ingredients first used to make it?  What visitor to
India has not looked with renewed interest on his *pyjamas*
once he has learned of their Persian origin?  But
most lists of Indian loanwords in English are disappointingly
short.  To get the full story one would have
to search through the unabridged *OED,* and who has
time for such a labor?  Fortunately for the scholar, R.E.
Hawkins has recently published, first as a Supplement
to the Indian edition of the *Little Oxford Dictionary,*
and later as a separate book,[^a1]  a list of about two
thousand lexical items culled from the *OED* and other
sources.  I am indebted to this book for several of my
examples.

Two thousand words is surely a significant contribution
by one group of languages to another tongue.
When one goes through Mr. Hawkins's list, however,
one soon realizes that it contains many more Indian
words used by Indians speaking English than by native
English speakers.  By my own very rough calculation,
based on a random sampling of twenty pages containing
165 words, about 80 percent of Mr. Hawkins's
entries are not loanwords at all, but words without
adequate English equivalents used by Indians while
speaking English.  *Ghoongat* (Hindi 'face-veil') is not
used by English speakers.  Neither are *dudhi* (Gujarati
'gourd of family Cucurbitaceae') or *taka* (Bengali 'rupee').
Such words are included in English dictionaries
for the convenience of readers of books about India.
There is very little likelihood that they will ever become
parts of the English language.  Indeed, the three
examples just given are hardly known outside the regions
of their origin.  Other words of this type, however,
are known by English-speaking people in all parts
of India, as well as by many foreigners; for example,
*kurta* (Hindi-Urdu 'shirtlike garment'), *bindi* (Hindi
'mark on woman's forehead'), and *idli* (Tamil 'steamed
cake of rice and gram').

All of these examples and hundreds of others like
them have a decidedly exotic air about them.  They are
regularly used in English only by two restricted groups
of speakers: Indians who speak English, and English
speakers resident in India.  They cannot therefore be
considered loanwords properly speaking.  They are not
resident aliens but visitors.  India does have to her
credit, however, a good number of words known by
speakers without any special connection with India.
Most of these words belong to one of three related
categories: flora and fauna, food and drink, and fabric
and clothing.  Many names of Indian plants and animals,
and products made from them, have entered our
language with their meanings practically intact, and
their pronunciations relatively undistorted.  *Cheetah*
flourishes in English even though the Indian variety of
*Acinonyx jubatus* is practically extinct.  *Mangoes* are
now cultivated in Florida, and *jute* is twisted into rope
in factories far from the Ganges delta.  *Afghan* coverlets
and *cashmere* sweaters are found in some of the
best households.  *Calico* and *chintz* grace the homes of
the less affluent.  All of these words are familiar, but
most of them (calico and chintz may be exceptions) are
clearly non-native.  They roam through our language
like Brahma bulls in a Texas pasture; put down roots
like patchouli trees in Kew Gardens.

India has always been famous for its spirituality,
so it should come as no surprise that another major
source of Indian words in English is religion.  Many
such terms are rather new additions, and the list is
growing: *guru, avatar, swami, nirvana, ashram.*
These five, and a number of others, have entered the
language directly from Sanskrit.  Their careful use by
scholars and devotees has allowed them to keep a fair
approximation of their original phonetic form.  The
pronunciation of other borrowings from the spiritual
world is commonly Anglicized, either because the
words contain phonemes that the English speaker's
tongue cannot easily reproduce, such as the *dh* of *Buddha,*
or because they were introduced not by admirers
but by detractors, *juggernaut,* for example.

*Juggernaut* had to submit to semantic as well as
phonetic deformation when it reincarnated in English.
The word comes from the Sanskrit *jagat-nath,* Vishnu
'Lord of the World,' specifically the image of Jagannath
at Puri that is taken out in a famous procession.  It
is doubtful whether many devotees of Lord Jagannath
ever cast themselves under the wheels of his chariot;
but the connotative meaning that has arisen from this
supposed practice, 'deity (or cause, etc.) to which people
blindly sacrifice themselves,' has in some English
contexts entirely replaced the denotative meaning that
is still current in India.

This sort of replacement of the literal by the figurative
sense of a word can be observed in a number of
almost completely naturalized words that might be
referred to as quasi-religious or jocular-learned.  *Brahmin,
pundit,* and *pariah* are generally used in English
figuratively.  The same sort of semi-jocular meanings
have been given to the Sanskrit religious terms mentioned
above; all five are now employed more frequently
in these derivative senses than in their proper
meanings.  Despite their increasing use, these &ldquo;religious&rdquo;
words are all recognizably foreign.  Their utility
as ironic dismissive terms depends in large measure on
their exotic character.

Only about two dozen of the words that English
has borrowed from Indian languages have been so
thoroughly assimilated that very few speakers think of
them as aliens.  Most of these belong to categories already
considered.  Indian weavers, tailors, and dyers
have provided us with *pyjamas, bandanas, shawls,
gunny* sacks, *dungarees*, and *khaki*.  One of the materials
previously mentioned has given rise to the more
perfectly naturalized adjective *chintzy.*  Indian plants
have given us *toddy* and *cheroots;* their abundance has
brought *jungle* into the imaginations of mountain- and
desert-dwellers.  India is not famous as a nautical nation,
but we owe *catamaran* and *dinghy* to Indian
boatmen.  From Indian domestic life have come *chit,*[^a2] 
*cot, shampoo, bungalow, tank, bazaar,* and *veranda.*
Almost all these words have significances in English
that differ considerably from the original meaning.
There is, in fact, a close correlation between the degree
of assimilation and the amount of semantic
change.  *Lut* means 'loot,' *dingi* a 'small boat,' in
Hindi, but few other well-assimilated Indian loanwords
have kept their root senses so well.  *Tankh,* the
original of *tank,* does not mean a fabricated container
for liquids, much less an armored combat vehicle, in
Gujarati.  Even if the original sense of a loanword is
possible in English, as in *toddy, chit,* and *bazaar,* a
derivative meaning, often far removed from the original,
usually predominates, particularly outside India.
*Khaki* can be used for anything &ldquo;dust-colored&rdquo; in English
as in Hindi, but in our language the word is usually
reserved for a certain color of cloth, or the coarse
material that is dyed this color.

Occasionally the semantic change is so considerable
that the borrowed word has in English a meaning
quite different, sometimes the very opposite of what it
meant in the source language.  *Shampoo* comes from
the Hindi *champo,* imperative of the verb *champna,*
'to press,' hence 'to rub, massage.'  Somewhere along
the line the verb began to be used as a noun, first in
the sense of 'body-massage,' then 'scalp-massage,' then,
according to Hawkins, 'washing of hair with rubbing
of scalp.'  Modern speakers of Hindi needing a soap for
washing their hair go the grocery store (rather, the
&ldquo;general merchants&rdquo;) and ask for *shampoo.*  They use
this word, which they assume to be as English as
*toothpaste,* whether they address the shopkeeper in
Hindi or English.  None of the half-dozen north Indians
I questioned had any idea the word was originally
Hindi.

An even greater metamorphosis has been undergone
by *jungle.*  In Sanskrit *jangla* means 'dry, a
desert.'  This has given rise to the Hindi and Marathi
*jangal,* properly 'wasteland,' but by extension 'wild
place, forest.'  The latter is the current meaning in
Hindi and related languages, so current in fact that
north Indians speaking English often use *jungle* to
mean any sort of forest, even one with deciduous or
coniferous trees.  Only in English and languages that
have borrowed the word from English does *jungle*
carry exclusively the sense of 'tropical rain forest,' the
distinguishing characteristic being denseness of vegetation.
To Hindi speakers (at least to all four informants I
have asked) what makes a jungle a jungle is the possibility
of meeting wild animals; the type of vegetation
does not matter.  At any rate the familiar English word
*jungle* has come a long way from the deserts of Rajasthan.

Enterprising immigrants adopt many of the habits
of their new homelands.  The more they do this, the
more like the natives they become, until a point is
reached when they no longer can be considered strangers.
An apprehensive Londoner once complained that
England was fish and chips, not rice and curry.  But
what about hot toddy?  And if women in New York
ashrams never look really at home in their saris, what
could be more American than their children's khaki
dungarees?

***

[^a1]: R.E. Hawkins, *Common Indian Words in English*. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1984.

[^a2]: I think of *chit* as being well assimilated because it was of frequent
occurrence in my home in Illinois when I was growing up.  I was
surprised to find that none of my fellow expatriates were familiar
with it before coming to India.  My father tells me he picked up the
word from other servicemen in the South Pacific in 1944.

## A Man of Fire-new Words
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

What do these sentences have in common?  &ldquo;Has
Will a peer?, I ask me.&rdquo; &ldquo;I swear he's like a
lamp.&rdquo;  &ldquo;We all make his praise.&rdquo;  Each of these three
sentences is an anagram that uses all the letters in the
name *William Shakespeare,* and each makes a true
statement; peerless Will Shakespeare shines through
the centuries and inspires our praise.

Shakespeare's plays have been in almost constant
production since their creation.  Because the playwright
dealt with universal truths and conflicts in human
nature, his works continue to draw audiences
from all walks of life, just as they did in his own day.
History has proven the truth of what Shakespeare's
contemporary, Ben Jonson, said of him: &ldquo;He was not of
an age, but for all time.&rdquo;  An often neglected aspect of
William Shakespeare's genius is that he was the greatest
word-maker of all time.  Ongoing research demonstrates
that there are 20,138 individual words (lemmata)
in Shakespeare's published works—a figure that
represents approximately 45 percent of the total recorded
for the English language up to the year 1623.
Of the 20,138 such words that Shakespeare employs in
his plays, sonnets, and narrative poems, his is the first
known use of more than 1,700 of them.  More than 8.5
percent of Shakespeare's vocabulary was fashioned
from neologisms, making him by far the most verbally
innovative of our authors.

Here is a list of fifty representative words that, as
far as we can tell, Shakespeare is the first to have used
in writing.  So great is his influence on his native
tongue that we find it hard to imagine a time when
these words did not exist:

>*accommodation*   
*aerial*          
*amazement*       
*apostrophe*      
*assassination*   
*auspicious*      
*baseless*        
*bump*            
*castigate*       
*changeful*       
*clangor*         
*control (n.)*    
*countless*       
*courtship*       
*critic*          
*critical*        
*dexterously*     
*dishearten*          
*dislocate*           
*dwindle*             
*eventful*            
*exposure*            
*fitful*              
*frugal*              
*generous*            
*gloomy*              
*gnarled*             
*hurry*               
*impartial*           
*indistinguishable*   
*invulnerable*        
*lapse*               
*laughable*           
*lonely*  
*majestic*  
*misplaced*  
*monumental*  
*multitudinous*  
*obscene*  
*palmy*  
*perusal*  
*pious*  
*premeditated*  
*radiance*  
*reliance*  
*road*  
*sanctimonious*  
*seamy*  
*sportive*  
*submerge*

Now add to these individual words Shakespeare's
daring originality with compounds.  In addition to
splendid audacities such as *proud-pied April, heaven-kissing
hill,* and *world-without-end hour,* Shakespeare
gave to the English language such now-familiar compounds
as *barefaced, fancy free, green-eyed, heartsick,
hot-blooded, housekeeping, lackluster, leapfrog,
long-haired,* and *pitched battle.*  The striking compound
that Shakespeare used to describe Don Adriano
de Armando in *Love's Labour's Lost* is an appropriate
epithet for the playwright himself: &ldquo;a man of fire-new
words.&rdquo;

Unrivaled in so many other ways, Shakespeare has
no equal as a phrase-maker.  A student who attended a
performance of *Hamlet* came away complaining that
the play &ldquo;was nothing more than a bunch of clich&eacute;s.&rdquo;
The reason for this common reaction is that so many of
the memorable expressions in *Hamlet* have become
proverbial.  In that one play alone were born *mind's
eye; brevity is the soul of wit; primrose path; it smells
to heaven; there's the rub; the very witching time of
night; not a mouse stirring; towering passion; there's
method in his madness; ministering angel; dog will
have his day; the apparel oft proclaims the man; neither
a borrower nor a lender be; to thine own self be
true; frailty, thy name is woman; something is rotten
in the state of Denmark; more honored in the breach
than the observance; hoist with his own petard; the
lady both protest too much; to be or not to be; and to
the manner born.*

To these we may append a small sample of everyday,
idiomatic phrases from other Shakespearean
plays: *what the dickens; breathe my last; live long
day; the be-all and end-all; break the ice; one fell
swoop; foregone conclusion; heart of gold; all that glisters
is not gold; strange bedfellows; give the devil his
due; the course of true love never did run smooth;
wear one's heart on one's sleeve; we have seen better
days; more sinned against than sinning; it's Greek to
me; the most unkindest cut of all; itching palm; eat
out of house and home; paint the lily; too much of a
good thing;* and *the milk of human kindness.*

Shakespeare was an extremely prolific writer.  In
twenty-five years he turned out thirty-seven long plays
and co-authored several others, yet so felicitous was his
phrasing that he still found time to provide generations
of authors with titles for their books.  Take *Macbeth,*
for example.  Near the end of the play, Macbeth
expresses his darkening vision of life: &ldquo;It is a tale/Told
by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/Signifying nothing.&rdquo;
Centuries later, William Faulkner purloined a
phrase from that speech, and *The Sound and the Fury*
became a great American novel.  Earlier in the play,
one of the witches chants, &ldquo;By the pricking of my
thumbs,/Something wicked this way comes.&rdquo;  Agatha
Christie plucked the first line and Ray Bradbury the
second as titles for their bestsellers.  Other borrowings
from just the one play *Macbeth* include Rose Macauley's
*Told by an Idiot,* Ellis Middleton's *Vaulting Ambition,*
Adrienne Rich's *Of Woman Born,* Ngaio Marsh's
*Light Thickens,* Alistair MacLean's *The Way to Dusty
Death,* Edward G. Robinson's *All Our Yesterdays,* and
John Steinbeck's *The Moon is Down.*  From those other
favorites—*Julius Caesar, Hamlet,* and *Romeo and Juliet*—have
been lifted the titles of Robert Stone's *The
Dogs of War,* James Barrie's *Dear Brutus,* John Gunther's
*Taken at the Flood,* R. Lance Hill's *The Evil
That Men Do,* H. Hall's *The Valiant,*A.G. MacDonnell's
*How Like an Angel,* Joyce Martins' *Rosemary
for Remembrance,* Arthur Schnitzler's *Undiscovered
Country,* Ernest Hebert's *A Little More Than Kin,* Eric
Knight's *This Above All,* Dorothy Parker's *Not So Deep
as a Well,* and Henry Wade's *No Friendly Drop.*  Add to
these Aldous Huxley's *Brave New World,* James Stewart
Carter's *Full Fathom Five,* and Andrew Soutar's
*Strange Bedfellows* (all from *The Tempest*); W. Somerset
Maugham's *Cakes and Ale (Twelfth Night),* John
Steinbeck's *The Winter of Our Discontent (Richard
II),* John van Druten's *Bell, Book, and Candle (King
John),* Richard Oke's *Wanton Boys (King Lear),* Frank
Swinnerton's *The Merry Heart (Much Ado About
Nothing*), and Francis Ferguson's *Naked to Mine Enemies
(Henry VIII);* and, from the sonnets, John Herbert's
*Fortune and Men's Eyes,* Marcel Proust's *Remembrance
of Things Past* (the English translation, of
course), and Gary Wills' *Bare Ruined Choirs*—and it
becomes evident that William Shakespeare was one of
the most generous souls who ever put quill to parchment.
Although he was never granted a title, he freely
granted titles to others.

The etymologist Ernest Weekley said of Shakespeare,
&ldquo;His contribution to our phraseology is ten
times greater than that of any writer to any language
in the history of the world.&rdquo;  The poet Walter Pater
exclaimed, &ldquo;What a garden of words!&rdquo;  If Shakespeare
had not lived and written, our English tongue would
be immeasurably the poorer.  No day goes by that we
do not speak and hear and read and write his legacy to
our language.

## Agatha Christie's Works Are Not Legal Fictions
*Stephen E. Hirschberg, Elmsford, New York*

In &ldquo;Tooth and the Whole Tooth&rdquo; Robert Benchley
offered the challenge: &ldquo;The English language may
hold a more disagreeable combination of words than
'The doctor will see you now'... I'm not narrow-minded
about it.  I'm willing to consider other possibilities.&rdquo;[^b1]
I wish to propose three statements which, if not
more unpleasant, are close runners-up:

>1.  &ldquo;There's a lawyer on the phone for you.&rdquo;  
>2.  &ldquo;There's a policeman at the door for you.&rdquo;  
>3.  &ldquo;Is that a man coming through our window?&rdquo;

Our fear and loathing of contact with both sides of the
law may be enhanced by our difficulty in understanding
the English of its denizens, whose dialects are alien
to us.

The law is, like Euclid's geometry, a self-contained,
internally consistent set of postulates and rules.
It is purported to have relevance to the real world.
There its similarity to a mathematical system ends.
The observer who is unfamiliar with the mysteries of
courtroom proceedings may question his own ears.  As
Alice said to the Caterpillar in Wonderland, &ldquo;Some of
the words have got altered.&rdquo;

The law distinguishes *facts* (actualities) from *truth*
(a legal principle governing or declaring facts).  *False
facts*—also known as *simulated* or *fabricated
facts*—(those existing only in their assertion, and without
foundation in reality) are contrasted to *legal
fictions* (things known false but presumed true).  *Fabricated
facts* have another meaning—actual facts which
a lawyer has artfully given a false appearance.  The
mathematician's proof (beyond any doubt) does not
allow for the sort of flexibility of thought inherent in
the lawyer's concepts of *clear and convincing evidence,
preponderance of the evidence,* and *proof beyond
reasonable doubt.*

Flexibility lets judges interpret the laws, and is at
the heart of the appeals process.  Further linguistic
peculiarities arise because definitions are not engraved
in stone.  Thus:

>*Artificial persons* are not androids; they are
creations of the law for societal purposes.
>
>Corporations and partnerships are examples.
They are distinguished legally from *natural persons*—what
nonlawyers would call &ldquo;human beings.&rdquo;
Since a corporation is a person it must
have a *domicile*—the primary locus of its business
affairs.  Collectively, persons are &ldquo;such, not
because [they are] human, but because rights
and duties are ascribed to [them].&rdquo;[^b2]
>
>Though lawsuits are allegedly adversarial,
there exist *amicable actions,* brought by mutual
arrangement of the parties, with facts already
settled by agreement, so that courts might make
findings on doubtful questions of law.
>
>*Violent presumption* is not, for instance, asking
for a date while brandishing a submachine
gun; it is, rather, indirect proof of a fact by
proof of necessarily attendant circumstances.
Here it is illustrated, in a demonstration of
when to stop asking questions on cross-examination:
>
>Q.  Did you actually *see* my client bite off the
victim's nose?
>
>A.  No.  [The questions should stop here.]
>
>Q.  Then how can you say he bit it off?
>
>A.  I saw him spit it out.
>
>Not a gynecological conclusion, but a legal
one, is the *negative pregnant.*  This is a denial
formulated in such a way as to admit the substantial
fact which appears controverted.  For instance:
>
>Q.  Lizzie, did you not take an axe and whack
your mother forty times and then whack
your father forty-one times when faced
with the prospect of cold mutton stew?
>
>A.  Not true.  We were to eat Brussels sprouts
fondue that day.
>
>To deny comprehensively in court, one must
deny every aspect of the allegation individually.

Since imprecise turns of phrase might allow the
opposition to inflict a fatal blow on his case, the lawyer
sets up a linguistic strategic defense.  The favorite
weapon is iteration, to the point that one sometimes
wonders whether the father of the thesaurus was really
a lawyer.  (Alas, Peter Roget was a physician.)  Legal
proceedings are thus peppered with phrases like *lands,
tenements, and hereditaments*, 'real property,' *goods
and chattels* 'personal property,' *goods, wares and merchandise*
'chattels subject to trade or sale,' *lewd and
lascivious cohabitation* (as if *lewd* were not enough!),
*fair and impartial jury* (could it fair and partial?),
*sick, sore, lame and disabled* (how to make a point in a
personal injury action).  A standard form of will includes
in one of its sections:

>All the rest, residue and remainder of my estate
of whatever kind and nature, real, personal,
and mixed and wherever situated ... I give, devise,
and bequeath to my trustees ... for the
following uses and purposes:[^b3]

Along with arcane use of common English words,
the legal profession's vocabulary contains healthy doses
of French and Latin, as well as hoary terms.  Some of
these are useful shorthand for legal complexities, and
have entered the language of nonlawyers (e.g., *res ipsa
loquitur, caveat emptor, habeas corpus).*  Others are
exclusively of the law, e.g., *voir dire*—French, 'to
speak the truth'—the preliminary screening examination
of jurors or witnesses by the court; *barratry*—the
offense of stirring up frequent groundless lawsuits,
profiting only the attorney; *champerty*—third-party
funding of a lawsuit in exchange for a share in the
proceeds if it is successful; *estoppel*—precluding of
one's allegation because of his previous acts or allegations
to the contrary.

Sometimes lawyers do manage to loosen up, especially
when bantering off the record.  Then their terms
of art may overlap the vocabulary of their less-reputable
clientele.  A straightforward, polite legal contest
with clear evidence and solid witnesses on both sides is
a *swearing contest* (the winner &ldquo;swears&rdquo; its evidence
more convincingly).  It is contrasted with proceedings
in which each side gives the other as difficult a time as
possible by means of dilatory, nitpicking, senseless
technicalities—the *pissing contest* (after the decathlons
of micturition for which small boys are notorious).
Their criminal clients might offer the *SODDI
defense* (*S*ome *O*ther *D*ude *D*id *I*t), with the more
fortunate defendants convicted only of a *paper felony*
(a finding on paper, but involving no added prison
time) or sentenced to a *bullet*—a one-year term.
Judges and attorneys speak of a *dropsy case,* in which
an unscrupulous police officer, wishing to circumvent
the legal requirement of a probable cause for having
searched the accused (with the fruit of an unreasonable
search inadmissible in court), testifies that &ldquo;as I
approached I saw him take the [gun / knife / packet of
white powder / etc.]  from his pocket and drop it on the
ground at his feet.&rdquo;

Police dialect's formal voice, used in court testimony
and official reports, may have arisen (or descended)
from emulation of the erudite verbiage of
attorneys.  It may be an attempt thus to gain credibility
with a jury.  Its use certainly causes a loss of color in
the portrayal of events.  An annotated version of an
excerpt from a typical police report may illustrate the
point:

>*On a radio run*[^b4] to the above location *I and my
partner*[^b5] *observed*[^b6] that *entry had been made
through the rear door*.[^b7] *At this time*[^b8]  we *exited*[^b9]
our *vehicle*[^b10] and observed the subject.[^b11]  *Subsequent
to this*[^b12] the subject turned and drew a
*firearm*[^b13] from his pocket.  I drew my *weapon*[^b14]
...and *apprehended the alleged perpetrator*.[^b15]
At this time, *I advised the subject of his rights
from a card which I carry with me*.[^b16]

The colloquial cop-to-cop talk is metaphorical,
colorful, and telegraphic—a more accurate reflection
of the electricity and urgency of police work.  Perpetrators
are reduced to *perps,* their offenses to initials (OC
'organized crime,' D&amp;D 'drunk and disorderly,' CCW
'carrying a concealed weapon,&rdquo; B&amp;E 'breaking and
entering').  Fans of broadcast police shows, from
&ldquo;Racket Squad&rdquo; to &ldquo;Dragnet&rdquo; to &ldquo;Hill Street Blues,&rdquo;
know of A.P.B.  (*all points bulletin*—a general alert)
and M.O. (*modus operandi*—the perp's method).  The
policeman's club is a *billy;* his second, nonregulation
gun a *saver.*  The officer's badge or ID card is a *potsy*
(tin, used to make pots, was used to make badges),
with favors received for showing a badge *on the tin.*

When a *body* (a person chargeable with a crime)
is apprehended he is *busted* or *collared.*  Upon apprehension
in the United States, a suspect is *read his rights*
or *Mirandized* (from the decision in *Ernesto A. Miranda
v. the State of Arizona*).  Because these rights (to
remain silent, to have a lawyer's advice before interrogation
and his presence during questioning, to a lawyer
free of charge if one cannot be afforded, to stop
answering questions at any time) must be clearly and
completely stated, the arresting officer may rely on
reading from his *Miranda card.*  While there are constitutional
guarantees against warrantless searches, a
*no-knock* raid (without the warning, &ldquo;Open up. Police.
We have a warrant.&rdquo;)  may be used to secure evidence
before it can be destroyed.  *No-sock* laws say that
force cannot be used in resisting an *illegal* arrest.  The
suspect is then *mugged* (photographed—from the picture
of a face, or &ldquo;mug&rdquo;), and his *rap sheet,* or *yellow
sheet* ('arrest record') obtained.

There is an extensive jargon among police for
corrupt or less-than-scrupulous behaviour of their colleagues.
To improve his *batting average* ('arrest statistics'—a
basis for promotion), an officer might resort to
*accommodation collars* ('arrests made only to improve
that record').  Unjustified arrests may be fortified by
*plants* ('evidence hidden by the police on the person or
in the home or car of the suspect').  In contrast to the
*saint*—the incorruptible cop who will not accept a *nut*
('bribe')—are the *grass-eaters* (who accept, but do not
solicit, whatever bribes their beats offer) and the *meateaters*
(who solicit and compel bribes).  Collectively,
crooked cops are *bent.*

With a population exceeding that of attorneys and
police, and absent the stabilizing influence of a *written*
language, criminal society's dialect is more varied
and liabile than that of the law.  As fresh terminology is
popularized, users of obsolete vocabulary risk sounding
like Damon Runyon characters or, worse, undercover
police.  Guns are no longer &ldquo;heaters&rdquo; or &ldquo;Roscoes;&rdquo;
they are *pieces.*  The murder victim is no longer
&ldquo;rubbed out,&rdquo; &ldquo;taken for a ride,&rdquo; &ldquo;hit,&rdquo; or &ldquo;offed;&rdquo; he is
*iced.*

A criminal specialist merits a specialized designation:
*paper-hanger* 'passer of bad checks'; *crib man*
'house burglar' (a &ldquo;crib&rdquo; is a house or apartment);
*plastic artist* 'one who engages in credit card fraud';
*blanket man* 'arsonist's accomplice' (who holds the
blanket for extinguishing the arsonist who is overly
involved in his work); *heavy* 'safecracker'; and *rip-off
artist* a 'prostitute whose specialty is theft rather than
commercial sex' (and more generally, a 'thief who does
not deliver goods paid for').

After he *does a job* ('commits a crime') the miscreant
may *split* or *book* ('flee').  If caught by the *heat*
('police') he may try to *cop out* (or *cop a plea* 'plead to
a lesser charge') or *turn* (or *flip* 'become an informer')
lest he *pull time* ('be sentenced to imprisonment').
However, informing is a dangerous game.  Many prefer
to *take the weight* ('take punishment alone though not
the sole guilty party') and not appear to have cooperated
with the police.  Higher-ups may *put a notice on*
(or *take out a contract on* 'make a paid assignment to
murder') one who is thought to have squealed, and his
wardrobe may soon include a *cement kimono.*

Cement kimonos, no-socks, artificial persons...
Yes, I'd very much prefer to see the doctor now.

***

[^b1]: In Benchley: *Love Conquers All*

[^b2]: Pollock: *First Book of Jurisprudence*

[^b3]: Klipstein: *Drafting New York Wills* 2nd ed.

[^b4]: Sent by radio.

[^b5]: we.

[^b6]: saw.

[^b7]: the back door was open.

[^b8]: Then.

[^b9]: got out of.

[^b10]: car.

[^b11]: suspect.

[^b12]: Next.

[^b13]: Suspects' guns are &ldquo;firearms&rdquo; ...

[^b14]: ...and police guns are &ldquo;weapons.&rdquo;

[^b15]: arrested the suspect.

[^b16]: I read him his Miranda rights [*vide infra*].

## Noticing Nouns
*John de Forest, New York City*

Many people, when telling a story these days,
even a brief and very simple one, insert a rhetorical
question at every possible opportunity in order
to ensure that they are being listened to and understood.
You have often, I am sure, heard things like this:
&ldquo;I'm walking down the street, right?  And I see this guy
coming towards me, right?  I think I know him, but
I'm not really sure, right?  Anyway, he doesn't seem to
recognize me, right?  But all of a sudden, right?...,&rdquo;
and so on.  When somebody talks like that to me I want
to slam my first on the table and shout, &ldquo;Yes!  I understand
you!  I have excellent hearing.  It's clear that you
are speaking to me, and I am listening to you.  What's
more, I am quite capable of following a number of
short sentences, related in import, and spoken in the
English language.&rdquo;

But justified though my exasperation may be, his
narrative style has been formed as a direct reaction,
albeit unconscious, to his usual experience of not being
really listened to.  He is not necessarily a bore, but a
victim of the haste, impatience, and inattention of
today's ordinary conversation.  Unfortunately, the habits
of mind developed under those conditions have also
had an influence on more formal speech and on our
writing, where among a number of other effects we
find a stultifying repetition and perverse misapplication
of nouns.

Thirty years ago, when I attended a junior high
school of not very high standards in upstate New York,
my teachers carefully informed me that it was unacceptably
clumsy and annoying to use the same noun
more than once in three consecutive paragraphs unless
a special effect was intended.  And they were pretty
much right.  Nowadays, to do so is normal, even among
the better educated.  *The New Yorker* magazine, where
graceful prose was formerly required, now prints some
of the lamest, of which the following examples must
stand for countless others in that and other publications.

&ldquo;[S] he has made the British public aware of its
wildflower heritage and the threatened loss of that
heritage.&rdquo;  Why not say, &ldquo;and the threat of its loss&rdquo;?  The
published version not only has bad rhythm, it prevents
&ldquo;loss&rdquo; from having the force it ought to have, and
would have if it came at the end.  (It also misstates the
case, for it is not the loss that is threatened, but the
heritage.)  &ldquo;Eventually,&rdquo; says another writer, &ldquo;investigators
discovered that bacteria that had entered specific
wells could cause cholera in everyone who drank the
water from the wells.&rdquo;  Why not, &ldquo;who drank the water
from them&rdquo;?  And in the next paragraph he writes,
&ldquo;Decades followed the doublings and triplings in size
of English cities and the subsequent alarming increases
in the death rates in those cities before ...&rdquo; Why not,
&ldquo;and the subsequent alarming increases in the death
rates there&rdquo;?

In the same magazine, not long ago, I came upon
an article that described how its author learned to
paddle a very small, round boat, of ancient design,
called a coracle.  Now, I happen to be very interested
in such aquatic pursuits, and the location of the man's
self-instruction, a beautiful English river, strengthened
his claim on my attention.  I also happen to feel, or
rather, I did, that &ldquo;coracle&rdquo; was an especially lovely old
word.  It suggested the light buoyancy of the little vessel,
and the sound of the water, licking and slightly
slapping her skin.  But one can have too much of even a
very good thing.  Never substituting &ldquo;boat,&rdquo; &ldquo;craft,&rdquo;
&ldquo;conveyance,&rdquo; &ldquo;bowl,&rdquo; &ldquo;tippy little thing,&rdquo; &ldquo;she,&rdquo; &ldquo;her,&rdquo;
or &ldquo;it,&rdquo; he relentlessly, remorselessly, invariably employed
the word &ldquo;coracle.&rdquo;  After about ten repetitions
of it in the first two pages, I wanted never, ever to see it
again.  My initial interest in the subject, though declining,
made me continue, but I skimmed the rest with
my eyes screwed up and my head averted to reduce the
force of the remaining fifteen recurrences.

Like the speaker with his &ldquo;right?,&rdquo; those writers
have a chronic fear of our inattention, and they are so
numbed by what they hear every day that they no
longer recognize bad style.  &ldquo;In Los Angeles,&rdquo; says the
man on WNYC-FM, &ldquo;Senator Dole announced that he
would propose new legislation.  That legislation would
provide the means for the removal of Clark Air Force
Base from the Phillipines.&rdquo;  Someday soon, such copy
will begin, &ldquo;In Boston, Senator So and So announced
that he would propose new legislation.  Do you follow
me so far?&rdquo;  Though all such reiterations deaden our
pleasure and blunt our perception, it can at least be
said for them that they don't mislead or confuse,
which is far from true of the use of nouns as verbs and
adjectives, a practice which has become just as common,
one which almost everybody has come to rely
upon.  The television announcer says that &ldquo;it's hard to
defense against&rdquo; a certain play in football, and an editor
of *The New York Times* recalls &ldquo;the mystery sinking
of the *U.S.S. Maine.&rdquo;*  We read of a television show that
&ldquo;can frequently pack a relevancy wallop,&rdquo; of a person
who is suffering from &ldquo;multiple blunt-trauma injuries,&rdquo;
and of another who has &ldquo;all but mastered the all-but-all-dialogue
novel.&rdquo;  Alexander Haig says, &ldquo;Let me context
that for you, senator,&rdquo; and *The New York Post*
screams, &ldquo;Freed on Possession to Sell Charge.&rdquo;

Haste, again, is working here.  Speakers and writers
are in a hurry.  Worried about making their point at
all, they try to cram together as many elements of their
message as possible.  &ldquo;A loss of revenue&rdquo; sounds almost
leisurely to them, and they say &ldquo;a revenue loss&rdquo; instead.
But that is not all there is to it.  The editors of
the *Times* have to fit their headlines to the space available,
but they prefer to print, &ldquo;U.S. Accuses Shearson
of Money Laundering&rdquo; to &ldquo;U.S. Accuses Shearson of
Laundering Money,&rdquo; though the length of the latter is
just the same.

No, the disease has another and perhaps a deeper
cause, which is our culture's preoccupation with *what*
things are, and its concomitant failure to consider *how*
they are what they are.  I once read a legal brief that
discussed whether someone's rights had been abridged
as a result of being &ldquo;excluded by denied access.&rdquo;  That
the phrase does not use a noun incorrectly, and is not,
therefore, an instance of the particular solecisms I am
decrying, makes it all the better an example of how
characteristic is the sensibility that lies behind them.  If
the lawyer had said, &ldquo;excluded by the denial of access,&rdquo;
&ldquo;excluded by being denied access,&rdquo; or even &ldquo;excluded
because he was denied access,&rdquo; he would have accorded
a full measure of importance to the act of denial as
well as to what it was that had been denied.  But this
*denied access* gives more weight to the *access,* and by
merging the two concepts, it depreciates their relation
to each other.  It is as though *denied access* were something
with so familiar and established an identity,
something like *brick wall,* that no question about its
nature need ordinarily arise.

By the same means, &ldquo;the arms sale to Iran&rdquo; and a
&ldquo;confidence loss&rdquo; repress the associations, resonances,
implications, and speculations that the words can
stimulate when properly used.  Those phrases make the
events they describe seem silent and far away.  They
withhold from us the humming immediacy of &ldquo;the sale
of arms to Iran&rdquo; and &ldquo;a loss of confidence.&rdquo;  Referring
to a place where her friend's young daughter was being
looked after, somebody once confided to me, &ldquo;I hope
there are no child abuse things going on there.&rdquo;  How
very abstract that seemed.  Had she said, &ldquo;I hope they
don't abuse the children there,&rdquo; I would have felt my
heart jump.

It is distressing also to notice that even as meanings
are being reduced in this way, it is increasingly
difficult to tell what they are at all.  Because people are
disregarding the grammatical relation of one word to
another, they are relying more and more on our knowing
beforehand what they have in mind.  If *fire fighters*
fight fires, why don't *freedom fighters* fight freedom?
Does *Saga of Shareholder Neglect* mean that shareholders
are neglecting something, or that they themselves
are being neglected?  Are the words *Save the
West Branch Coalition* an exhortation to save an organization
known as the *West Branch Coalition,* or are
they the name of a coalition formed to save something
else called the *West Branch?  The New Yorker,* perhaps
in atonement for publishing similar language every
week, has reprinted from elsewhere an advertisement
that reads, &ldquo;Infant teacher and 2 year old teacher's aid
needed.  Experience desired,&rdquo; and has commented,
&ldquo;Seems like a lot to ask.&rdquo;  Indeed it does, and we are
asking far too much of our luck when we rely on others
to supply our meanings for us.

Although the speaker or writer is worried about
our keeping up with him, he is busily undermining the
means by which we are enabled to do so.  The parts of
speech, when respected, serve as indicators of his intention.
But if they do not perform their grammatical
function, we must proceed haltingly, and often lose the
way.  The United Farm Workers, according to *The Wall
Street Journal,* &ldquo;drew a $25,000 fine for reporting
violations.&rdquo;  When I came to the word *reporting,* I
naturally assumed that whatever followed would tell
me what it was that had been reported.  But the writer
was not to be trusted, for in fact the union was not
fined for reporting any violations; it was fined for its
violations of a law that required the reporting of contributions
to political campaigns.[^c1]

To illustrate how endangered English syntax has
become, I am willing to confess that on my first reading
I misunderstood the following sentence, simple
and blameless though it is: &ldquo;What is one to think of the
seriousness of an American President who offers his
people fantasies as the pass to safety?&rdquo;  So accustomed
was I to reading about things like &ldquo;people fantasies&rdquo;
that I thought that that is what were being offered.

***

[^c1]: This is an example of what Theodore M. Bernstein, in *Winners &amp;
Sinners,* used to call a &ldquo;two-faced head.&rdquo;  —Ed.

## Shakespeare's Legal Language
*D.S. Bland, Bournemouth*

>...his knowledge of legal terms is not such as
might be acquired by the casual observation of
even his all-comprehending mind; it has the appearance
of technical skill.

With these words, which appeared in his edition
of Shakespeare's works in 1790, Edmund Malone
began a debate which has continued to this day,
the question of whether Shakespeare was ever a student
of the law, either as an attorney's apprentice or as
a member of one of the London Inns of Court.  It is a
question which, in default of direct evidence, cannot
be satisfactorily settled.  We just do not know whether
he received any legal training.  What we do know is
that he used the vocabulary of the law to enrich the
texture and the impact of his verse.

Even the briefest survey of his legal terms will
reveal their great variety, ranging as they do from the
literal in Shylock's &ldquo;I *will* have my bond,&rdquo; to the metaphorical,
indeed the metaphysical, in Macbeth's entreaty
to Night, that it will destroy the daylight and so
enable him to proceed on his path to the murder of
Duncan.

>Cancel, and tear to pieces, that great bond
Which keeps me pale.

It is the metaphorical uses to which Shakespeare puts
the legal vocabulary that are the important ones.  One
way in which a language lives and grows is by modifying
existing meanings and employing them in new
contexts, and it is the poets who contribute most to this
process.

.bqb
As an example from Shakespeare we can take the
word *quietus* which at first sight seems not to lend
itself to poetry at all.  But Shakespeare uses it twice,
the first time in Sonnet 126.

>Nature's audit, though delayed, answered
must be,
>
>And her quietus is to render thee.

Here the metaphor is tied to the literal legal meaning.
*Quietus* is a short form of the term *quietus est* or
*abeinde recessit quietus,* the formulae used in the
Court of the Exchequer to show that an account has
been correctly presented and cleared.  The Court and
its formulae are long dead (although it is from this
piece of procedure that we get the modern colloquial
term *to be quits*).  But Shakespeare's other use of the
word, in Hamlet's self-debate on suicide,

>When he himself might his quietus make  
With a bare bodkin,

carries the meaning well away from the dusty offices of
the Exchequer Court.  The basic meaning is still there,
of course: by committing suicide one closes the account
book of one's life.  But death also involves the
concept of *quit* in the sense of leaving one place for
another, of moving from the turmoil of the world to
the *quiet* of the grave.

This extension of meaning, from the almost literal
to the fully metaphorical, is to be found quite frequently
in Shakespeare's work.  Once again, the Sonnets
and *Hamlet* will furnish an example.  Sonnet 74
speaks of death as the moment

>when that fell arrest  
Without all bail shall carry me away.

This is striking enough in its way, and very contemporary,
since an arrest in the street was a familiar sight to
the Elizabethans.  Shakespeare makes use of it in *Henry
IV,* Part II, when the Chief Justice orders Falstaff and
his companions to the Fleet prison.  But the sonnet's
phrase is somewhat abstract.  In Hamlet's dying words,
however, the idea is given flesh and blood, becomes a
personified image which is as visually dramatic as the
taking up of Falstaff.

>Had I but time—as this fell serjeant, death,  
Is strict in his arrest—O, I could tell you.

This comparison tells us something about Shakespeare's
development as a poetic dramatist.  He discovered
early in his career that the decorative style he had
employed in his poems would not work satisfactorily in
the theater.  Drama is action, and dramatic verse, if it
is to be effective, must *move.*  It needs activating as
much as plot and character, and in his mature work
Shakespeare makes no exception to this rule, even
when he is building up a scenic effect.  Duncan, approaching
Macbeth's castle, declares:

>This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air  
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself  
Unto our gentle senses.

The air is not only sweet; it moves in the adverb
*nimbly.*

But to return to strictly legal matters.  Hovering
continually in the background of an examination of
Shakespeare's legal vocabulary are several questions
which sooner or later have to be faced.  The first is:
how accurate was he in his use of legal terms?  G.M.
Young, in his essay, &ldquo;Shakespeare and the Termers&rdquo;
(*Today and Yesterday,* p. 294), singles out his use of
*misprison* in *All's Well that Ends Well* (II, iii, 155) as an
example of error.

>Here, take her hand,  
Proud, scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,  
That doth in vile misprison shackle up  
My love and her desert.

Young says it looks as though Shakespeare &ldquo;thought
that misprison was such a good word for poetry that
the meaning did not matter.&rdquo;  In other words, Shakespeare
thought it meant 'false imprisonment' rather
than 'contempt.'  But did he?  Elsewhere we find him
using *misprise* correctly as a synonym for *despise.*

Here is another example in which legal terms are
used correctly on one occasion and apparently incorrectly
on another.  Sonnet 137 distinguishes accurately
between enclosed land and common land.

>Why should my heart think that a *several* plot  
Which my heart knows the wide world's  
*common* place?

Here, *several* means 'enclosed' or 'private,' and Shakespeare
is quite accurate in distinguishing between the
two terms.  But in *Love's Labour's Lost* (II, i, 224) he
seems to be confusing them.  Katharine, flirting with
Boyet (who has just tried to kiss her) says:

My lips are no common, though several they be.

Here we have the sort of crux which delights Shakespeare's
editors: by using the work *though* he seems to
be equating *several* and *common.*  Or is it that, not for
the first time, he is being carried away by a pun, a play
on *several* as meaning 'private' and *several* as meaning
'more than one' or even 'separate' or 'open,' which is
what common land is and lips can be?  Or is he intending
to show that Katharine is ignorant of the distinction?
Hardly, for when Boyet asks &ldquo;belonging to
whom?&rdquo;  she answers &ldquo;to my fortunes and me.&rdquo;  But is it
necessary to get Shakespeare off this semantic hook?
For myself, I am content to follow the Princess of
France who breaks in at this point to declare that
&ldquo;good wits will be jangling.&rdquo;  In other words, one need
not look for absolute consistency in a quick bout of
verbal fencing.

On the whole, it is obvious that Shakespeare is
accurate in his use of legal terms, that they occur with
great frequency and embrace many aspects of the law.
It is likely that references to English Common law, so
much concerned in his day with property, inheritance,
and contract, are in the majority.  But there are references
also to constitutional law—inevitably so because
of the large area of his work which deals with English
history—as well as to ecclesiastical law and the law of
equity.  And since Shakespeare was a dramatist and
therefore concerned with people, there is a wide spectrum
of officers of the law and a variety of ways of
alluding to them.  On the one hand, there is the respect
paid to the Chief Justice in *Henry IV;* on the other,
there is Doll Tearsheet's disrespectful reference to the
parish beadle as a *bluebottle* because of the color of his
uniform.  Strictly speaking, this is not a legal term, but
slang, as is *bum- ... baily* (a 'sheriff's officer') in
*Twelfth Night.*  But they have to be taken into consideration
because they show the dislike for the lower
officers of the law which was felt by the ordinary man.
The bum-baily, after all, could well be the man who
lived next door.

This raises a further question: how did Shakespeare
himself regard the law?  It is immediately obvious
that he wrote no play or even a considerable part
of a play in which the law and its officers are made the
subject of satire.  And yet it was a common enough
theme at the time and had been, both in England and
on the continent, since the Middle Ages.  One example
is *Ignoramus*, a Latin play of 1614 presented by the
University of Cambridge to James I.  There is nothing
similar in Shakespeare, even when he creates Justice
Shallow.  Of course Shallow is an ignoramus—his very
name is a give-away; of course he is an incompetent
Justice of the Peace who learned nothing at Clemen's
Inn except where to find the local prostitutes.  But
Shakespeare gives us no picture of that incompetence
in action in the manor court.  Shallow is introduced
into the second part of *Henry IV* solely to be Falstaff's
gull and to be cheated out of a thousand pounds.

As to the question raised by Malone, Did Shakespeare
receive any formal training in the law?, scholars
who have examined the matter have on the whole decided
on a verdict of &ldquo;not proven.&rdquo;  I would go further
and say that there is no case to answer.  There are many
images in Shakespeare drawn from medicine, for example.
Does this mean that he was apprenciated to an
apothecary or a barber-surgeon?  There are numerous
references to the sea and to the life of a soldier.  Was
Shakespeare ever a Jack Tar or a Tommy Atkins?  It
seems most unlikely.

What *can* be said in respect of his knowledge of
the law is this: Working as he did in London, the
national center of legal activity, rubbing shoulders
with Southampton and Pembroke and others at the
royal court, looking to the Inns of Court for an appreciable
part of his audience at the Globe, providing
entertainment at the Inns themselves, and having regard
to his own involvement with legal matters (his
grant of arms, the Bellott-Mountjoy suit, the purchase
of property in Stratford) it is not surprising that &ldquo;the
law&rdquo; figures so largely in his work.  And when his own
knowledge, experience, or acquaintances failed him
there were works of reference he could have consulted,
such as John Rastell's *Les Termes de la Ley*, first
printed in about 1525 and many times reprinted in the
next eighty years, or John Cowell's *Law Dictionary*
of 1607, as well as standard texts such as Littleton's
*Tenures*.

In the end, however, it was his remarkable assimilative
powers as a creative artist that enabled him to
make such a rich and varied use of the language of the
law, that central feature of the social fabric of this day.
But if a legal *training* were to be regarded as a precondition
of that richness and variety, then there would be
something to be said for the Baconian theory of authorship
after all!

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The English Language*](https://www.amazon.com/English-Language-Guided-Tour/dp/0141003960)
David Crystal, (Penguin Books, 1988), x + 288pp.

People, being (for the most part) human, make
mistakes.  In a book of mine published about a year
ago, for some unaccountable reason, I wrote that the
Bront&euml;'s real name was Bell, while, of course, as every
literate person knows, it was the other way round.
There are certain kinds of mistakes that are mystifying:
despite having been advised countless times that
the first syllable of the name of that city in Texas is
pronounced &ldquo;Hugh&rdquo; and not &ldquo;Who,&rdquo; British presenters,
commentators, announcers, and, seemingly, anyone
who gets a chance to do so on radio or TV pronounces
it &ldquo;Who-stin&rdquo; or (worse) &ldquo;Who-ston.&rdquo;  If they can ever
be persuaded to say &ldquo;Hugh&rdquo; for &ldquo;Who,&rdquo; it will probably
be carried over to the New York City street name,
spelled the same way but pronounced &ldquo;How-stin,&rdquo; and
we shall be going on about that.

Recently, published materials (articles, books,
etc.) written by otherwise qualified, usually responsible,
and traditionally careful scholars have contained
unconscionable errors—errors that could have been
avoided by minimal checking.  I will come to the article
later; for the moment, let us look at the book in
hand.  For 20 years David Crystal was Professor of
Linguistic Science at the University of Reading.  A few
years ago he resigned to write and, generally, to pursue
studies that do not include full-time teaching,
though he is an Honorary Professor at University College,
Bangor.  He is also linguistics consultant to *English
Today*, a relatively new British language quarterly.
I personally know Crystal to be a good scholar, and I
like his relaxed writing style.  All the more reason for
me to express some surprise at some of the misinformation
found in his book.  A chapter on British and American
English begins with nine more or less categorical
remarks about American pronunciation; unfortunately,
most of them are wrong:

>The middle vowel of *tomato* rhymes with *mate*
in AmE, but with *car* in BrE.  [As the song goes,
you say *tomayto* and I say *tomahto*.  Both
pronunciations occur in AmE, and a quick
check in an AmE dictionary would have yielded
that information.]
>
>The first syllable of *lever* rhythms *[sic]* with that
of *level* in AmE, and with *leaver* in BrE.  [I
don't know what the percentages or distributions
are, but again, a quick check in an AmE dictionary
would have revealed that speakers of
AmE—a lot of them, in fact—say &ldquo;leaver.&rdquo;]
>
>Conversely, the first syllable of *leisure* rhymes
with *lee* in AmE, but has the vowel of *let* in
BrE.  [At this point one wonders whether Crystal
had gathered incorrect data within a single dialect
area in the U.S. or whether he'd simply had
a bad informant.  The AmE dictionaries I
checked all gave both pronunciations.  Perhaps
Crystal has little or no respect for (American)
dictionaries and deliberately ignored them in
favor of his own or his informant's data.  He
was ill-advised to do so, for they happen to be
correct.]
>
>*Vase* rhymes with *days* in AmE, with *cars*
in BrE.  [For some Americans, this word rhymes
with *base*, for some with *days*, and for some
with *cars* (without the &ldquo;r&rdquo;).  It might be true
that the last, &ldquo;more British&rdquo; pronunciation is
used when a Ming vase is referred to, while either
of the first two is used for an ordinary vase
from Woolworth's, but that has not been confirmed.]
>
>*Docile* is 'doss-ile' in AmE, but 'doe-sile' in BrE.
The -*ile* ending regularly changes in this way:
*missile* is often pronounced like *missal* in AmE,
and similarly *fertile, hostile*, etc.  [This is a bit
more complicated: the second syllables of *hostile,
fertile*, and a few other words were once
uniformly pronounced to rhyme with *pill* in
AmE; in the past 30 years or so, possibly because
the psychologists and psychiatrists (who
use *hostile* almost as a technical term) felt that
pronouncing it to rhyme with *pile* removed it
somewhat from the grasp of lay speakers, started
saying &ldquo;hos-tile&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;hos-til.&rdquo;  Some
AmE speakers caught the bug and, though they
are not in the field, affectedly say &ldquo;hos-tile.&rdquo;  This
has been carried over to *fertile*, perhaps, but
there is no evidence that it has cropped up in
*missile* or *docile*.]
>
>*Herb* is pronounced without the initial *h* in
AmE, but with the *h* in BrE.  [That is certainly
correct, but it might have been interesting to
have added that in AmE *herbaceous, herbalist,
herbarium, herbicide, herbivore, herbivorous,
herbology, herborist*, and *herborize* are usually
pronounced with the *h*, but (in addition to
*herb) herbal, herbless, herblike, herbage*, and
*herby* are usually pronounced without it.]
>
>Many words have the stress in different places:
>
>*AmE* debris address inquiry magazine
*BrE* debris address inquiry magazine
And several words which have one main stress in
BrE have two in AmE: *AmE* Birmingham
*BrE* Birmingham
>
>[(I have not included words about which Crystal
is right.)  Some AmE speakers do say daybree,
address, inquiry, and magazine, so again Crystal
was misinformed, and the AmE pronunciation
Birmingham is usually reserved for the
American cities in Michigan and Alabama, with
Birmingham for the city in England.]

All this is most unfortunate.  In his comments on
spelling, Crystal refers to &ldquo;some BrE spellings [that]
are used in the U.S. (e.g. *enclose, judgement*).&rdquo;  I suppose
it depends on one's point of view, but the facts of
the matter are that *inclose* is far less frequent in AmE
than *enclose* and that the spelling *judgement* was originally
the AmE spelling till Noah Webster's simplified
spelling campaign removed the *e* (and effected other
changes, like dropping the *u* from words like *honour,
colour*, etc.).  Also, *mould* is sometimes so spelled in
AmE, and, while the preferred spelling is *theater* in
written text, it is very likely that the names of most of
the theaters in the U.S. contain the word spelled *theatre*,
possibly because it is felt to have more cachet.
*Smoulder* is a free spelling variant of *smolder*, and
Americans usually write *endorse* in preference to *indorse.
Ensure* is the preferred form when the sense is
'guarantee, make sure, make safe' but *insure* when the
sense is 'guarantee against loss or harm, procure an
insurance policy against.'  *Fibre* is frequently seen,
though not as often as *fiber*.  Among the individual
items listed, *moustache* is almost in free variation with
*mustache, storey* 'building floor' with *story, tsar* with
*czar*.  BrE spells *programme* that way except when referring
to computer software, and AmE writes *programmed,
programming, programmer* only in the
context of computers.  Although Americans were once
taught to spell *kidnaper, kidnaped, kidnaping* that
way, they appear far more often today with two *ps*.

Other fables, either concocted or perpetuated by
the author, are that Americans do not say *twenty to
four* or *five past eight*, preferring *twenty of four* and
*five after eight*; that they say *real good* for *really good*
(some do, of course, but it is considered a solecism);
that they say *in back of* for *behind* (they say either; it is
the Brits who do not say *in back of*); that they prefer *a
half hour* to *half an hour*, etc.  Crystal does remark,
&ldquo;variations in style are not noted,&rdquo; but what he might,
more accurately, have said was that some of the constructions
in the AmE column are not usual in BrE
and vice versa.  Nonetheless, some are simply wrong:
AmE does not say *I'm visiting with her tomorrow* in
preference to *I'm visiting her tomorrow, I'll go get the
car* in preference to *I'll go and get the car, Come take a
look* in preference to *Come and take a look, I asked
that he leave* in preference to *I asked him to leave*, etc.

Where these bits of misinformation come from is
not easy to determine: most of the sources listed in
Appendices B and C are British, with the possible exception
of Whitney F. Bolton, who might be an American
(his book, with which I am not familiar, was published
by Random House) and who collaborated with
Crystal on a book, and *The State of the Language*, by
Michaels and Ricks.  As I have remarked on other occasions,
in recent BrE the word *billion* is used to mean
'thousand million,' not, as Crystal has it, 'million million'
(though that was the way it was once used).  The
financial pages of the newspapers in Britain and the
numerous radio and television programs dealing with
finance and business consistently use *billion* to mean
'thousand million,' as in AmE.  *Pavement* in AmE does
not mean 'road surface' but 'any paved surface (road
or sidewalk).'  The chapter concludes with a list of
AmE and BrE equivalents some of which are quite
misleading: for example, when BrE *sofa* is equated
with AmE *couch* or *davenport*, is the reader to understand
that AmE does not have *sofa?*  That BrE does not
have *davenport* or *couch?*  Of course, BrE has *couch,*
but *davenport* sounds distinctly old-fashioned in AmE,
which, of course, has *sofa*.  There are many other similar
confusions, none of which is resolved by the simple
listing of pairs of words.  The problem is that BrE
*roundabout* is AmE *traffic circle*, and neither is customarily
used in the other dialect; that is true about a
certain number of the pairs—*check (mark) / tick,
checkers / draughts, diaper / nappy, dish towel / tea
towel, drug store / chemist, eggplant / aubergine, gas /
petrol, elevator / lift*, etc.  But other words need more
to be said about them, since they are not mutually
exclusive in either dialect: AmE does use *sweets, sweet
corn, sofa, cot, autumn, tap, tramp, ...* and BrE
does use *couch, detour, fall*.

I have always felt that a relaxed, colloquial style
of writing does not, of necessity, require the admittance
of nonstandard usage.  Moreover, it seems indefensible
in a book on language to use nonstandard
constructions when they add nothing to the communication
with the reader, especially when standard usage
would in no way interfere with the message.  Thus, I
am bothered by the following, which appear to be
almost deliberate, for Crystal is certainly not a sloppy
writer:

>&ldquo;The problem is how to choose between the
many indigenous languages ...&rdquo; [p.3]
>
>&ldquo;But why [choose] English?  In Ghana, Nigeria,
and many other countries, the choice is motivated
by the weight of historical tradition from
the British or American colonial era.&rdquo; [p.3.
What does this mean?  The British colonial era
was, largely, the 19th century, when Britain colonized
other countries; the American colonial
era was, largely, the 17th and 18th centuries,
when it was being colonized by Britain.]
>
>[The subject of splitting infinitives, discussed
on p. 25, suggests that the rules against it were
first ariculated by Lowth and others in the mid
18th century, but Dryden's objection to the practice
appeared almost a hundred years earlier.]
>
>[p. 53: In the pronunciation of *glimpsed*, the
transcription should have an &ldquo;I&rdquo; not an &ldquo;i&rdquo;:
/ glImpst /.]
>
>[p.60: &ldquo;*apparatus*... vowel in 3rd syllable as
in *car* or **fate*&rdquo; AmE would have the vowel of
*hat*.
>
>&ldquo;*derisive*... vowel in 2nd syllable as in
**rice* or *rise*&rdquo; The vowel is the same, so it should
read, &ldquo;*s* as in **rice* or *rise*&rdquo;]
>
>&ldquo;... the same vowel sound turns up in *cot*
and *wash* [p.72: That rather depends on the dialect,
doesn't it?]

These criticisms having been registered, it is fair
to note that they appear in only small sections of the
book, the majority of which deals with other aspects of
language.  The chapter on Personal English and those
dealing with the History of English are among the best
I have ever read.  Bearing in mind that the intention is
to remain quite informal in approach and that certain
matters (like the Great Vowel Shift) are referred to
obliquely rather than being treated as fully as one
might expect in a thorough-going text, Crystal succeeds
in making interesting and lucid the subjects that
are covered.  Because of the omission of the straightforward,
scholarly impedimenta for the sake of producing
a &ldquo;user-friendly&rdquo; approach, it is difficult to see the
application of the book except for the purposes set
forth by the author in his Introduction—&ldquo;what, in the
world of travel, tourists would expect to find in a
'guide' or a 'companion.' &rdquo;  To focus on that comparison,
which is borne out in the subtitle, &ldquo;A guided tour
of the language,&rdquo; I must say that it follows the lead of
the more superficial guides of the type: it emerges as
more of a *Good Food Guide* than as a traditional
*Baedeker* (which, after all, directed the reader's attention
to the art and culture of the sites to be visited).  Of
its kind, *The English Language* is by far the most
palatable, given my earlier reservations.  The questionable
bits (like the sidebars, on pages 198 and 199, listing
Shakespearian and Biblical &ldquo;Idioms,&rdquo; most of
which, in my opinion, would be classed as metaphors)
need reexamination, and it is hoped that a second
edition might yield an approach to some of the objectionable
areas that finds the author focusing on the
subject more than on an attempt at reaching the lowest
common denominator of reader.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Days*](https://www.amazon.com/dictionary-days-Leslie-Dunkling/dp/0415002397)
Leslie Dunkling, (Routledge, London; Facts On File, New York, 1988), xiii + 156.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

Many readers may be familiar with *Holidays and
Anniversaries of the World*, published by Gale Research
Company and, I believe, now in its second edition.
Then there is the *Book of Days*, an interesting Victorian
relic that seems to be in most libraries either in its
original edition or in a Gale reprint.  The former is a
large (8&frac12;&rdquo; &times; 11&rdquo;) work of almost 900 pages arranged in
calendar order and with a detailed index; it lists all
kinds of important holidays in all countries of the world
and offers a brief chronology of the major events that
took place on each day; it ranges from religious, historical,
and political days to promotional items, like National
Laugh Week.  For its avowed purpose, it is probably
the most comprehensive work available.  The old
*Book of Days* lists far fewer holidays and anniversaries
but gives interesting (if not always accurate) descriptions
of their origins.  The first is a reference book, the
second a fascinating browsing medium.

Leslie Dunkling's book is not like either of the
above.  It does have a calendar in the back, but that
lists only the relatively few days the author has selected
for treatment in the main body of the book, where
they are listed by name, in alphabetical order.  For
those benighted few who are unfamiliar with
Dunkling's works, they include the *Guinness Book of
Names, First Names First, Everyman's Dictionary of
First Names, You Name It!*, and, with Gordon Wright,
*A Dictionary of Pub Names*.  The last, as far as I know,
has not been published in the U.S.  To make a long
story short, Dunkling is an onomasiologist or onomastician,
and president of the Names Society, a U.K.
counterpart (in more modest guise) of the American
Name Society.

The number of entries in the book (850, according
to the jacket blurb) may seem a bit sparse, but they
make up in quality what they lack in quantity.  The list
is eclectic, covering the days important to people in the
U.K., Commonwealth, and the U.S.  It contains not
only &ldquo;real&rdquo; days (like *gaudy day, Geranium Day, German
Day, Gesuffa Day* [See TOAST 'N JELLY DAY], and
*Girl Scout Day*, but *Gloomy Sunday* (after the lugubrious
song of the same name, which I had not known
was of Hungarian origin), *insipid day*, and *Teacher for
a Day Day*.  Nights, like *Thump-the-door Night* and
*Burns Night* are there as well as anything else one
might think up having to do with *day, night*, the
names of the days of the week, and other associated
references, including *busman's holiday*.  All the information
is set forth in a clear, straightforward style;
knowing Dunkling's meticulous scholarship, I assume
the facts are as accurate as available evidence permits.
My only criticism of the book is that it lacks an index.
The calendar in the back, already mentioned, serves as
a kind of chronological index, but there is much good
material buried in the entries which, once one has
read through the text, remains almost inaccessible to
those who haven't memorized it.  This is the kind of
reference book one reads through, cover to cover; but
if readers recall a detail, mentioned in an entry, to
which they want to refer again weeks, months, or
years later, the absence of an index will stymie them.
How experienced publishers of reference books, like
Routledge and Facts On File, can allow such a work to
be published without an index is a mystery.

*Laurence Urdang*


### OBITER DICTA

The owner of a hotel in the Dordogne, Le Moulin
du Roc, has been expelled from the &ldquo;prestigious&rdquo; international
association of inns, Relais et Ch&acirc;teaux de
Campagne, and is likely to be *d&eacute;ros&eacute;e* and *d&eacute;toqu&eacute;e* by
the two other major corps of renown for restaurateurs,
*Guide Michelin* and *Guide Millau*, because she doctored
a photograph of Nancy Reagan and Raisa
Gorbachev to put herself in the picture, representing
that she had been invited to prepare the food served at
the recent summit meetings.  This intelligence is imparted
to readers of VERBATIM in the interest of attestation
for etymologists: the woman's name is *Solange
Gardillou*.  One might have expected *Gardemanger*.

Readers of the review of *The Random House Dictionary*
in the Winter 1988 issue might have been somewhat
mystified by the following:

>According to H. W. Wilson, publishers of *Book
Review Digest*, approximately XXXXX reviews
appear in all kinds of periodicals in the United
States in the course of a year, but these are of
only YYYYY titles, of ZZ percent of the books
published: the rest are not reviewed at all.

The simple explanation is that the figures were
not available when the article was written, so the Xs,
Ys, and Zs were inserted for later replacement.  As it
turned out, the statistics did not become available at
all (at least, not from Wilson), and the appropriate
adjustment was not made to the text.  We regret the
error.  In any event, we can be reasonably confident
that &ldquo;XXXXX&rdquo; is not a very large number, that
&ldquo;YYYYY&rdquo; is a much smaller number, and the &ldquo;ZZ percent&rdquo;
is, at a guess, in the single digits, probably not
more than 5.  We should be grateful to any reader who
can provide the suitable statistics.

According to *The Times* [19 February 1988], the
leading brand of condoms sold in the Soviet Union is
nicknamed *galoshers*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Corn Borer Levels Building.&rdquo;  [Headline in the *Sheboygan
Press*, early July 1987.  Submitted by Rodger L. Holton, Newark, Delaware.]


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA

There are probably many things in western culture
that we take for granted—or, at least, are not
wont to question too closely.  Whatever curiosity might
have been aroused at the tender age when we first
learned *Pop!  Goes the Weasel* was likely to have been
squelched (if, indeed, it ever manifested itself as a
question) by mother or nanny who, herself ignorant of
the answer, dismissed it as a bit of nursery-rhyme nonsense:
after all, it took Baring Gould and the Opies to
alert the world to the secretive, satirical undertones
lying beneath many common nursery rhymes.  William
Greaves, in an article on a collection of Victorian music
hall posters [*The Times*, 10 February 1988], reports
that the Hackney borough archivist, David Mander,
speculates that the expression arose because the frequenters
of the Eagle, a pub mentioned in the song,
found their finances occasionally stretched, requiring
them to *pop* ('pawn' in the vernacular of the day) their
*weasel*.  As to the nature of a *weasel*, there is some
doubt: Mander suggests it was &ldquo;some kind of carpenter's
tool&rdquo;; Len Deadfield, current landlord of the Eagle
(rebuilt around 1900), thinks it was a tailor's flatiron;
Bill Manley, a local historian, questions the
likelihood that any worker would pawn the tools of his
trade, thus disabling his ability to get them out of
pawn.  In Manley's opinion, *weasel* means, 'any item of
value, like a family watch chain.'  There are so many
factors at work in expressions of this kind—poetic license,
lost sources of metaphors, etc.—that it is dangerous
to offer definitive answers without sufficient
supporting evidence.  Nonetheless, one might well
question the image, literal or metaphoric, of the monkey
chasing the weasel &ldquo;once around the cobbler's
bench,&rdquo; which makes little sense if the weasel is an
object.  Moreover, how is the *monkey* explained, either
literally or figuratively?

Turning to the *OED*, we find quite a large number
of glosses for *monkey*:

>1.  literally, the animal.
>
>2.  *monkey on a stick*, a kind of toy.
>
>3.  one who resembles a monkey in looks or
behavior.
>
>4.  a term of playful contempt, used of young
people.
>
>5.  (in Australia) the monkey-bear, or koala.
>
>6.  a kind of gun or cannon.
>
>7.  a drop hammer (machine).
>
>8.  the instrument which drives a rocket.
>
>9.  short for *monkey-block*, a kind of nautical
sheave.
>
>10.  a wooden container for grog.
>
>11.  a hunting flask.
>
>12.  a kind of earthenware water vessel.
>
>13.  a bricklayer's hod.
>
>14.  a device for checking railcar movement in a
mine.
>
>15.  a solution of zinc chloride used in soldering.
>
>16.  *suck* (or *sup*) the monkey, (a) drink from a
bottle; (b) drink spirit from a coconut; (c)
drink spirit from a cask through a straw.
>
>17.  *monkey's allowance*, &ldquo;more kicks than halfpence.&rdquo;
>
>18.  *get* or *put one's monkey up*, enrage someone.
>
>19.  a bet of $500 or &pound;500.
>
>20.  *have a monkey on a house*, have a mortgage
on it.

Definitions of *weasel* yield little: the only remotely
applicable senses seem to focus on *weese*, an
old word meaning 'distil gently,' and an obsolete term
for the windpipe, or trachea, *weezle*, itself a variant of
*weasand*, with the same meaning.  To be sure, one of
the problems in accepting *pop* in the sense of 'pawn' is
that the words of the song would seem to indicate that
the monkey received some sort of knock or rap in retaliation
for &ldquo;chasing the weasel&rdquo;—whatever that might
mean.  The most tempting theory combines the semantic
content of senses 10, 11, and 16 of *monkey* with
*weese*—at least those place the expression into the general
realm of bibulation, in keeping, if remotely, with
the folklore of the Eagle.

Alas, all of the foregoing is too clever by half, for
we can find (also in the *OED*), under *Pop,* *int., adv*.,
the following intelligence:

>*Pop goes the weasel*, name of a country dance
very popular in the 'fifties,' in which these words
were sung or exclaimed by the dancers while
one of them darted under the arms of the others
to his partner; also the name of the tune; hence
as a vb. and in other humorous uses.  See *N. &amp;
Q*. (1905) 10th Ser. III. 492, IV. 209.
>
>...*c* *1854* (*Musicseller's Advt*. in *Newspaper*)
The new country dance 'Pop goes the weasel,'
introduced by her Majesty Queen Victoria.—
*Musical Bouquet* No. 409. *Pop goes the Weasel;
La Temp&ecirc;te*; and *Le Grand P&egrave;re.  These fashionable
dances as performed at the court balls.  1855*
in *N. &amp; Q*. 10th Ser. IV. 211/1 This dance is very
popular, it is without deception, 'Pop goes the
weasel' has been to Court, and met a good reception....

That is not to say that *pop goes the weasel* (the
dance and the expression) could not have originated at
the Grecian Saloon, the theater annex to the Eagle in
City Road; but the embellishing information puts us
no closer to the etymology.  Is it possible that what is
described is a popping sound made when tapping a
keg with a bung-starter in order to *suck the monkey*?
Perhaps.  But that still does not explain the words of the
jingle.  Clearly, what we need is some attestation for
*weasel* (or a similar word) having the meaning 'bung,'
'barrel' or 'keg,' or the like.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Sign spotted in a Chelsea restaurant: &ldquo;Plat du jour,
changed each day.&rdquo;  From *The Times [London] Diary*, 25
February 1987.

## Language As a Source of Conflict
*Geoffrey Kingscott, Editor, Language Monthly*

In the Terror which followed the French Revolution,
the hated aristocrats, whatever their disguise,
could usually be distinguished from honest toilers because
their hands were unroughened by manual labor.
But to make doubly sure they could also be tested to
see how they pronounced the particular diphthong
written as *oi* in French (as in *moi, foin, soin* etc.).  If it
came out as a somewhat effeminate WE and not as a
straightforward proletarian WA (as in modern French)
they were condemned out of their own mouths.

I often think of this story whenever I hear someone
speak with a languid, drawled &ldquo;Oxford&rdquo; or &ldquo;cut-glass&rdquo;
accent.  Because of a quite unreasoning prejudice
the upper class accent sets my teeth on edge, and in a
social upheaval I can quite imagine myself as a latter-day
Fouquier-Tinville, sending the Horray Henries to
the guillotine on the evidence of a single drawled
vowel (*mairn*, perhaps, as in &ldquo;I say, my good mairn&rdquo;).

Sometimes an actual language (not just the pronunciation)
divides the ruler from the ruled, as is said
to have happened in 11th- and 12th-century England,
when the court and all officials spoke French and the
rest of the population English.  A case in point in the
modern world is the Philippines, where the educated
elite prefer to communicate in English.  The mass of
the population speak local languages, of which Tagalog
is the best known.  The Communist insurgents are
said to owe much of their success in maintaining their
ground under various regimes to the fact that they
can communicate in Tagalog to the local peasants,
whereas the Manila politicians cannot.

Speech and language are powerful sources of individual
and collective identification, and so it is hardly
surprising that even in our internationalized world,
many social conflicts owe their origin to linguistic differences.

The problems are seen most clearly, of course, in
countries which are officially bilingual, of which poor
little Belgium is the most striking example.  Even as I
write [late 1987], that country is in the throes of a
political crisis.  It may be the undeclared capital of the
European Community, where in 1992 there will be a
barrier-free common market of 320 million souls from
12 member countries speaking a variety of languages,
but such international vision does not govern domestic
politics.

The Fourons crisis, which provoked the fall of the
Belgian coalition government in December 1987, is but
the latest in a whole series of language disputes which
have vexed the Belgian state since WWII, and which
determine political allegiances more than any economic
theory or social class.

In the northern and western parts of Belgium the
language spoken is Flemish (the local name for what
is, in fact, Dutch).  In the south and east they speak
French.  For much of Belgium's short history (the country
was not created until 1830) French was the more
fashionable language, and the sharp-eyed visitor to
Flemish-speaking towns such as Ostend or Antwerp
may still see texts in French carved on some buildings.
The Flemings came more and more to resent their own
tongue being looked down on, and since WWII, in
particular, they have been asserting themselves.

The problems became so acute that the country
has in effect been split into Flemish-speaking Flanders
and French-speaking Wallonia, each with its own regional
administration.  The capital, Brussels, a predominantly
French-speaking island in a Flemish-speaking
area, is a third zone, officially bilingual in
everything.  But linguistic boundaries are never tidy,
and a small group of predominantly French-speaking
villages called Les Fourons were included in the Flemish
zone.  They have elected a French-speaking mayor,
Jos&eacute; Happart, who refuses to take the examination for
proficiency in Flemish required for the exercise of his
office in that region.  The Flemings take this as an
affront and insist on dismissing him, but he is always
re-elected.  The national government coalition fell
apart on this very matter, but in the subsequent general
election no one seemed to offer a solution to the
problem.

Even if the problem of Les Fourons—or perhaps
we should use the Flemish name Voeren—were solved,
many Belgians feel that the language question would
then immediately raise its head somewhere else.  The
Belgians joke wryly about their predicament.  Their
favorite story is one in which a class of European
schoolchildren is asked to write an essay about an elephant.
The French child writes about the love life of
the elephant.  The English child writes about the hunting
of elephants.  But the longest essay was that written
by the Belgian child—it was called &ldquo;The Elephant and
the Belgian Language Question.&rdquo;

Canada is another country with bilingual problems,
although in the eyes of the world it seems to have
settled these with tact and diplomacy.  Officially the
country is bilingual in English and French.  Quebec
has always been predominantly French, and the other
provinces predominantly English.  Hitting back at the
danger of being swamped in an English-speaking
North America, Quebec has always been militant in
the defense of French, and this has caused some friction.
Inspired by De Gaulle's splendid indiscretion,
shouting &ldquo;Vive le Qu&eacute;bec libre&rdquo; to an ecstactic crowd
during his official visit to Canada 20 years ago and by
the influence of the militant Parti Qu&eacute;b&eacute;cois, Quebec
has tried to insist on the primacy of French, even to
the extent of banning English-only signs outside shops
and business premises.

On the other hand, as official English/French bilingualism
is extended to more and more of those Canadian
provinces with English-speaking majorities, reports
are coming in of a backlash: In New Brunswick,
which is said to have a 38 percent francophone population
and which was the first province to go officially
bilingual, there were fist fights at one public meeting
held in Moncton to discuss the proposals.  In the summer
of 1987 there were hostile demonstrations in Salisbury
when the post office hired a francophone manager
in a primarily anglophone town.  &ldquo;French
language services stir fear, anger—Alliance for Preservation
of English slowly taking hold in Eastern Ontario&rdquo;
was a headline in November 1987 in the *Toronto
Globe and Mail* over reports that support for the backlash's
own association had been booming since the Ontario
provincial parliament passed Bill 8, the French
Language Services Act, in November 1986.

In the United States there has also been something
of a backlash against the increasing official and unofficial
use of ethnic languages, particularly Spanish, with
the passage by referendum in California of a proposal
to enshrine in legislation that English should be recognized
as the official language.

Even in the United Kingdom, cradle of the world
language English, there are problems with the Welsh
in the Welsh-speaking part of Wales, though protests
are usually limited to painting out the English in official
signs.  From time to time, however, martyrs find
ways of provoking the authorities to send them to
prison, usually by refusing to pay a fine for some infraction
committed during a demonstration.

In the countries of Asia linguistic consciousness is
only just starting to stir.  Up to now so many activities
were locally centered that language problems did not
arise, or where various communities lived side by side,
as do the Malays and Chinese in Malaysia and Singapore,
each community kept to itself.  But now there are
problems, for example, in Malaysia over the respective
educational provision, particularly in higher education,
for Malay, Tamil, and Chinese speakers, with
political parties becoming aligned—as in Belgium—on
linguistic lines.

And so, we can go on round the world, with communities,
national, social, or tribal, often drawing
battle lines along linguistic frontiers.  But one should
not exaggerate.  Linguistic differences might occasionally
lead to fisticuffs, but rarely to loss of life—in contrast
to religious differences.

Language is a form of individual and corporate
identity, necessary to the human psyche.  But only if we
feel our identity is threatened do we become aggressive.
It is no accident that dictatorships tend to frown
on diversity in language—in the reign of Franco in
Spain there was little tolerance for the two regional
languages, Basque and Catalan, both of which have
enjoyed a new flowering since the old regime was laid
to rest.

If we could all recognize that there is richness in
diversity, the world would be a more tolerant, and
altogether more tolerable, place in which to live.

## Antipodean Newsletter: *The Coming of the Strangers*
*George W. Turner*

It was in the warm part of the year that the strangers
appeared.  Yet they were wrapped up in peculiar
close-fitting cloaks or blankets.  They came from the
sea, from enormous floating objects, were of indeterminate
gender, and were as pale as if they were returning
from the dead.  They brought with them terrifying
animals with big ears, and others even taller, which
with a snort and a loud noise caused a man to fall dead
and bleeding.  They made noises unlike any known
language.

In the language of the newcomers this was January
1788 and they called the land *New South Wales*.
Unlike other visitors among the local people they
tended to stay in one place and began to crowd out
their hosts from the best hunting grounds and fishing
places.  It was a convenient fiction among themselves
that the land had no previous owner, a fiction still
challenged two hundred years later in a call for *land
rights*.

The elders among the newcomers were well-meaning.
They brought what they felt to be a superior
religion and a superior civilization.  It was not immediately
obvious to the local people why working most of
the day was better than hunting for a few hours a
week, and the intricacies of personal ownership sometimes
eluded them, as, indeed, they had eluded many
of the newcomers who owed their passage out to that
very shortcoming.  Nevertheless there was some exchange
of learning.  The local people learned that the
big-eared ones that made terrifying noises at night
were called *cows* and the snorting ones *horses*, and
they knew that the man with the gun was inseparable
from the horse.  More familiar animals were now
called *kangaroos* since the newcomers seemed to think
that this would be the native name in Sydney, as it was
farther north.  Sometimes the local people made their
own names for the new animals; rabbits were '*stand-up
ears*,' sheep '*soft feet*.'  Horses were named '*white
man's kangaroo*' (in the Adelaide region) or *yarraman*
which seems to mean 'long teeth.'  European food was
named too: rice was called 'white man's maggots.'

The newcomers began to learn the names of Australian
animals, plants, weapons, and other things
from the first people they met, the natives of the Sydney
area, so that many Aboriginal words in English
are from this region.  The *koala* (for a long time called
*native bear*), the *dingo*, the *wallaroo* (a large brownish-black
kangaroo), the *wallaby* (a small kangaroo),
*waratah* (a red-flowering tree or shrub, the floral emblem
of New South Wales), *boomerang, waddy* (a club
or stick, possibly a Pidgin word from English *wood),
cooee* (a call to attract attention from a distance), and
*corroboree* (Aboriginal singing and dancing), appear
to have this origin.  Sometimes, as with *galah* or *kookaburra*,
names of noisy birds, it is not easy to determine
a source language as several languages provide a plausible
source but perhaps reflect onomatopoeic names
independently arrived at.

Some Aboriginal people accepted invitations to
closer relations with the newcomers.  One named Bennelong
lived for a time with the Governor and later,
wearing the clothing of a British officer, lived in a hut
at what is now Bennelong Point, where the Sydney
Opera House now stands.  A few miles to the north at
Parramatta, Captain Watkin Tench of the Marines encountered
a native whose name he recorded as Yel-lo-mun-dee
(with the stress on the first syllable).  This
presumably explains the oddly named *Yellow Monday
Creek* and thence the names of the cicadas *yellow
Monday* and (in imitation of it, we may presume)
*green Monday*, also known as *greengrocer*.  The plethora
of popular names for kinds of cicadas (others are
*floury miller, double drummer*, and *cherry nose*, also
known as *whisky drinker*) is explained by the popularity
of collecting cicadas among boys, especially round
Sydney.

Opera lovers and boys who collect cicadas commemorate
the names of Bennelong and Yel-lo-mun-dee,
but this beginning did not lead to fruitful cultural
exchange.  Towards the end of the nineteenth century,
nationalism promoted native names such as *koala* and
*kookaburra* rather than *native bear* and *laughing jackass*,
and in the early twentieth century the *Jindy-worobak*
movement in poetry encouraged Aboriginal
themes.  But there is not really much to show for two
hundred years of sharing a land.  It is not surprising
that many Aboriginal people see little cause to celebrate
a much-publicized bicentenary of an intrusion
into their land.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;But opponents of the road insist that the planned extension
will bring even more traffic into the area, as well as
destroy the parkland habitat of wild creatures bellybuttons
such as pileated woodpeckers and red-shouldered hawks.&rdquo;
[*The Potomac Almanac*, Potomac, Maryland, early December 1987.  Submitted by Cornelius Van S. Roosevelt, Washington,
D.C.]


#### EPISTOLA {Harold Mann}

Robert Marvin seems to have &ldquo;dropped a clanger&rdquo;
in dubbing John Donne an anthroponesiast.  Donne
wrote, &ldquo;No man is an island, entire of itself; every man
is a piece of the Continent, a part of the main.&rdquo;  Perhaps,
taking a cue from Edward C. Echols, he could
have been an ananthroponesiast.  For whom the
clanger tolls....

*[Harold Mann, Faversham, Kent]*


#### EPISTOLA {Judith Collins}

I very much enjoyed the article on moroxes.  May I
suggest a candidate for this classification from the
world of corporate mergers and acquisitions: &ldquo;hostile
tender offer&rdquo;?

*[Judith Collins, Arlington, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robin Gill}

With reference to &ldquo;Sinister Dexterity,&rdquo; [XIV, 2] it is
curious that *left-right* can be discussed without reference
to *up-down*, which might be the penultimate
prejudice (*light-dark* is apparently the ultimate one).

Heumann and Wellisch point out that &ldquo;astronomers
have found that a very much larger number of
galaxies spin leftward rather than in a clockwise direction.&rdquo;
What the astronomers do not say is that the
&ldquo;clockwise = rightward, anticlockwise = leftward&rdquo;
nomenclature is an arbitrary one based on an assumption
of superiority for the upperside of the spin span.

As the authors would surely agree, a check for
correspondence of *right* and *correct* alone is only one
measure of left-right prejudice.  For example, while
'right' *migi* and 'correct' *tadashii* are not the same in
Japanese, *migi-ni deru* (literally, 'appear to the right')
means 'to be superior' or 'go above,' 'be second to
none'; a dependable person is *migi-ude* (literally, 'right
arm') or 'right-hand man'; *hidari-leiki* can mean a 'sot'
as well as a 'left-hander,' *hidarimae* (literally, 'left
(side) in front') can mean being on a 'downward
course' or 'in adversity'; and *hidari-malti* or 'anticlockwise'
also means 'an eccentric' or 'screwball.'

And if I can interject a purely personal observation,
Esperanto, while using a different word, *prava,*
for 'correct' than for 'right,' *dekstra*, as was shown in
the authors' list, is surely the most hopelessly prejudicial
of languages.  Not only is 'left' (*maldekstra*) a mere
'not right,' but 'old' is 'not new' (*mal-nova*), 'bad' is
'not good' (*mal-bona*), 'down' is 'not up,' and 'cold' is
'not warm' (*mal-varma*).  I find this disgusting.

*[Robin Gill, Tokyo]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the situation is likely to deteriorate if nothing is
done quickly.&rdquo;  [From an article by Kirk Makin, *The Globe
and Mail*, Winnipeg, 11 November 1987.  Submitted by
Charles C. Bigelow, Winnipeg.]


#### EPISTOLA {David Galef}

Ms. Graham's reflections on foreigners who mangle
English &ldquo;Speaking English&rdquo; [XIV, 1], was entertaining,
if not entirely new: in &ldquo;Japanese English&rdquo; [VII, 3],
I wrote up my own collection of such phrases.  It is
true, as Ms. Graham says, that the Japanese are &ldquo;masters
of the art of seizing a foreign word and alternately
beating it and aerating it until it sounds like a native
product.&rdquo;  Unfortunately, having made that statement,
Ms. Graham goes on to mangle the Japanese loanwords.
*Sumato*, for example, undergoes a sea-change
in crossing the Pacific: it no longer means 'intelligent,'
but 'slim and stylish.'  *Upatodatu* and *gurma foto*—
well, no Japanese could pronounce those words that
way: for one thing, there are no isolated *tu* or *r* sounds
in Japanese.  The words should be *appu tsu deto* and
*gurama foto*.  A little more attention to detail and Ms.
Graham's article would have been really *haikurasu*
'high class.'

*[David Galef, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {John B. Mullen}

As Horace said, &ldquo;Sometimes even Homer nods.&rdquo;  So
also VERBATIM; but twice in one issue [XIII,4]?

The lead article, &ldquo;Folk Etymology...,&rdquo; offers
several questions.  First, listed among words as &ldquo;simply
invented,&rdquo; is *tercel*.  Hardly.  It is a legitimate word for a
class of hawks, used in falconry.

When dealing with invented words, especially in
an article on etymology, it would seem appropriate to
distinguish between words that are truly invented (of
which *Kodak* and *Nylon* are perhaps the most famous)
on the one hand; for these one could truly say that they
have no etymology.  On the other hand are words like
*Xerox* and *Amtrak*, which are invented but have known
roots, often in Greek or Latin, but also in English and
other modern languages.  It's a useful distinction.

The various examples of unusual words and spellings
cited in the article, created and innovative though
they be, are often malapropisms rather than folk etymology—at
least if you understand &ldquo;folk etymology&rdquo;
as meaning 'providing a plausible-sounding explanation
of the derivation of a word or expression that is
totally different from its actual roots and/or original
meaning'; with possibly the addition of '... thereupon
distorting the original words (as in &ldquo;chaise
*lounge*&rdquo;).'  Etymology, folk or genuine, has little to do
with most of the cited expressions.

*[John B. Mullen, Barrington, Illinois]*


#### EPISTOLA {N. Hamment}

Having read Mr. Demy's article on James Joyce
[XIV,1] and the &ldquo;odderkop in the myre,&rdquo; I begin to
wonder if there is yet more to be dug out of the quotation.
In my native Lancashire dialect an *attercop* is a
spider: it can be found in modern Danish also as *edderkop*.
In the same language *myre* means 'ant.'

*[N. Hamment, Bolton, England]*


### OBITER DICTA

1\.  *Advertising*:

(a)  Before your very eyes, another intransitive
verb bites the dust!  If you enjoy watching the language
change, keep your eye on *shop*.  It is an established
transitive verb in British slang, where to *shop* someone
means to betray him to the police or other authorities.
But the Americans, always ready to exploit commercialism,
have taken to removing the *at* from the traditional
*Shop at Gimbels*: now that Gimbels is (*are?*)
gone, we are told to *Shop Macys, Harrods*, etc.  What
have they ever done to me?

(b)  One is easily seduced into believing that the
advertising agency for a new headache remedy must
be delighted that the name of the product seems to be
the 1980s' version of *MadAve*: it is called *Advil(le)*.

(c)  Coors managed to make the wrong choice no
matter how one looks at it.  Their current slogan is
*Coors ages their beer*.  With a name like *Coors*, which
sounds like a plural anyway, there is unlikely to have
been any objection to *Coors age their beer*.  If they
revel in their singularity, then *Coors ages its beer,
Coors ages the beer, Coors ages beer*, or what-have-you—anything
but what they have.

(d)  On a logic-defying note, how about this exchange
in a TV commercial for Genovese Drugstores?:

>SHE: How can we afford to take so many pictures?
>
>HE: At Genovese, the more we take, the more
we save.

(e)  To *marathon, sale-athon*, you might want to
add *Toyotathon*.  On the other hand, you might not.

(f)  Wrangler seem to be having DNA problems.
In their TV commercials aimed at women, in which
&ldquo;special fitting&rdquo; is stressed, they have come up with a
line that ought to arouse the feminists: &ldquo;It's not a better
body you need, it's better genes.&rdquo;

(g)  There are desperate drinkers in the West
Country of England.  An advertisement in *The Sunday
Times* (27 September 1987) offers &ldquo;Sheep Dip—An 8
year old pure Malt Scotch whisky much enjoyed by the
villagers of Oldbury-on-Severn.&rdquo;

2\.  *Insurance/Law Note*: [from *Buck Rogers*, 19 April
1987]

>WILMA: I'll check the engineroom for damages.

3\.  [*Editor's Prejudice Department*]
Don't you wish that TV would

(a)  stop spending so much of its time promoting
itself and the entertainment business in general?  Virtually
everyone interviewed on every talk show (with a
few notable exceptions) is an &ldquo;entertainer.&rdquo;  Where are
the artists, musicians, authors, philosophers, teachers,
historians, craftsmen, physicists, chemists, biologists,
psychologists, etc.?

(b)  notwithstanding the (disconcerting) prospect
of 3D reception in the future, reduce for the time
being the overwhelming frequency of commercials for
Douches, Diapers, and Drugs?  The latest disposable
diaper commercial features *blue urine!*

(c)  eliminate—or, at least, reduce—violence by
making those actors who meet a horrible death on the
tube *stay dead?*

(d)  make toilet-paper manufacturers confine their
sponsorship to shitcoms?

(e)  discontinue (at once) all domestic comedies in
which every five-year-old is a wise-cracking Groucho
Marx?  (On a heartening note, the Bill Cosby show
died a quick rating death in the U.K.)

(f)  forbid Kentucky Fried Chicken from using
chickens on TV to promote their own consumption?

(I'm no vegetarian, but aren't there limits?)

4\.  *Felicitous metaphor*: In an interview concerning
the Reagan/Gorbachev summit scheduled for late
1987, Peter Hobday (BBC4, 25 September 1987) referred
to those hardworking people responsible for the
complex organizations details as *Sherpas*.

5\.  The British Home Office maintains a register of
prisoners who have escaped custody.  According to a
newspaper report, it is called *The Book of Exodus*.
[September 1987]

6\.  *Irish Bull Department:* &ldquo;But how do I know what is
going to be useful or make me laugh until I see it?&rdquo;
[Philip Howard, *The Times*, 28 September 1987]

7\.  The name of the former Conservative Lord Mayor
who urged the city councillors of Birmingham, England,
to license brothels is *Freda Cocks*.  [October
1987]

8\.  In an effort to acquaint London taxi drivers with
the whereabouts of the new Stolport (short take-off
and landing airport) in the East End, Brymon, the
proprietors, are holding a competition for an airport
monicker in rhyming slang.  [October 1987]

9\.  *Librarians, Thesaurus Compilers, and Other Cataloguers
Please Copy:* According to *The Times* City
Diary [15 October 1987], the Sheffield City Council
lists cemeteries and crematoria under RECREATION DEPARTMENT;
Wirral County Council lists them under
LEISURE (along with parks, museums, and public
baths); the London Stock Exchange lists funeral directors
under FREIGHT AND TRANSPORT.

10\.  In October 1987, the British Independent Broadcasting
Authority, several Tory MPs, executives of
Channel 4, and several prominent literary figures, including
Auberon Waugh, Harold Pinter, Andrew Motion,
and Peter Levi, became embroiled in a dispute
concerning the banning from a reading, scheduled for
November on Channel 4, of &ldquo;v.,&rdquo; a poem by Tony
Harrison on the grounds that it is &ldquo;a torrent of abscene
language&rdquo; and a &ldquo;stream of four-letter filth.&rdquo;  It does
seem curious that Great Britain and America, which
make so much of the issue of the freedom of the press
(and, one must assume, other media), still suffer from
periodic attacks of puritan logomancy, while countries
that have never made such a fuss over such matters
appear to be surviving quite well, unsullied by pornography
on TV and, in the case of Italy, unaffected by
the election to Parliament of &ldquo;La Cicciolina&rdquo; (Ilona
Staller), a star of pornographic films.  In his leading
article in *The Times* [19 October], Bernard Levin
quite properly (if that is the right word) laces into the
Yahoos.  Harrison's poem, according to report, is an
account by a Leeds United skinhead on finding graffiti
sprayed on his parents' gravestone.  As no one has yet
come up with a cleaning material successful in removing
graffiti, perhaps the only way to get rid of it is to
legislate it away.  The furor has had one desirable effect:
if the reading is broadcast, Channel 4 can be
assured of the widest possible audience, even though a
significantly large percentage of the viewers is likely to
consist of prurient prudes.

11\.  All Belgium is divided into two parts; in the northern,
the official language is Flemish, in the southern,
French.  In the Flemish village of Fouron, quite close
to the border and at the eastern (Dutch) border, it has
been reported that the mayor, who, by law, must be
able to speak Flemish, was dismissed because he failed
a language proficiency examination.  Countering this
action, the people of Fouron reelected him.  The law
being what it is, he was required to take the examination
again—and again, and again—in all, he refused
nine times to submit.  As a result (the details were
sketchy), in October the entire Belgian government
was compelled to resign, and the problem was not
expected to be resolved till the end of 1987, when elections
were again held.

12\.  &ldquo;[A] layer of unskilled yahoos devoid of either intellectual
or spiritual depth&rdquo; is the way Sir Geoffrey
Elton, regius professor of modern history at Cambridge
University, characterized the coming generation
if the government were to allow Latin to seek its own
level in the national curriculum.  The present requirement
is for &ldquo;a modern language&rdquo;; the Secretary of
State for Education and Science, Mr. Kenneth Baker,
plans to change this to &ldquo;a foreign language&rdquo; or &ldquo;a
modern foreign or classical language.&rdquo;  By the time
they have sorted out what &ldquo;a modern classical language&rdquo;
might be, it will probably include standard
English.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Iranian interpreter Wahid Gordji... is wanted for
questioning in some bombings by French police.&rdquo;  [Caption
under a photograph in the *Chicago Tribune*, 27 July 1987.
Submitted by Robert N. Feinstein, Downers Grove, Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Millions of others were rehabilitated posthumously.&rdquo;
[From an article about Russia by Barry Schweid in *The
Patriot Ledger*, Quincy, Massachusetts, 14 February 1987.
Submitted by Dr. Adam G. N. Moore, Boston.]

### CORRIGENDUM

In Walter P. Armstrong, Jr.'s article, &ldquo;Sherlock
Holmes Adds a Word,&rdquo; [XIV,3], reference was made to
&ldquo;the centenary of the publication of the first Sherlock
Holmes story....&rdquo;  The article was submitted in 1987,
when the centenary was celebrated; there is no convenient
English word for '101st anniversary,' so some
other change should have been made, but wasn't.  *Nostra
culpa*.

## Paring Pairs No. 29

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Record work and create star of first magnitude.  
(b). Castle in the air.  
(c). Look briefly through cravat collection.  
(d). Entrance for wandering opera star.  
(e). Churchman's debts to second-hand experiences.  
(f). Blemish from being borne in Pullman.  
(g). Aptly named country of angry people.  
(h). Coin is something at a great distance.  
(i). Nonitalic (!) words inspire sentimental twitch.  
(j). St. Andrew's bunker for athletic supporters?  
(k). Gypsy man's horseplay leads to love.  
(l). What one must pay today even for a doghouse.  
(m). Rambunctious western without music.  
(n). The least you can expect from Little Mother.  
(o). Fake ache from the bubbly?  
(p). Unimportant midget's coffin.  
(q). Scented French chamberpot sounds mixed up.  
(r). Allow me to say the swindle is over.  
(s). Chance's partners become one always in bad odor.  
(t). Lovers entwine to create woman's plant.  
(u). Fertile lorry source.  
(v). American beauty is up to it.  
(w). Recognize information about current electrical state.  
(x). Purchase!  
(y). Hip joint.  
(z). Clupeid delicacy arranged on this before fiery furnace?  

(1). A.  
(2). A.C.  
(3). Antic.  
(4). Beer.  
(5). Berth.  
(6). Butt.  
(7). Buy.  
(8). Can.  
(9). Con.  
(10). Cur.  
(11). Diva.  
(12). Done.  
(13). Dun.  
(14). Ever.  
(15). Far.  
(16). Garden.  
(17). Gate.  
(18). Her.  
(19). Hinge.  
(20). Horse.  
(21). House.  
(22). I.O.U.s  
(23). Ire.  
(24). Jock's.  
(25). Knowledge.  
(26). Land.  
(27). Light.  
(28). Mark.  
(29). Mini.  
(30). Mum.  
(31). Oleander.  
(32). Opus.  
(33). Pain.  
(34). Paris.  
(35). Play.  
(36). Po.  
(37). Rack.  
(38). Rent.  
(39). Rom.  
(40). Roman.  
(41). Rose.  
(42). Scan.  
(43). Shad.  
(44). Sham.  
(45). Small.  
(46). Stinker.  
(47). Thing.  
(48). Tic.  
(49). Ties.  
(50). Trap.  
(51). Truck.  
(52). Vicar.  
(53). Word.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those received
in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A.  *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please*.

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 28

(a). Salary for Siamese becomes capital in Taiwan?  (47,36) Thai Pay.  
(b). Def.: (of a Chinese) to get drunk.  (47,51,33) Thai Won On.  
(c). Frowning, morbid fighter-plane pilot.  (17,1) Grim Ace.  
(d). Bury the fresco between the institutions.  (22,27) Inter Mural.  
(e). Caviar vessel.  (41,7) Roe Boat.  
(f). Iraqi street woman's father?  (5,13) Bag Dad.  
(g). Polluted, wealthy people (15,44) Effluent Society.  
(h). Fat farm.  (18,12) Hippie Commune.  
(i). Computer connection for grain shipments.  (11,38) Cereal Port.  
(j). Nude film-goer.  (26,8) Movie Buff.  
(k). That's a no-no.  (14,28) Double Negative.  
(l). Animated shorts.  (20,35) Hot Pants.  
(m). Will he inherit his father's fishy odor?  (45,3) Sole Air.  
(n). Little devil to wander about and get better.  (21,43) Imp Rove.  
(o). Policy of Doc's memo.  (39,30) Quay Note.  
(p). Productive distribution of hereditary character.  (16,40) Gene Ration.  
(q). Benedict Arnold in the Big Apple?  (29,46) Northern Spy.  
(r). Plastic surgeon is the expert.  (24,23) Knows Job.  
(s). Tainted caviar in Hyde Park.  (42,41) Rotten Roe.  
(t). *The Naughty Sombrero*, a German spa?  (4,19) Bad Homburg.  
(u). Makes the stool move smoothly.  (9,32) Caster Oil.  
(v). Patchy sidemen.  (6,2) Band Aids.  
(w). Appealing fruit of your labors.  (34,37) Paring Pears.  
(x). Post partum for a man.  (25,10) Male Caul.  
(y). Pitcher ends his career.  (50,48) Winds Up.  
(z). Lachrymatory.  (49,7) Wail Boat.


#### EPISTOLA {Hugh Grant Allamson}

I refer to the article, &ldquo;Sherlock Holmes Adds a
Word,&rdquo; by Walter P. Armstrong, Jr., [XIV,3] and particularly
to his quotation from Dame Helen Gardner
quoting, in turn, Baring Gould.

It is believed locally—or certainly was by me
when I lived in that part of the world—that the bog
called &ldquo;Grimpen Mire&rdquo; was based on Foxtor Mire.  I do
not think that the term &ldquo;Grimspound Bog&rdquo; is used: this
bog is simply called Grimspound, whereas Foxtor Mire
is always referred to as such.  Perhaps &ldquo;Grimpen Mire&rdquo;
is a composite.

I believe that the story was written when Sir Arthur
was staying at Prince Hall, just along the road
from Two Bridges.  Foxtor Mire is much nearer Prince
Hall than is Grimspound, being only a couple of miles
or so from Prince Hall, whereas Grimspound is some
distance beyond Postbridge.

*[Hugh Grant Allamson, Hove, Sussex]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Introduces wrestling holds in professional matches (13)  
9\. Troubadour almost makes toast (5)  
10\. Nude has to sing boating song (9)  
11\. Vitamin C is ordered to retain smile in part? (7)  
12\. Lioness tearing parts of shoes (7)  
13\. Careless among merry bunch of stars?  (6)  
15\. Signs of maturity covered by newspapers (8)  
18\. Morally weak period of time before New Testament (8)  
19\. Eight slips covering top of one hamper (3-3)  
22\. Kind of exercise drill held by spy group, in retrospect (7)  
24\. Bunk made with energy and two trees (7)  
26\. Charms in appearance on stage (9)  
27\. Imperial Beer overturned (5)  
28\. Spy with an accent returned some silverware (13)  

**Down**

1\. Taking chances, hide in outfit (7)  
2\. Snapshot captures an alarm (5)  
3\. Nymphomaniacal love poem crossed out (9)  
4\. Future nun drunkenly holds up mug (6)  
5\. Stories about stray dogs (8)  
6\. Gems from ring put before chums (5)  
7\. Call attention to minor in possession of marijuana (9)  
8\. Last of college dons doesn't eat in banquets (6)  
14\. Torn frilly fabric evaluated (9)  
16\. Mossy plant spreads to necropolis's center (9)  
17\. Family member grabs frozen vehicle (8)  
18\. Phone user is again set up (6)  
20\. Hex cast on porter's pants (7)  
21\. Kid with time to make cups and saucers (3,3)  
23\. Carries empty into saloons (5)  
25\. Non-Hispanic wandering along (5)  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Coin—$10 gold embezzled.&rdquo;  [Classified advertisement
in the *Orlando Sentinel*, 21 December 1987.  Submitted by
Paul Pink, Orlando, Florida.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. P(AGE)ANTRY.  
6\. CAR(A)T.  
9\. E(POC)H.  (HE, COP rev.).  
10\. C(LAIM)ABLE (MAIL anag.).  
11\. TRI(VI)AL.  
12\. NEEDLES(s).  
13\. FIG(H)TS (GIFTS anag.).  
14\. TO(READ)OR (ROOT rev.).  
17\. IMP-ACTED.  
19\. PA(USE)D.  
22\. AD(HERE)D.  
24\. EN(EM)IES.  (SEINE, ME rev.).  
26\. SECTIONAL (anag.).  
27\. T-HEFT.  
28\. ENSUE (hidden).  
29\. SA(MAR-I)TAN.  

**Down**

1\. PLEA-T.  
2\. GRO-WING-UP.    
3\. AT-HEIST.  
4\. TAC-KLE (rev.).  
5\. YEARN FOR (anag.).  
6\. COM(PET)E.  
7\. RE(B)EL.  
8\. TREA(SURE)D.  
13\. FRICASSEE (hidden).  
15\. DISS(I'D)ENT.  
16\. P(END)ANTS.  
18\. CAR-MINE.  
20\. A-BETTOR.  
21\. BED-LAM.  
23\. HACKS (two meanings).  
25\. S(IT)-IN.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Fetus taken from womb to perform surgery.&rdquo;  [Headline
in *Petoskey (Michigan) News-Review*, 7 October 1986.  Submitted
by David L. Miles, Charlevoix, Michigan.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_Spring_1988)