--- 
title: "VOL XIV, No 1 [Summer, 1987]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Go to the Dictionary, Thou Sluggard
*Nicholas G. Demy, East Hampton, New York*

In the Winter, 1987, issue of VERBATIM, Arthur
Plotnik bemoans the state of arts and letters in
which the words have gone stale and flat.  Scientific
language in contrast, he avers, is sonorous and sparkling.

Beware the scientist as well as the humanist who
casually uses a word without exhausting all the nuances
of its etymology before choosing the one best
suited to his meaning.  He need not be agonizingly
Flaubertian, but he should take care that no infelicitous
notion creeps into print, for once it does, it becomes
a prisoner for life.  An example is in a passage
from Plotkin's article:

>Subatomic particles receive such whimsical
names as *quarks, gluons, gypsies, truths,* and
*beauties*.  As not quite everybody knows, physicist
Murray Gell-Mann borrowed *quark* from
James Joyce's phrase &ldquo;Three quarks for Muster
Mark&rdquo; in *Finnegans Wake*.  In German, *quark*
means 'curds, cream cheese, trash, rubbish, or
nonsense.'

... Or 'dung.'

Just about every physics text states Gell-Mann's
source for *quark* and gives 'cheese curds' for its dictionary
meaning.  *Finnegans Wake* is a Babel of tongues, a
thing of rags and patches from the languages of the
arts and sciences in a linguistic meld of syllables he
called &ldquo;solubles.&rdquo;  These &ldquo;solubles&rdquo; have as many quirks
of meaning as quarks have of charm, color, flavor,
strangeness, ups-and-downs in physics.  This topsi-turviness
of physics and humanities came about in
1963 when theoretical physicists were debating the existence
of a putative subatomic particle which might
be the fundamental building block of the universe.
Murray Gell-Mann was among a group of physicists at
Columbia University who had gathered to discuss this
strange particle when he used an odd word—*quark*—
(rhymed with *pork*) as a provisional name for it.  Being
a fan of *Finnegans Wake* and of a whimsical turn of
mind which delighted in the vagaries of not only physics
but of language, he thought the strange sound of
*quark* appropriate for a strange particle.  He described
the events leading to the final adoption of the name
thus: the word, he said, seemed appropriate as

>... a strange sound for something peculiar.
When I was going to publish the idea eight
months later or whenever it was, late in sixty-three,
I was paging through *Finnegans Wake* as
I often do trying to understand bits and
pieces—you know how you read *Finnegans
Wake*—and I came across &ldquo;Three quarks for
Muster Mark.&rdquo;  I said &ldquo;That's it!&rdquo;  Joyce's word
rhymes with *bark* but it was close enough to my
funny word. ...  The whole thing is just a gag.
It's a reaction against pretentious scientific
language.

His &ldquo;reaction against pretentious scientific language&rdquo;
led him unwittingly into one of Joyce's linguistic
traps.  In the Brideship episode of *Finnegans Wake*,
Tristan and Isolde have just had their *Liebestod*, and
as the vessel approaches the harbor, it is greeted by the
jeering seagulls who sing a derisive song for the cuckolded
monarch: &ldquo;Three quarks for Muster Mark.&rdquo;
Joyce slyly knew what he was doing with the word
*quark*.  He said he could justify the use of every word
in *Finnegans Wake*, that there wasn't a single serious
line in it, that he had put so many linguistic puzzles in
it, the professors would be busy for centuries figuring
out what he had meant....

Anyone who has read Joyce's letters in German,
French, and Italian will be struck by two things: first,
that he could use the language with academic ease and
precision; and second that he could also use the lowlife
language of the vulgar his sharp ear picked up in
the taverns and gutters of Austria, Italy, France, and
Switzerland.  This is the scatologic material he used in
*Ulysses* and *Finnegans Wake*, and his method was a
deliberate melding of &ldquo;solubles&rdquo; into a fakesimilar of
the originals.  Nora Barnacle reported hearing him
laugh uproariously in his room during the composition
of *Finnegans Wake*.  The same tale is told by Phillipe
Soupalt in describing a typical day in Joyce's life in
*Portrait of the Artist in Exile*:

>No one in my knowledge has subjugated his life
to his work more than James Joyce did.  Not
without suffering, which I have witnessed, he
accepted that perpetual slavery, a slavery of
body and spirit.  I see him again during one of
those days I spent with him, tortured by a
word, almost rebelliously constructing a framework,
questioning his characters, extracting a
vision from some music, throwing himself exhaustedly
on a couch, the better to hear that
phrase which was about to be born, about to
burst into light.  Then for an hour or more, a
deep silence, broken by laughs.

This was the resolution we see in two hundred
puns in eight different languages on a single page,
laboriously and too often contrivedly constructed.  This
is the method Joyce used to put a fizz into the language,
a method admired by no less a linguist than
George Steiner who said

>... his work, more than any since Milton, recalls
to the English ear the wide magnificence of
its legacy.  It marshalls great battalions of words,
calling back to the ranks words long since asleep
or rusted, and recruiting new ones by stress of
imaginative need.

There is an Uncertainty Principle in language as
well as in physics.  This applies only to the meaning of
Joyce's words, not his intent and performance.  When it
comes to a choice of two, three, or more meanings, it
is always a safe bet to choose the slyest, the funniest,
and most scatologic one.  There are almost 5,000 German
words in *Finnegans Wake*, many of them sly disguises
for vulgarity.  Joyce had roistered in German-speaking
taverns and had picked up the idioms there.
He knew Goethe's *Faust* and has based the Circe episode
in *Ulysses* on the *Walpurgisnacht*.  Also, in the
Prologue in Heaven, the Lord and Mephisto are having
their amiable colloquy, with Mephisto jeering the
Lord's servile creature—man—that long-legged grasshopper
who sticks his curious nose into every pile of
dung.  In the original, it is:

>In jeden Quark begraebt er seine Nase.

Joyce indubitably had the idiomatic meaning of *quark*
in mind, given as *dung* in most translations (Harvard
Classics, for one).  *None* gives 'cheese.'  Goethe was as
earthy a poet as Joyce was a scatologic one, and both
knew a grasshopper rummaged a dung heap, not a
cheese pot.

In the episode of the Ondt and the Gracehoper,
Joyce says the Gracehoper had his &ldquo;odderkop in the
myre.&rdquo;  The Lord only knows how many meanings lie
in *odder* in addition to 'more odd'—'other,' 'odor,' 'udder,'
'utter,' and puns on these—but *kop (Kopf)* in German
means 'head,' so we may assume the Gracehoper
(Joyce) had his head in the mire.  Certainly, he had a
nose for not only the curiosity Mephisto jeered but also
for the odor of *Quark*—dung.

Goethe gets to use the word again in the Entombment
scene of Part II, lines 11743-4:

>Irrlichter fort! Du, leuchte noch so stark,  
Du bleibst, gehaucht, ein ekler Gellert-Quark.

The sum of this is that a will-o'-the-wisp, when
grasped, is as disgusting as the feel of a clammy, sticky,
gelatinous mass of frog's eggs.  Cheese, no; something
slimily disgusting, yes.

German literature provides overkill for the idiomatic
use of *Quark*.  A notorious scatologic poet named
Jakob Lenz was a contemporary of Goethe in Weimar,
from which he was banished for his scurrilous verses.
He wrote a series of love lyrics to Friedericke Brion,
famous for her attachment to Goethe, which were for
a long time attributed to Goethe.  Lenz had
neurosyphilis from which he died at 44 in Moscow.  In
one of his dejected periods he wrote:

>Lieben, hassen, streben, zittern,  
Hoffen, zagen bis ins Mark,  
Kann das Leben zwar verbittern,  
Aber ohne sie waers Quark.

Allowing for the treachery of translation, there is
no escaping Lenz's burden of thought:

>To love, to hate, to strive, to jitter,  
To hope, yet to the winds be flung,  
Indeed can make our life seem bitter,  
Though life without them would be dung.

From what I know of the quirks of Joyce's mind,
the cloacal physiology of gulls, and the onomatopoieic
meaning of *Quark* in German, I believe Joyce intended
the gulls to jettison a cloacal cargo on the already
crapped-on monarch.

H. G. Wells, in reviewing Joyce's *Portrait* in 1916,
wrote that Joyce had a &ldquo;cloacal obsession&rdquo;; Stanislaus
Joyce asked his brother &ldquo;Isn't your art in danger of
becoming a sanitary science ... everything dirty seems
to have the same irresistible attraction for you that cow-dung
has for flies.&rdquo;  And dainty Ezra Pound complained
to Joyce that he could have drawn Bloom quite effectively
&ldquo;without such detailed treatment of the dropping
feces.&rdquo;  An example of this obsession is in one of Bloom's
interior monologues, speculating existentially on the
composition of the universe and concluding it was made
of dung.

Well—it took a voyage to the moon to prove that
the moon wasn't made of green cheese, but the books
on nuclear physics still give 'cheese' as the meaning for
*quark*.  Ironically, at least in etymology, Bloom's cosmogony
may be right after all if the quark is the building
block of the universe.

Poets can be forgiven for the mistaken use of facts,
as when Keats put stout Cort&eacute;s silent on a peak in
Darien and when Henley made himself a King in Babylon
toying with a Christian slave; but scientists must
have factual rigor, not poetic flights.  Whether in science
or the humanities, we must still say with Voltaire
(by way of Socrates) &ldquo;If you wish to discourse with me,
first define your terms.&rdquo;

If the humanities wish to recharge their words
with fizz (the ultimate is Joyce in *Finnegans Wake*),
they should go directly to an etymologic dictionary,
not to the taxonomic sciences to discover the heady
truth in Emerson's &ldquo;Every word was once a poem.&rdquo;  Not
for nothing do the Germans call poetry a *Dichtung*—a
'condensation.'  For the scientists it is a cinch: he simply
borrows from the humanities as Gell-Mann did.  Sometimes
it is felicitous, sonorous, and precise—Linnaeus
at his best.  But science is a Johnny-Come-Lately on the
linguistic scene.  Once man discovered language some
half-a-million years ago, he deposited his experiences
and history in words, and every word was then a
poem.  Abstractions didn't come into language until
the dawn of conscience when such social artifacts having
only human values and no objective correlative in
nature were coined—such &ldquo;non-things&rdquo; as &ldquo;justice,
freedom, honor, good, evil, true, false, love, cruelty,
compassion, gods.&rdquo;

Three fourths of the words in Roget's *Thesaurus*
are abstractions, and it is these which are fuzzy
though fraught with unnamed emotions.  Western society
is dominated by the phenomenological, verbal, analytic
left brain of the scientists; it is only when the
noumenological, imaginative, synthesizing, poetic
right brain of the humanist bodies forth the picture of
a *thing* or of an airy nothing that the left brain provides
a local habitation and a name.

Writing is a creative art; no word has been written
or spoken, read or heard twice in exactly the same
way.  Joyce had Vico's definition of creativity in mind
when he wrote *Finnegans Wake*, namely, that creativity
is nothing more than the reworking by the imagination
of what is already in the memory.  It is the
ability to see and hear more than meets the eye and
ear.  This was the last skill to be taught to the philosopher-guardians
of Plato's *Republic*.  &ldquo;The synoptical
man,&rdquo; he says in Huntington Cairns's *Legal Philosophy
from Plato to Hegel*, &ldquo;the man who has a conspectus of
knowledge is the philosopher; and the man who is not
synoptical, who cannot see two subjects in their relations
is no philosopher.&rdquo;

Take it from this humanist/scientist: this is the
only way to put the fizz back into a fresh vocabulary—whether
literary or technical.

## Way To Go, Aubie!
*Brian Cahill, Ottawa*

On July 29, 1983, Homer nodded and the following
appeared in the Home News section of *The
Times* [London]:

>A father jailed for savagely beating a man who
was prosecuted for sexually molesting his young
handicapped daughter had his six-month sentence
halved by the Court of Appeal yesterday.

Despite the repellent subject matter, I pounced with
some satisfaction on this clumsily constructed sentence.
A Canadian just beginning a two-month visit to
Great Britain, I thought I had discovered the first of a
reasonable number of examples of bad writing to be
found in even-the best of popular British publications,
examples which I intended to bring back to Canada
and fling in the face of a supercilious member of the
British diplomatic service, Sir John Ford.  The flinging
would, of course, have had to be metaphorical and,
indeed, *in absentia*.  Sir John Ford had been British
High Commissioner to Canada during a period in
1981 when rather delicate negotiations were going on
about the more-than-symbolic move of Canada's written
Constitution from London to Ottawa.  His major
contribution to the spirit of the negotiations had been
a public remark to the effect that a certain document
could not have been leaked from *his* office because, as
any fool could see, the English was so bad that only a
Canadian could have written it.

You may have noted that I described Sir John as a
member of the British diplomatic service—not as a
diplomat.  His subsequent fate is not fully known, but
he was quickly yanked back to London and for a while
was believed to be hanging by his thumbs in the
Tower.

It is against this background that I hope that
readers of VERBATIM will understand why a Canadian
journalist with some experience in speech writing and
the preparation of &ldquo;position papers&rdquo; on public issues,
should at that time have fallen with glad cries upon
any evidence that the usage of English in Great Britain
was at least as bad as in Canada or elsewhere in the
world.

I had no illusions at all about the sorry state of
English in Canada.  On the morning that I had left
Ottawa for London, the *Toronto Globe and Mail*,
which regards itself as the best-written newspaper in
Canada and may be right, had reported:

>Dawson, the oldest of eight children of a career
U.S. Army man who never married his mother,
grew up in South Miami....

And on the plane I had been wading through an official
document on the Canadian transportation industry
which was full of sentences like:

>If Canada is to achieve its full economic potential
the performance of the transportation system
must be optimized for people and goods to
move at the lowest achievable total cost.

I had this altered to read &ldquo;Canadian prosperity depends
upon the low-cost movement of goods and people,&rdquo;
muttering the while about the kind of bloated
bureaucratese that gave people like Sir John the occasion
to put us down but still convinced that standards
of English were falling everywhere in the world, including
Great Britain.  And I was also convinced that I
would find good evidence of this in *The Times* and
other British publications.

It is with some embarrassment that I must now
report that after the first find there was no other.  Daily
reading of *The Times* over the next eight weeks as
well as less frequent but careful scanning of other
newspapers and publications, including *Punch* and
*The Economist*, produced not one other example of
really bad writing, in the sense of *unintentional* misuse
of the language.  Some amusing typographical errors,
of course.  A shocking amount of fatuity and
stupidity.  Platitudes by the ream and, in the dreadful
London tabloids and their provincial imitators, lying
sensationalism carried to the point of criminal irresponsibility.
But no further examples of the &ldquo;tin ear&rdquo;
for language—the scrambled syntax, the confident
use of the wrong word, the pretentious redundancy—which
is so characteristic of popular and
official writing in Canada, as in the United States,
these days.

Nothing, for instance, to match this classic Canadian
Press item moved out of Edmonton, Alberta, a
few years ago and carried, without editing, in major
dailies across the country:

>The controversial movie, Without A Stitch, has
been termed a framework on which to hang explicit
sexual acts by Crown Prosecutor Richard
Anthony.

Or this, from a June 30, 1980 editorial in the *Globe
and Mail*:

>'I do not trust this man,' Ayatollah Khomaini
said, leaving ajar no plausible hope that the Secretary
General and the Ayatollah would meet.

Or this from a February 25, 1981, speech by Robert
Blair, a successful and influential Western Canadian
businessman opposed to &ldquo;separatist&rdquo; sentiment in that
part of Canada:

>In fierceness of purpose that there be a balanced
and distinguishable Canada by continuation of
Confederation, there is an abundance in the
West.  I honestly feel that, absent of very unusual
provocation, there is no depth of support
for separation....  What is present is a sense of
demand for fairness within Canada.

The mangled syntax, wrong word usage, and redundancy
illustrated above are, I am afraid, typical of
contemporary popular writing in Canada.  Why this
should be so I am not sure.  Explanations I have listened
to include inadequacies in the educational system,
chain ownership of newspapers, proximity to the
United States, the influence of television, and a low-fiber,
high-fat diet.  Perhaps each of these does play
some part.  But why then did I find popular English to
be so much better in Great Britain?  They, too, have
problems with mass education, newspaper chains,
U.S. cultural penetration, and television.  Indeed,
some people, including Edwin Newman, say that a
universal rot is well under way and that it is only a
matter of time, as Newman wrote in *Edwin Newman
on Language* (Warner Books), before &ldquo;America will be
the death of English&rdquo; in Great Britain and all over the
world.

My experience in the summer of '83 causes me,
however, to disagree with this gloomy prognostication.
On August 30, 1983, shortly after my return to Canada,
I came across the following by Michael Valpy,
then an editorial page columnist for the *Globe and
Mail*:

>Allan MacEachen, Hecate-like, whispers a beguiling
exorcism into the trembling ears of the
Liberal Party's platform committee on the weekend,
48 hours before two by-election votes,
neither of which the party has a hope of winning.
No need to be spooked by Brian Mulroney,
the Deputy Prime Minister incants.  Right.  Not
until Birnam wood comes to Dunsinane hill.
Besides the Prime Minister's Office has moved to
a political war-footing.

This pretentious mishmash was intended, as far as I
can make out, as an elegantly literate put-down of a
Canadian politician and his party.

Contrast it with a similarly intentioned paragraph
by Auberon Waugh in the London *Sunday Telegraph*
of June 19, 1983:

>Neil Kinnock would seem to be the best choice
to lead Labour towards its historic destiny as a
minor tourist attraction.  He gives the impression
that he believes most of the rubbish he talks and
it is certainly not his fault that he has the face
of an incontinent schoolboy.

Well, my sympathies are socialist, but Way to go,
Aubie!

Call me dreamer, if you will, but I hold to the
faith that good writing will eventually drive out bad.
Anywhere.  And in that faith I foresee Waugh triumphing
over Valpy.  My research has indicated that good
English still flourishes in Great Britain and to me this
presages the resurrection rather than the death of English
in America.


#### EPISTOLA {Jim Ramsay}

I was enthralled by the article on cattle brands by
Maxey Brooke [XIII, 3], especially the simple and elegant
solution which changed XIT (&ldquo;Ten in Texas&rdquo;) to
&ldquo;Starcross.&rdquo;

I am sure I join other armchair rustlers in offering
further brand switches that can be made from XIT.
The cattle I liberated from &ldquo;Ten in Texas&rdquo; would bear
the following brands:

The names of the ranches where I would graze
these ill-gotten herds are, of course, &ldquo;Fish Eye,&rdquo; &ldquo;Fission
Chips,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Cow Pie.&rdquo;

In closing, I would note that the pastime of discussing
brands and brand switching is not limited to
cow people.  My colleagues and I at Philip Morris
U.S.A., the domestic tobacco subsidiary of Philip Morris
Companies Inc., often address these subjects.

*[Jim Ramsay, New York City]*

## Whither Thou, Thee, Thy and Thine
*Dan E. Soyka, Brownsville, Texas*

&ldquo;Doest *thou*, Michael, take this woman to be
*thy* lawful wedded wife...?&rdquo;  This antique
wedding formula was spoken by a justice of the peace
at our son's marriage.  I marveled at this legal usage
here in Texas in this day and age.  That unexpected use
of the archaic pronouns stirred up all of the old difficulties
caused by the lack of a distinct pronoun for the
second person singular.

The forms of *thou* are termed archaic by
*Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary
of the English Language Unabridged*:  &ldquo;In this dictionary,
the label *archaic* is affixed to words and senses
relatively common in earlier times but infrequently
used in present-day English.&rdquo;  *M-W III's* entry for *thou*
indicates that its usage prevailed into the 17th century
as the appropriate form of address to an intimate
friend or a person of lower social status.  The first act
of *King Lear* provides ample examples of the use of the
plural form of the second person pronoun (*you*) when
responding to the kingly first person plural (*we*).  The
*Oxford English Dictionary* says that the practice of
using *you* to superiors was later extended to equals.  If,
therefore, each individual is conceived of today in the
second person plural, will usage eventually dictate the
elimination of first and third person singular pronouns,
too?  Will we then bewail:

>Alack for *I* and *me*,  
Along with *thou* and *thee*,  
Farewell to *he* and *she*,  
For now each one is *we*  
And so, of course, we also say  
That *he* or *she* or *it* is *they!*

That *reductio ad absurdum* aside, I do know that
for me, as probably for many who have had an
intensely religious upbringing, or have taught or read
widely in English literature, or both, the archaic second
person singular does not seem so terribly archaic
in either sacred or secular contexts.  Allen Walker Read
may have supplied the reason in his article, &ldquo;Dictionary,&rdquo;
in the *Encyclopaedia Britannica*, 1976.  He
writes of the dangers of affixing labels such as obsolete
and archaic &ldquo;because some speakers have long memories
and might use old words very naturally.&rdquo;  However,
an effort to restore the use of a distinct second
person singular pronoun would be, I know, as vain as
crusading against the pre-Galilean imagery of the sun
rising and setting.  I can only bemoan the awkward
consequences.

There are persistent problems caused by the current
modern English practice.  None is more evident
than the controversies over the translation of the Bible
into English.  Most modern versions, and there are
many, succeed in rendering the ancient documents
into reasonably vernacular English, but some stop
short of applying the plural pronoun *you* to the deity
and to Christ.  Strangely enough, historically speaking,
this practice seems to contradict the origins of applying
the plural pronoun *you* to a superior, such as a
king.  Could an unspoken fear of blasphemy underlie
the hesitation of those translators who use *Thou* to the
deity?  There is an amusing citation in the *OED* under
the entry *you*, verb transitive: &ldquo;1675 H. More in R.
Ward *Life* (1710) No Man will *You God*, but will use
the pronoun *Thou* to him.&rdquo;  The two most respected
versions that do make this exception for the deity are
the *Revised Standard Version* and *The New English
Bible*.  Other respected versions fearlessly follow modern
English practice, confident, I suppose, that God's
English is up to date and that He will understand the
form *you*, as it applies to Him, as singular.  Among the
latter versions are the American Bible Society's *Good
News Bible*, the Roman Catholic *New American
Bible*, Tyndale's *Living Bible*, and the New York Bible
Society's *New International Version (NIV)*.  The controversy
is encapsulated in a curious volume published
by Zondervan, entitled, *The New International Version
Interlinear Greek-English New Testament*.
Within its covers is waged a Swiftean &ldquo;Battle of the
Books&rdquo; between the *NIV* translators and the interlinear
translator, the Reverend Alfred Marshall.

*NIV* boldly thrusts: &ldquo;As for the omission of the
pronouns *thou, thee* and *thine* in reference to the
Deity, the translators felt that to retain these archaisms
(along with the strange verb forms, such as *doest*,
*wouldest*, and *hadst*) would have violated their aim of
faithful translation.  The Greek text uses no special
pronouns to express reverence for God and Christ.
Scripture is not enhanced by keeping, as a special
mode of addressing Deity, forms that in the days of
the King James Bible were simply the regular pronouns
and verbs used in everyday speech, whether
referring to God or to man.&rdquo;

The Reverend Mr. Marshall counters by excoriating
the practice of employing the ambiguous *you*.  He
concedes the modern forms of verbs, &ldquo;but the older *ye*
has been retained for the nominative (*you* for the
oblique case) of the second person plural pronoun; and
*thou (thee)*, not *you*, for the second person singular.  It
is a loss that in modern English these differences have
disappeared; so unaccustomed are we now to them
that even the average reader of the Authorized Version
misses the point of Luke *ch*. 22, *v* 31.  The loss is even
more to be regretted when God is addressed as *You*.&rdquo;

The point of the reference to the verse from the
King James Version is germane to this discussion.

>v.31 And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold,  
Satan hath desired to have you, that he may  
sift you as wheat;
>
>v.32 But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail  
not; and when thou art converted,  
strengthen thy brethren.

The Greek pronoun for *you* in v. 31 is plural.  Marshall
is pointing out that modern readers are so accustomed
to *you* as singular or plural that they fail to
realize that the Lord is addressing Simon on behalf of
all His disciples, not Simon alone.

The *Revised Standard Version*, which here uses
*you* unmodified in both verses, footnotes *v*. 31: &ldquo;The
Greek word for you is plural; in *v*. 32 it is singular,&rdquo;
The *NIV* translates *v*. 31 *you all*: Berkeley uses *all of
you*; the *Living Bible* misses the distinction.

Naturally, whichever version is used in the liturgy
of the various denominations, antique forms may or
may not be on the lips of today's worshipers.  However,
I have yet to run into a modern version of the
Lord's Prayer in public worship.  The good old &ldquo;Our
Father which art in heaven; hallowed be *thy*
name...&rdquo; rises with vigor and spontaneity.  I doubt
that there is a more conspicuous battlefield of language,
nor one fought with as much rancor, as that of
Bible translation.

The controversy over second person pronouns is by
no means limited to Bible translating.  If usage eased
quietly into change, as Robert Henry Robins writes in
his article, &ldquo;Language,&rdquo; also in the *Britannica*, this
usually happens &ldquo;without any direct volition on the
part of speakers as regards the language itself.&rdquo;  He
goes on: &ldquo;More deliberate, however, have been various
attempts at preserving the purity of a language, at
least for some uses, or at arresting the processes of
change.&rdquo;

Simeon Potter in his &ldquo;English Language&rdquo; article
(*EB*, 1976) decries the hard-line grammarians who
succeeded Samuel Johnson: &ldquo;They spent too much
time condemning current 'improprieties' ... Without
explanatory comment they banned *you* was outright,
although it was in widespread use among educated
people (on that ground it was later defended by Noah
Webster).  *You was* had, in fact, taken the place of
both *thou wast* and *thou wert* as a useful singular
equivalent of the accepted plural *you were*.&rdquo;

In the conclusion of his article, Potter discusses the
future of English.  &ldquo;The abandonment of the forms
*thou* and *thee* may encourage the spread of *yous* and
*youse* in many areas, but it is not necessarily certain
that these forms will win general acceptance.  The
need for a distinctive plural can be supplied in other
ways (e.g., the forms *you all, you fellows, you people*.&rdquo;
An amusing citation in the *M-W III* entry for
*you-all* will cap this observation: &ldquo;down here we can
always spot Yankees by the way they use *you-all* in the
singular—Arthur Gordon.&rdquo;

Here in Brownsville, Texas, English is a second
language to the majority, which speaks Mexican Spanish.
Spanish has not only the familiar second person
pronouns in both singular (*te*) and plural (*vosotros*),
but also has second person pronouns for general use:
singular (*usted*) and plural (*ustedes*).  Teaching English
here is an especially difficult task, but the simplistic
and ambiguous *you* as a translation of all four of the
Spanish forms is a substantial stumbling block.

In a cursory examination of personal pronoun paradigms
of five additional languages—French, German,
Italian, Swedish, and Yiddish—I tentatively
conclude that modern English is the only European
language without a distinction between singular and
plural second person pronouns.

Eric P. Hamp's article on &ldquo;Grammar&rdquo; (*EB,* 1976)
discusses grammatical categories: &ldquo;Some categories
...turn out to have very ramified implications; that
of person, since it involves and flows from the speaking
situation, is bound up with that of deixis, or the
kind of pointing that demonstrative pronouns normally
carry out (I = this; thou = that (near); third
person = yonder).&rdquo;

Pondering the fact that the use of *thou* implies
nearness and that English speakers (with some exceptions,
such as the Friends and speakers of some modern
British dialects) have spurned it, I wonder with
Zeno Vendler as he concludes his article on &ldquo;Semantics&rdquo;
(*EB,* 1976): &ldquo;How much, finally, of the semantic
structure can be attributed to a particular language
and how much can be ascribed to common (and possibly
innate) elements of the human mind?&rdquo;

Is it possible that the collective unconscious (to use
Carl Jung's term) of English-speaking people shies
away from nearness, from intimacy, and prefers to
deal with everyone &ldquo;at arm's length,&rdquo; as some British
are fond of saying?  To settle for a second person pronoun
which fails to distinguish between one and many
might have to be explained in another discipline, such
as epistemology, psychology or, even, metaphysics.

*Bristol Cities*

(Almost) everyone knows the above to be (Cockney)
rhyming slang for *titties*.  Why Bristol in particular?
Of course, the *Brist*- for *breast* is almost obvious
enough to stand by itself; but in a further burst of upfront
research, I suggest that the connection may lie in
the Bristol Channel where one may find, as described
in a travel article, &ldquo;a pair of conspicuously mammiform
islands known locally as *The Mumbles*&rdquo; by association
with a small nearby fishing village called
*Mumbles*.

*[Stephen M. Edson, Riverside, Connecticut]*


### OBITER DICTA
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York City*

When is an infant not an infant (any longer)?

In Latin, when it starts to talk (*infans* from *in fari*
'speechless').

In Law (both U.S. and English), when he or she
becomes an adult, usually at 21.

## Microlinguistics
*Harry Cohen, Brussels*

My new flatlet is the smallest apartment I've ever
had.  The kitchen is a mere cubicle; there isn't
even a place to hide the cookies from the dog.  The only
window is in the dining room (aptly called dinette).  It
looks out on a hillock where a red-headed damsel with
a kitten on a leash is tending her goslings.  Near the
top, a lambkin is dozing in the shade of an obelisk.

A load of nonsense?  Agreed.  I don't even have a
dog.  The sole purpose of this silly tale is to present a
number of words all of which convey a certain idea of
smallness: *flatlet, cubicle, cookie, dinette, hillock,
damsel, kitten, gosling, lambkin*—all of these suggest
objects of less than average size.  Clearly, the effect is
achieved by the endings: *-let, -cle, -ie, -ette, -ock, -el,
-en, -ling, -kin*.  A little experimenting will show that
these endings can do the same for certain other nouns.
In the case of *-ock*, for instance, think of the relative
size of a *bullock* or, if you are Scottish, a *bittock*.
Suitable test material for the other endings includes:
*tartlet, booklet, particle, versicle; birdie, bootee, statuette,
superette*.  In this article, such words will be
called DIMs, and their endings DIMSUFs.

On closer inspection, the phrase &ldquo;objects of less
than average size&rdquo; appears to fit rather loosely in most
cases.  It may be all right to use *droplet* for any little
drop but it would be incorrect to apply *kitchenette* to
all undersized kitchens.  Kitchenettes constitute a category
of their own, a recognized offshoot of kitchens
proper.  Admittedly, they are small, but smallness is
just one of their characteristics (as for the others, ask
your interior decorator).  Similar observations could be
made about words like *starlet* or *cigarillo* (*-illo* is also a
DIMSUF).  Interestingly, what is true for *cigarillo* does
not hold for *cigarette*.  Cigarettes are no longer looked
upon as a subspecies of cigars but rather as a separate
smoking article, on the same footing as, say, pipe tobacco.
In other words, cigarillos relate to cigars as
children to parents, whereas cigarettes and cigars are
more like siblings.  Other examples of this kind: *ballet,
operetta*, (*-etta* is another DIMSUF).

Many DIMs have become even more emancipated.
A *lancet* has little in common with a *lance*, though it
may be used for lancing.  *Eyelet* and *catkin* are linked
to their origins by similarity in shape or appearance
only.  Yet, the implication of smallness subsists.  As these
examples suggest, there is a tendency for DIMs to evolve
toward semantic independence; indeed, many have
lost their DIM character altogether.  *Muscle*, for instance,
derives from the Latin DIM *musculus* 'little
mouse,' a name probably inspired by the way the muscle
moves under the skin when tensing the biceps.  The
DIMSUF is still visible, but any association with smallness
has vanished.  *Mussel*, though it stems from the
same source, seems to retain no sense of diminution.

Less well known is the story of *obelisk*.  The word
originally meant 'small spit,' *-isk(os)* being an ancient
Greek DIMSUF (cf. *asterisk* 'little star').  Designed to
impress the populace (and probably serving as phallic
symbols), obelisks were bound to expand, and we now
think of them as huge.  However, to remind you of their
humble beginnings, one of them has been given a
place in our introductory story.  In fact, we do not need
to go back to antiquity to find autonomous ex-DIMs.  A
*budget* was once a 'little bag,' a *morsel* a 'little bite,' a
*manikin* a 'little man,' a *cutlet* ... no, not a little cut,
but a 'small rib' (from French c&ocirc;telette).  More arcane
are the fortunes of *tinsel* and *toilet*, of *codicil*,
*calculus*, and *carbuncle*, of *gazette*, *bulletin*, and
*formula*, of *mosquito*, *casino*, and *spaghetti*.  Real curios
are DIMS that have preserved their ending but shed
most of their base, like *cello* (a shortening of *violoncello*)
and *ghetto* (probably from Italian *borghetto* 'little
borough').  *Uncle* also comes under this heading.
Because of the foreign origin of these words, identifying
their DIM character requires some familiarity with
DIM mechanics in other languages.  However, English
keeps adopting new DIMs from all parts of the globe:
*babushka*, *neutrino*, *kopje*, *guerrilla*.  It is hard to say
whether all these importees ought to be classified as
DIMs in the English lexicon.  And it would certainly be
vain to attempt to compile an exhaustive list of English
DIMSUFs.

Even if we had a complete DIMSUF list, two
problems would remain.  First, most word endings
serve different functions in different contexts.  For instance,
the ending *-let* acts as a DIMSUF in *platelet* but
its role seems different in *wristlet* or *necklet*.  A *sapling*
is small but a *hireling*, though lowly, is not.  And the
Rockies are certainly no tiny rocks! In short, there are
not only ex-DIMs and crypto-DIMs but also pseudo-DIMs.
If you come across a doubtful case, ask your neighborhood
etymologist.

The other problem is that DIMs often have side
effects.  While smallness remains the underlying concept,
other ideas are conveyed as well.  One such concurrent
notion has already been demonstrated in the
first paragraph of this article.  The various animals on
the slope of the hillock were indicated by DIMs that
defined them primarily as *young* creatures.  Their
smallness was rather a corollary.  The same holds for
*ducklings* and *lionets*, and also for *maidens* and
*princelets*.

Then too, the DIMSUF *-ette* is often employed as a
feminizer, either to create a new female-agent name,
like *suffragette*, or to convert an existing male-agent
name, as in *majorette*, or to adapt a proper name, as
in *Paulette*.  The link with smallness rests on age-old
conceptions about sex differentials but is rapidly losing
force.

Many other DIMs, however, retain their full emotional
charge.  In fact, the conveyance of affective
meanings is the most notable side effect produced by
DIMs.  A *lambkin* is not just a small lamb, it's a 'sweet
little lamb,' a *piglet* a 'cute little pig,' a *doggie* a
'charming little dog.'  Where feelings like tenderness,
intimacy, or coziness come in, the size-reducing function
retreats.  It may even become virtually imperceptible,
as in *darling* or *daddy*, not to speak of
*biggie*.  A borderline case is the adding of *-ie* (or *-y* or
*-ee*) to clipped words, not only in nursery talk (*nappie*,
*hankie*, *grannie*) but also in colloquial speech (*telly,
hubby, comfy*), especially for proper names: *Eddie*,
*Maggie*, *Dizzy* (Disraeli), *Monty* (Field Marshal Montgomery).

So much for DIMs as terms of endearment.  Verbs
like *belittle* and *slight* suggest that they can go other
ways as well.  *Princeling* and *kinglet* can be derisive,
*darkie* and *blackie* patronizing.  And it could be argued
that *hireling* is a DIM after all, used disparagingly.
As for truncation, *Aussie*, *Argie*, and *Paki* range
in Britain from good-humored mockery to outright
contempt.  In areas like these, interpretation becomes
precarious.  Context or intonation can make all the
difference.  Indeed, some parts of DIM territory merge
into a semantic no-man's land where conflicting connotations
momentarily emerge, even overlap.

Many languages apply the DIM concept, through
DIMSUFs or other means.  This article can offer only a
few fragmentary remarks on the main official West
European languages.  Of these, the members of the
Romance group are best equipped.  A quick look at
Italian yields *-ino*, *-ello*, *-etto*, *-uccio*, to mention only
the most common.  Not surprisingly, Italians are virtuosi
in the art of DIMming.  They even concatenate their
DIMSUFs, e.g., *casa* 'house' &gt; *casetta* 'small house' >
*casettina* 'houselet.'  Also, DIMSUFs are attached to adjectives,
e.g., *caro* 'dear' &gt; *caruccio* 'somewhat expensive,'
and to verbs, e.g., *piovere* 'to rain' &gt; *pioviscolare*
'to drizzle.'  Another handy device consists of
tagging DIMSUFs to verb roots or adjectives to create
new nouns, e.g., *spogliare* 'to undress' &gt; *spogliarello*
'striptease,' *povero* 'poor' &gt; *poverino* or *poveretto*
'poor devil.'

The range seems dazzling, but English does sport
similar features, though less exuberantly: *yellow* >
*yellowish*, *to crack* &gt; *to crackle*, *single* &gt; *singlet*.
Still, the difference between the English and the Italian
systems is not just a matter of degree; they contrast
essentially in openness.  In Italian, DIMSUFs may be attached
to practically any noun (and occasionally to
other parts of speech), so that legions of potential DIMs
are at a speaker's disposal.  Even if quite a few have
risen to lexical independence, the vast majority are not
even mentioned in the simpler dictionaries.  (Just as
concise English dictionaries do not bother to indicate
regular plurals or conjugations: native speakers are
supposed to know how to modify the main entries.)

Similar possibilities exist in Spanish and Portuguese,
but not in French.  Although French DIMSUFs are
numerous, the set of DIMs is as good as closed, in other
words, the freedom to create new ones is extremely
limited—much as in English.  Another similarity is
that, generally speaking, the DIM of noun X does not
refer to a small specimen of X but rather to a member
of a class of objects somehow related to X.  Thus *femme*
'woman' &gt; *femelle* 'female animal,' *orge* 'barley' &lt;
*orgelet* 'stye,' the swelling on the eyelid being grain-shaped.
In rare cases, different DIMSUFs yield diverse
meanings: *lune* 'moon' &gt; *lunettes* 'pair of spectacles'
but also &gt; *lunule* 'lunula,' the white area at the base
of the fingernail being crescent-shaped.

On the Germanic side, the equipment is simpler.
The Germans have basically two DIMSUFs: *-chen* and
*-lein*.  These can be freely applied to practically every
concrete noun and, in a few cases, to other parts of
speech.  The Dutch are content with one single DIMSUF
(*-tje* and its variants) plus some archaic remnants, but
the range of deployment is vast.  It comprehends abstract
as well as concrete nouns and considerable parts
of other word classes, including even a few numerals
and interjections.  The DIM density of spoken Dutch is
perhaps the highest in western Europe.  (Swiss-German
speakers may hold the absolute record, but theirs is not
an official language.)

Although this anecdotal overview does not warrant
scientific conclusions, we may perhaps say that
speakers of most west European languages can apply
their DIM apparatus at will to all concrete nouns and,
to varying degrees, to other nouns and other parts of
speech.  English speakers—and the French, for that
matter—do not enjoy such freedom.  They have to keep
within a given set of DIMs.  Can they never create a
new one?  Of course they can, but they are restricted,
both in the choice of DIMSUFs and in the areas of application,
which might be delimited as follows:

>*Feminization:* Words like *usherette* are relatively
young, and this model may catch on.  A British
newspaper facetiously offered *hackette* for 'female
journalist.'  However, this usage is criticized
by feminists.
>
>*Commercial novelties:* DIMs are incessantly invented
for new products (*diskette*), new facilities
(*launderette*), new mock materials (*Leatherette*).
The association with smallness is not always
obvious.
>
>*Nonce words:* Nobody can stop you from calling
a small house a &ldquo;houselet&rdquo; if that word happens
to possess the expressive value you are looking
for.  Also, you may wish to synthesize a temporary
DIM for reasons of euphony or style, or just
for fun.  *BBC Wildlife* magazine recently published
a photograph of a little girl holding a
baby owl.  The caption read: &ldquo;Tawny owlet with
blond humanlet.&rdquo;  Inevitably, some of these intended
one-liners hang on.  Many a clipped word
may have come into being that way: *commie*,
*quickie*.

Whatever the area of application, modern DIM-makers
seem to restrict themselves to *-ette*, *-let*, and
*-ie*.  But then, there is a tendency to forgo word endings
altogether and instead to put *mini*- or *micro*- in
front.  Maybe we are entering the DIMPREF era.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; '[Eckhard Schmitz] has just totally disappeared,' said
Larry Tankersly, chief investigator for the district attorney's
office.&rdquo;  [From the *San Francisco Chronicle*, June 9, 1984.
Submitted by N.M. McGee, Daly City, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;After the jury convicted a rapist in circuit court last
week, Judge Ted Coleman sentenced him to prison 'for the
rest of your natural life with credit for the 3 days already
served.' &rdquo;  [From Column World, by Bob Morris, in *The
Orlando Sentinel*, November 19, 1986.  Submitted by Richard
E. Langford, Deland, Florida.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Slang and Jargon of Drugs and Drink*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/slang-jargon-drugs-drink-Spears-Richard/19158902013/bd)
Richard A. Spears, (The Scarecrow Press, 1986), xv + 585pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Anyone even vaguely familiar with slang and jargon
and with the seemingly bottomless source they
draw on in the language of drugs and drink will shudder
to consider how formidable a task Spears set for
himself in compiling this work.  I read recently—though
it merely confirmed a deep-seated conviction of mine—
that there are more synonyms for *drunk* than for any
other word in the language.  I haven't bothered to count
them exactly, but I found about 125 (listed as standard,
*Informal*, and *Slang*, in separate paragraphs) for the
adjective alone, and listed in *The Synonym Finder*
(Rodale, 1978).  Spears's list goes on for almost *eight
pages*! Moreover, *The Synonym Finder* count includes
phrases like *drunk as a*—, while Spears carries on with
another two pages of entries.  The only other entry that
lists such a profusion of terms is that for *dope* 'any
drug, narcotic, opiate, or chemical which produces
sedation, euphoria, stimulation, analgesia or stupor.'
That, too, goes on for eight pages.  The *dope* list is
extremely interesting in that it reflects the linguistic
resourcefulness of those associated with a subculture
that is scarcely connected in most people's minds with
lexicographic or metaphoric or poetic inventiveness.  (A
publisher's blurb reports that *SJDD* lists &ldquo;167 terms for
powdered cocaine, 151 for P.C.P. (angel dust), and 624
terms for marijuana.&rdquo;

This is a subject about which I am pitifully naive:
indeed, the material, with its documentation, is so
overwhelming that I should be surprised to discover
that our friendly neighborhood drug peddler knows a
large percentage of the terms.  My eye was caught by a
number of compound terms that included *Owsley*,
under the entry of *L.S.D.*, and a look at the entry for
*Owsley* revealed that Augustus Owsley Stanley III was
the name of one of the early makers of L.S.D. (Timothy
Leary does not appear to have been memorialized in
the culture he did so much to publicize.)

I assume that *crack* arrived in the language too
late for inclusion: from the compilation in the *SJDD* I
can only assume that the term is actually as new as it is
reported to be, for Spears adduces evidence from 283
sources (some representing a number of informants)
and, had *crack* been around earlier, he would surely
have found it.  I cannot offer comment on a great
number of entries.  I am not quite sure that I understand
why, under *mother's milk* (also *mother's ruin*)
'gin; any liquor' we find &ldquo;Heard on the M*A*S*H television
program (1970s)&rdquo; but no reference to Shaw's
*Pygmalion*.  Other sources date the term back to 1821,
but I am reasonably sure there is a reference to
*mother's ruin* in one (or more) of the series of engravings
by William Hogarth, which would antedate 1821
by a century.

Even if one were to analyze the terms from the
standpoint of word play, the *SJDD* would prove an
invaluable source, with its thorough documentation of
its subject: every single entry is cross-keyed to the
source(s) where it was found.  The definitions are terse,
to the point, and, where necessary, explanatory.  For
instance:

>*mosquitoes* cocaine.  This may refer to marks
left by hypodermic injections rather than the
drug itself...
>
>*Oz man* a drug seller or distributor... See
*ounce man*...

This last item, which, without the reference, I should
have thought had come from a reference to L. Frank
Baum's novels, obviously comes from the abbreviation
for *ounce*.

Space does not permit a more detailed description
of this impressive work, which is a pity, for it is patently
one of the best specialized dictionaries to have
come my way in any field.

The only sour note, which I cannot restrain, concerns
the typography, which is simply awful.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Language of Sex from A to Z*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780886872601/language-sex-Z-Goldenson-Robert-088687260X/plp)
Robert M. Goldenson and Kenneth N. Anderson, (Pharos Books, 1986), 314pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

The first thing I noticed in the Foreword (after
the announcement that this book contains 5,000
terms) was that *freudian* was spelt with a small F.I
doubt it.  However, I have no reason to doubt anything
else recorded in this dictionary of sexology, which contains
quite straightforward definitions of any sexual
term I could think of, plus a number that had never
occurred to me and I had not encountered—I almost
wrote &ldquo;come across&rdquo;!—in my meanderings through
the English language.  This is the sort of book where
one finds entries which move him to say &ldquo;Do people
really do *that*?!&rdquo;  By this time, with contraceptives
being advertised openly on television, we seem to be
letting it all hang out (if you will excuse the expression),
and none of us is likely to be surprised by
anything.  Gone are the days when one might have
mistaken &ldquo;condominium&rdquo; for a tiny contraceptive, or
*condom* as a small condominium.

Yet, to those uninitiated into the liberal society
(and its open description), revelations are to be found
in the pages of *The Language of Sex*.  Many of the
terms defined are anatomical, pathological, medical,
or psychiatric, but those aren't the interesting ones.  I
am not alone, I suppose, in assuming that once people
have devised a name for something, it must be sufficiently
common.  To be sure, there are one-time occurrences
that are talked and written about enough to
warrant their being given a name, like *Watergate*.  But
it seems unlikely to me that anyone would give something
a name unless it had to be discussed.  Thus, like
other people, I am occasionally brought up short by
certain linguistic discoveries, and I found a few such
documentations of kinkiness in this book.  Here is one:

>*candy pants* a commercial term for edible
panties—Bikini pants that are made out of sweet
material, for example, cherry-flavored &ldquo;fabric&rdquo;
with licorice string ties.

I hate to show my na&iuml;vet&eacute;, but *Wow*! A *commercial*
term?  That means that there are businesses out
there *making* these things! I am impressed.  Everyone
knows about the drug subculture and terms like *crack*.
Does everyone except me know about *candy pants*?
How about:

>*TV style* a slang term for intercourse in &ldquo;doggie
fashion&rdquo;: Both can watch TV.

Undoubtedly that practice must have a profound
effect on a show's Nielsen ratings.  An interesting entry
is *tabooness rating of dirty words*, too long to repeat
here: I found it as a cross reference when browsing
through the entry for *son of a bitch. POSSLQ* 'partners
of the opposite sex sharing living quarters' is here
but not *tallyman* or *tallywoman*, which, though not
slang, are terms for the same thing that have been in
the language for hundreds of years.  There is also the
convenient adverb *tally*, as in to *live tally* 'to live
together as husband and wife though not married (to
one another).'

Gastronomic references occur, as in *fish* and
*onions* &ldquo;a culinary concoction designed to ensure an
erotic reaction...&rdquo;

I don't mean to give the impression that the *Dictionary*
is either a joke book or a manual of obscenity:
it is somewhat erotic in the sense that each alphabetic
initial is decorated with a stylized illustration of two
or more Orientals engaged in a sexual act, though decorously
clothed.  (Why Indians and Japanese seem to
symbolize &ldquo;clean&rdquo; sex to westerners is beyond me, but
there are no westerners represented: too close to
home?)  Nevertheless, it treats its subject with decorum,
in an informative, direct style; the definitions are
excellent, and there is nothing offensive about the
book at all.  Moralists, prudes, and others of prurient
inclination should note (from the definition for *perversion*):
&ldquo;... sexologists tend to avoid the terms perversion
and perverted, as well as deviant, deviation
and 'unnatural,' preferring the less judgmental and
more neutral descriptive terms variation and variant.&rdquo;
The approach is clinical and sensible.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Needed—experienced carpenters ... truck and tools
required but not mandatory.&rdquo;  [Employment ad in *The
Enterprise*.  Submitted by Jerome Foster, Falmouth, Massachusetts.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Facts On File Visual Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780816015443/Facts-File-Visual-Dictionary-Corbeil-0816015449/plp)
Jean Claude Corbeil, (Facts On File, 1986), 792pp.

For many years Bibliographisches Institut, a German
publisher, has published the *Duden* series, an
extraordinarily useful set of books in which each detail
of a full-page drawing with call-out numbers is identified
on a facing page.  If one is visiting a foreign country,
such a book is particularly useful because it helps
in the naming of familiar (and some unfamiliar)
objects.  I vividly recall, for instance, my first visit to
France.  I had studied French for many years and
could speak and understand it quite well.  But, while I
could discuss Racine and Baudelaire, I had no idea
how to ask a chambermaid to get my laundry done
and had not encountered, in reading the great French
classics, the words for *toothpaste* or *light switch*.  A
*Duden* would have shown me a detailed drawing of a
bathroom, with all accessories numbered, and the legend
opposite would have provided their names in
French, German, or a variety of other languages.
Unfortunately, I did not have one; sign language
yielded *le linge*, but my pocket dictionary revealed
that that meant 'linen.'  As I wanted to enquire about
personal laundry, not (bed) linen, I was confused, for
none of my clothing was made out of linen.  But then,
neither was the bed linen, and that had never confused
me.  Well, anyway....

The *FOF Visual Dictionary (VD)* is something
like the *Duden* series but it is not as good.  In the first
place, there are errors, and from those I found in a
brief browse, they are not rare.  For example, under
*family ties*, a two-page spread where I was disappointed
not to find things like *third cousin once
removed* and *cousin german* explained, the male and
female illustrations are switched for the parents'
brothers—that is, the brother is called a wife/aunt-in-law,
the sister-in-law is called a husband/uncle-in-law.
Besides, just whose aunt- and uncle-in-law these
people are is unclear; and, finally, what is an aunt-in-law/uncle-in-law?
A few dictionaries I checked were
not forthcoming with entries.

Under *Communications* is a page on proofreading
that contains some errors which are too boring to
retail here.  On the *one-design sailboat* the bow and
stern are unmarked, the *spreader* is incorrectly named
&ldquo;crosstree,&rdquo; the *preventer* is misnamed the &ldquo;vang,&rdquo; the
*spinnaker boom* is rigged without any spinnaker
shown, and the *telltale* is attached to the mainsail,
where it is less likely to be as useful as on the jib.  Also,
there are many other parts that are unidentified.  In a
section called *upperworks*, a term unfamiliar to me, a
chock is called a *fairlead*, the function of a *hank* is not
clear, nor is that of a *turnbuckle*, and what we on the
East Coast call a *jam cleat* is identified as a &ldquo;clam
cleat.&rdquo;  All in all, sailing and sailboats are only sparsely
covered.  Under *heraldry*, the terms *crescent, fleur-delis*,
and *mullet*, which are properly ordinaries, are
labeled charges, and *lion passant* and *eagle*, which are
properly cadence marks, are also labeled charges.  The
equipment list for the *scuba diver* omits the *regulator*,
a vital piece of gear.

Notwithstanding such shortcomings, the book
contains a great deal of miscellaneous information
which might be hard to come by if one has no multivolume
encyclopedia to hand.  The only problem is
that, having encountered errors of the type documented,
my faith in anything the book has to offer is
very much shaken, and were I to rely (albeit tentatively)
on the *VD* as a source, I should feel compelled
to look up a given term and verify its accuracy in a
good dictionary or encyclopedia.  I am slightly puzzled
by the difference(s) between the French and English
chessboards: except for a minor difference in the silhouette
of the bishop symbol, they seem identical.

The greatest compliment I can pay is to *VD's*
indexes: in four columns of tiny type they cover 85
pages, showing all terms in one alphabetical order,
then thematically arranged, and finally organized by
special subjects.

The illustrations are generally clear, especially for
the simpler and diagrammatic matter, but they tend
to get confusing for things like *gasoline engine*, where
it is hard to tell where the edges of the cutaway views
begin and end.  Occasionally, extraneous items creep
in: What has a *water bottle* (or, indeed, a *water bottle
clip*) to do with a bicycle (especially one without a bell
or horn)?  Of what use is a drawing of a *station hall*
(which is, for Americans at least, an odd name for a
railway station)?  This particularly silly illustration
shows a *change machine* and—unlikely to be found in
most stations—a currency exchange office.  Where are
the public phones?  the restrooms?  the bagladies?  the
drunks?  the litter?  the overflowing waste containers?
The *airport passenger terminal*, curiously, shows an
*automatically-controlled [sic] door* as well as the services
usually found only at international airports.  I can
easily see the usefulness of the office supplies section: a
new employee who may know English well may have
no idea of what to call a *scratch pad*, a *coat tree*, or a
*book end*.  But I have never heard of a *swivel-tilter
armchair* (only a *swivel chair*), and it is somewhat
ludicrous to show a series of boxes from which one is
supposed to identify various components of computer
hardware.  Not only that, but the scale is all wrong,
with a *microprocessor* (which is a couple of inches
long and looks like a mechanical centipede) made to
appear to be about one quarter the size of an entire
central processing unit (represented as a rectangular
box with some vents and a black dot on one side).  At
this point, the exercise is virtually useless and would
best have been ignored.  At the more primitive end of
the technological spectrum, *letterpress, intaglio*, and
*planographic printing*, which the huge printing industry
in America will be interested to find under Creative
Leisure Activities, are covered in only the crudest
way, with offset lithography and typesetting ignored
entirely.

To sum up, there is a lot in this book, but there is
a great deal missing.  Much of what is here can be
found elsewhere, particularly in *The Way Things
Work*, published by Simon & Schuster, which ought to
be a sufficient source of information for this sort of
thing when referred to alongside a good encyclopedia.
Talking about encyclopedias, there are a number of
typographical errors in the Selective Bibliography,
among them &ldquo;Encyclopedia&rdquo; for *Encyclopaedia
Britannica*, Mitchell &ldquo;Beazleg&rdquo; for *Beazley, McGraw-Hill
Encyclopedia of Science @ [sic] Technology*,
&ldquo;Chamber's&rdquo; for *Chambers's*, etc.

*Laurence Urdang*


### OBITER DICTA: *New Uses for the One-Letter Word*
*Richard Bauerle, Ohio Wesleyan University*

Many a speaker has avoided the embarrassment
caused by uttering a specific four-letter word
by resorting to the expression a *four-letter word*.  Now
more and more speakers seem to be using variants of
the *one-letter word* for similar purposes.  Among those
in current use are the *C word for commitment*, the *M
word* for *marriage*, the *Y word* for *Yuppie*, as well as
the familiar *F word*.  It seems quite possible that the *F
word* with its many uses was the first one-letter word
to gain currency.  It did not require great innovative
powers to substitute new single letters to indicate new
meanings.

The potential for creative use of the one-letter
word has caught the attention of two well-known and
widely syndicated cartoonists who have become adept
at exploiting its humorous possibilities while escaping
the problems of censorship.  Recently in a comic strip
concerning the campaign against AIDS, Berke
Breathed sketched the Bloom County editor displaying
a health bulletin consisting almost entirely of one-letter
words: the *I word*, the *H word*, the *A word*, the
*A II word*, the *L word*, and the *C word*.  The health
bulletin clarified nothing about AIDS, of course, but it
teased the reader into guessing what it meant.  More
recently, in his Doonesbury cartoons Gary Trudeau
devoted three consecutive daily strips to the *Y word*
(*Yups* was also used) and the *C word* (apparently for
*condom*).  However, in keeping with their lifestyle, the
Yuppie characters took the *C* to stand for *condominium*.

The one-letter word seems to be of limited usefulness
in serious discourse.  With only twenty-six one-letter
words available in our alphabet, multiple meanings
would become necessary.  The *C word* has already
been used to indicate both *commitment* and *condom*.
The potential for misunderstanding is also increased
by the broad range of meanings already in use.  Four-letter
words are normally restricted by taboo.

Perhaps anthropological linguists should take note
of the increased range of meanings that the one-letter
words allude to.  Avoidance of such words as *marriage*
and *commitment* is scarcely trivial.  Marriage, according
to cultural anthropologists, is a cultural universal
which societies past and present have honored and
protected.  Why now the *M word*?  A few social scientists
are suggesting that the basic social unit in our
culture will soon be the single person, not the family.
The substitution of the *M word* suggests that they may
be right.


### OBITER DICTA
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York City*

Among the Jews wandering through Europe after
their expulsion from the Iberian peninsula, and to some
extent from Provence and Italy, two names became inordinately
popular for girls.  As they deteriorated, their
origins lost, they became *Yenta* and *Sprinze*.  *Yenta* persists
as a word for a fishwife type of woman.  What is
surprising about these names is their ladylike origin.
*Yenta* came from the French *Jeanette*.  *Sprinze* came
from the word for (and the name meaning) 'hope' in
Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian: *Esperanza, Esperan&ccedil;a*,
and *Speranza* respectively.

How the lovely have fallen!


### OBITER DICTA
*David M. Glixon, West Hartford, Connecticut*

An article on Asia in the *Encyclopaedia Britannica*
reveals that at one time the southeastern boundary
of Europe was considered to be *the Manych
depresssion*—which would account for much of the
world's chronic condition!  (Unfortunately for the pun,
however, the name of the Manych rivers and lakes,
which are in the Caucasus region, is pronounced
ma*nitch*.)


#### EPISTOLA {Clark Jobe}

I concur with Professor Smith's conclusion [XII, 4]
that the words *peckerwood* and *hoppergrass* have
their origins in the human playfulness with language.
To aid the professor's search for similar examples, I
offer these: *everwhich, everhow, everwhen*, and
*howsomeever*.

I first noticed these specimens in the speech of the
commission's now-retired personnel director.  They
quickly spread to those employees who were known to
sit with him at length over coffee.  These inversions
now serve to identify membership in this breakfast
clique.  If you will permit wild speculation in the
learned pages of your journal, I propose that these
variants come from a playful link between *every
which* and *whichever* (as in, *Pick whichever one you
want*).

The threat, *I'll turn you every which way but
loose*, is commonly visited upon the young in our
Southern dialect.  Indeed, a Clint Eastwood/orangutan
movie bears that title.  The well-known tendency in
the South to drop the *y* in *every* (as in *everday*), allows
the conjunction *everwhich*.  The resulting compound is
easily mistaken for the inversion of *whichever*.  That
forms the link, as well as the pattern for the other
forms: *everhow* and *everwhen*.  (The method of creation
of *howsomeever* as a variant of *however* yet
eludes me.)

*[Clark Jobe, Austin, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald Drury}

Looking over a back issue of VERBATIM [XI, 1], I
came upon one of the EPISTOLAE taking issue with a
definition in &ldquo;A Grandfather Stories Glossary&rdquo; [X,4]
by Josephus Perrick.

Perrick had explained the saying *I have seen the
elephant* as &ldquo;once bitten, twice shy.&rdquo;  Correspondent
Gary Muldoon, apparently by way of refutation, cited
a 1983 book by Jack Finney which defines *see the elephant*
as &ldquo;nineteenth century slang for seeing the
world, widening one's experience.&rdquo;

In counter-rebuttal, I now cite pp.  71-72 of Samuel
Hopkins Adams' *Grandfather Stories* (the subject
of Perrick's glossary).  Grandfather Adams has just
been overheard using this locution by four grandchildren:

>To betray embarrassment before us would
have been beneath the old gentleman's dignity,
but for a moment he looked a bit discountenanced.
He had been guilty of using slang, something he
considered reprehensible in us.
>
>'A figure of speech,' he said mildly.  'More
commonly and crudely expressed in the form
of the familiar saw, once bit, twice shy.'

According to Farmer & Henley's *Slang and Its
Analogues*, however, both Adams/Perrick and Finney/
Muldoon are correct—though the *Grandfather Stories*
usage seems to be the earlier:

>1841\.  Kendall, *Narrative of the Texas Sante
F&eacute; Expedition*.  When a man is disappointed in
anything he undertakes, when he has seen
enough, when he gets tired and sick of any job
he may have set himself about, he has SEEN THE
ELEPHANT.
>
>1870\.  L. Oliphant, *Picadilly*.  So had Mr. Wog,
who went up to town to see what he called THE
ELEPHANT—an American expression signifying 'to
gain experience of the world.'

A very different meaning is noted by Farmer &
Henley in *Puck's Library*, 1889:

>Forepaugh says that elephants have a natural
liking for whiskey.  We have often wondered,
when a man went out to SEE THE ELEPHANT, why
he always brought back such a strange odour
with him.  This seems to explain it.

*[Donald Drury, Long Beach, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Bill Simon III}

I read, with frustrated glee, Lillian Mermin Feinsilver's
article bemoaning the ubiquity of *one criteria,
the media has*...,&rdquo; and so on [XI, 4].

I spent 25&frac12; years in employment in a sector (the
U.S. military) where the Queen's (or anybody else's)
English doesn't always receive fair treatment.

An interesting perturbation of the language which
I observed repeatedly over many years in aviation concerned
the small *index markers* affixed to aircraft
engine instruments.  For example, if it is permissible to
operate a particular jet engine at 97 percent, then a
small red *index marker* would appear on the RPM
gage at the &ldquo;97&rdquo; position.  In multi-engine aircraft,
there would, naturally, be such *indices* on each of the
four RPM gages (temperature gages, oil pressure
gages, etc.).

When one pilot was instructing or discussing a
problem with another pilot, it was universally common
to refer, in the singular, to the &ldquo;indice [in-di-see]
on the #3 RPM gage&rdquo; or to the &ldquo;indice on the #2 oil
pressure gage.&rdquo;

I would have screamed, but that's not a wise thing
to do in an airplane cockpit.

Oh, well, as an old friend used to say, &ldquo;We live and
lean [*sic*].&rdquo;

*[Bill Simon III, Lt. Colonel, USAF (Ret.) Berlin]*

*SEX VS. GENDER*

An American visiting France to do some flyfishing
with a French friend vowed that he would speak
only French during his visit.  One day, when they were
out casting for trout, there was a sudden hatching of
mayflies.  &ldquo;Voil&aacute;! said the American, &ldquo;Regardez le
mouche!&rdquo;  &ldquo;Vraiment&rdquo; acknowledged his friend,
&ldquo;Mais, c'est *la* mouche.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Incroyable!&rdquo;  countered the
American; then, at a loss for the proper French
words—&ldquo;What eyesight!&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Word Mysteries &amp; Histories: From Quiche to Humble Pie*](https://www.amazon.com/Word-Mysteries-Histories-Quiche-Humble/dp/B000K1L2HY)
Editors of the American Heritage Dictionaries, (Houghton Mifflin, 1986), xi + 308 pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Anyone who is interested in etymologies of English
words (or words used in English) should enjoy this
book.  Its pages reflect the sense of joy and relief that
lexicographers feel when released from the shackles of
space limitations: as much as needs to be said in tracing
the history of a word has been set forth here.  In
some instances, one might criticize a bit of overwriting,
often the result of the authors' attempt at
lightening the burden of scholarship that inevitably
attends the research into word origins.  No one who has
been frustrated by the telegraphic, often cryptic style
imposed on etymologists *in vitro*—that is, in their dictionaries—will
fail to be satisfied by the full *in vivo*
treatment offered here.  The choice of entries (&ldquo;more
than 500&rdquo;) is eclectic if viewed superficially: as someone
who has worked on more etymologies than I can
shake my *shtick* at, it seems to me that the words have
been chosen because their histories are interesting, surprising,
typical of a particular category of word generation
or borrowing, or &ldquo;all of the above.&rdquo;  The editors
have the enormous advantage of an available citation
file, which must be a good one; they also have lost
neither their sense of humor nor their perspective in
discussing the words selected.  Not only is the style
refreshing but every page reflects original scholarship,
not just the same old turf plowed over again.  The
editors took the trouble to find out about *Quaaludes*,
for example, and did not just guess at its source.  As an
old China hand—the surface is beginning to show
signs of crazing—I am familiar with many of the etymologies.
You may be, too, but each contains some
filip of information that I did not remember or that
had eluded my earlier visits to the territory.  Of special
interest to me was the entry for *Teflon*, which runs to
four and a half pages and is neatly put together: I
cannot reveal the ending here, and nobody will be
seated in the last fifty pages of the book.

This is not just another popular etymology book
with a pretty face, though it must be said that the
design, illustration, and manufacture of the tome
make it a pleasure to have in one's library.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dimboxes, Epopts, and Other Quidams*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780894801556/Dimboxes-Epopts-Quidams-Words-Describe-0894801554/plp) and [*The Insomniac's Dictionary*](https://www.amazon.com/Insomniacs-Dictionary-Last-Word-Odd/dp/0816013640)

David Grambs, illus. by Simon Stern, (Workman Publishing, 1986), 190pp. and Paul Hellweg, illus. by Joan Leigh Herder, (Facts On File Publications, 1986), xiv + 159pp.

The English language is an inexhaustible mine of
lexicographic curiosities, and publishers (if not compilers)
seem to have at their disposal an inexhaustible
supply of language buffs who gluttonously gobble up
*poplollies, bellibones, tenderfeet, ladyfingers*, and
other linguistic delectables.  David Grambs, an editor
of the *Random House Dictionary* (which I once had
some remote connection with), has collected about 500
&ldquo;succinct, knockout sobriquets and epithets&rdquo; (according
to the back-cover blurb), which are arranged into
twenty-four categories, from Dentiloquists, Leptorrhinians
& Pithecoids, through Blateroons, Energumens
& Solipsists, to Mumpsimuses, Parvanimities
& Solitudinarians.  The descriptive definitions are
well done (though the entries be rare), and if you are
searching for another way to refer to the people whom
you have traditionally characterized as gormless
ninnyhammers and attocerebral twits, perhaps this
book is the solution.  The definitions are blithe and
often funny, with many esoteric, exotic words buried
inside them, each (I believe) with its own definition.

Paul Hellweg's book also contains lexicographic
rarities, but of a different sort; moreover, it is organized
thematically in a somewhat more productive
way—that is, if you cannot think of (or don't know)
the word for excessive sexual desire in men (the counterpart
of *nymphomania*), you can find it by scanning
a short list of Erotic Manias, a subset of Chapter IV,
Manifestly Manifold Manias, which boasts of listing
277 manias, &ldquo;the largest list in print anywhere.&rdquo;  This
can readily be made 278 by the addition of a mania
listed in most self-respecting dictionaries of any size—
*tulipomania*.  Maybe it's there, but *The Insomniac's
Dictionary*, unfortunately, has no index and there is
no quick way of again finding a word once encountered
in the text.  The categorization of the contents is
convenient and would usually enable a user to find the
word he may be seeking—I say &ldquo;may be&rdquo; because
there are, buried in the linguistic debris that is documented
here, many words that could well be useful
and, indeed, may be sought.  Generally, the book is a
potpourri of lexicographic matter—eponyms, longest
words, acronyms, -*cide* words (those are real killers),
and so on.  Hellweg has published some of this material
in *Word Ways*, The Journal of Recreational Linguistics.
If you are unfamiliar with *Word Ways*, you can
find out more by writing to A. Ross Eckler, Spring
Valley Road, Morristown, NJ 07960.

I cannot allow one egregious error in Hellweg's
book to slip past without comment: like some others
before him, he attributes *supercallifragilisticexpialidocious*
(or, as he has it, -*cali*-) to the movie *Mary
Poppins*.  Although the word does appear in a song in
that film, I (and my contemporaries) knew the word
very well in the 1930s, long before Disney made the
movie.  I haven't the slightest idea where it came from,
but it was &ldquo;going around&rdquo; when I was a lad, and I
should hope that whoever wrote the lyrics for the song
would acknowledge that he or she did not coin the
word.  Perhaps, though, the lyricist has more information
on its provenance.

*Laurence Urdang*

## In Praise of St. Jerome
*Virginia Howard, Metairie, Louisiana*

It all started with *The Grapes of Wrath*.  A friend
who had seen the movie version on television
asked me how the book ended.  After my cryptic
instruction for her to read it for herself, she returned
from the library with a new question, &ldquo;Where did the
title come from?&rdquo;  Julia Ward Howe's *Battle Hymn of
the Republic* came immediately to mind, but, we
asked ourselves, was that the origin of the phrase, or
were its roots in ancient soil?  The answer was in the
library's 1968 edition of *Bartlett's Book of Familiar
Quotations*.  Under &ldquo;grapes of wrath&rdquo; in the index, I
was referred to Mrs. Howe's offerings, and from her
quote &ldquo;...trampling out the vintage where the
grapes of wrath are stored...&rdquo; a footnote sent me to
Isaiah 63:3:

>I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people
there was none with me: for I will tread them in mine
anger and trample them in my fury; and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain
all my raiment.

My trek through &ldquo;grape&rdquo; in the index of *Bartlett's*
also led me to &ldquo;Beulah, peel me a grape&rdquo; (Mae West)
and &ldquo;For they wish to fill the wine press of eloquence
not with the tendrils of mere words but with the rich
grape juice of good sense&rdquo; (St. Jerome).  So taken with
St. Jerome's choice of (translated) words was I that
later, while seated in a comfortable chair at home, I
reached for my own 1955 edition of *Bartlett's* to pursue
and ponder St. Jerome's other verbal gems.  But
what's this?  My copy of *Bartlett's* listed only five quotations
under St. Jerome's name, and the one about
the rich grape juice of good sense was not among
them.  The only quotations given were as follows:

>Avoid, as you would the plague, a clergyman who is
also a man of business.
>
>A fat paunch never breeds fine thoughts.
>
>Preferring to store her money in the stomachs of the
needy rather than hide it in a purse.
>
>The best almoner is he who keeps back nothing for
himself.
>
>It is no fault of Christianity if a hypocrite falls into sin.

In the 1968 and 1980 editions of *Bartlett's*, St. Jerome
was credited with 38 &ldquo;familiar&rdquo; quotations.  How
could St. Jerome (A.D.C. 342-420) have said so much
between 1955 and 1968?  At least one of his comments
among those in the 1968 listing was certainly familiar
back in 1955: &ldquo;Never look a gift horse in the mouth.&rdquo;
If St. Jerome was credited with saying it in 1968, who
got credit back in 1955?  The 1955 edition indicated
that Rabelais, in 1532, said, &ldquo;He always looked a
given horse in the mouth,&rdquo; and a footnote clarified:
&ldquo;Archbishop Trench says the proverb (Never look a
gift horse in the mouth) is certainly as old as Jerome of
the fourth century, who, when someone found fault
with certain writings of his, replied that they were
free-will offerings, and that it did not behoove to look
a gift horse in the mouth.&rdquo;

In the 1968 *Bartlett's*, St. Jerome said, &ldquo;No athlete
is crowned but in the sweat of his brow.&rdquo;  Upon whose
brow was that drop of wisdom placed in 1955?  I found
the index deluged by sweaty brows, none having to do
with athletes:

>Badness, look you, you may choose easily in a heap:
level is the path and right near it dwells.  But before
Virtue the immortal gods have put the sweat of
man's brow; and long and steep is the way to it, and
rugged at the first.  (Hesiod, c. 720 B.C.)
>
>Which I have earned with the sweat of my brows.
(Cervantes, 1547-1616)
>
>The sweat of a man's brow, and the exudations of a
man's brains, are as much a man's own property as
the breeches upon his backside.  (Laurence Sterne,
1713-68)
>
>His brow is wet with honest sweat.  (&ldquo;The Village
Blacksmith,&rdquo; Longfellow, 1807-82)

Thoreau, ever the maverick, had a different view: &ldquo;It
is not necessary that a man should earn his living by
the sweat of his brow, unless he sweats easier than
I do.&rdquo;

Another 1968 St. Jerome offering that must have
been familiar even back in 1955 was &ldquo;Do not let your
deeds belie your words, lest when you speak in church
someone may say to himself, 'Why do you not practice
what you preach?' &rdquo;  Who was sermonizing in 1955?
Rowland Howard (floruit 1876) said:

>Waste not, want not, is a maxim I would teach,  
Let your watchword be dispatch, and practice  
what you preach.

Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) then came along
and said, &ldquo;That we should practise what we preach is
generally admitted; but anyone who preaches what he
and his hearers practise must incur the gravest moral
disapprobation.&rdquo;

St. Jerome's other maxims in the 1968 *Bartlett's*
did not appear to be duplicated by other sages in the
1955 edition of the book, although one particularly
pleasing one had an earlier parallel of sorts.  St.
Jerome said:

>The face is the mirror of the mind, and the eyes
without speaking confess the secrets of the heart.

Centuries earlier, Publilius Syrus (c. 42 B.C.) said,
&ldquo;Speech is a mirror of the soul: as a man speaks, so is
he.&rdquo;  Man sometimes speaks with such glib insincerity,
however, that more truth may be found in St.
Jerome's observation than in that of Publilius Syrus.

In fact, St. Jerome admonished, &ldquo;Everything
must have in it a sharp seasoning of truth.&rdquo;  He did,
however, occasionally contradict himself.  Although he
insisted, &ldquo;A friend is long sought, hardly found, and
with difficulty kept,&rdquo; he also admitted, &ldquo;The friendship
that can cease has never been real.&rdquo;  If the second
premise were true, then the friend in the first premise
would not be difficult to keep—unless the friendship
was never real.

Other insightful comments that mysteriously surfaced
between 1955 and 1968 as a part of St. Jerome's
repertoire did fit his own admonition:

>Love is not to be purchased and affection has no price.
>
>The scars of others should teach us caution.
>
>Even brute beasts and wandering birds do not fall into
the same traps or nets twice.
>
>Small minds can never handle great themes.
>
>It is worse still to be ignorant of your ignorance.
>
>No one cares to speak to an unwilling listener.  An
arrow never lodges in a stone; often it recoils upon
the sender of it.
>
>That clergyman soon becomes an object of contempt
who often asked out to dinner never refuses to go.
>
>When the stomach is full, it is easy to talk of fasting.
>
>The fact is that my native land is a prey to barbarism,
that in it men's only God is their belly, that they live
only for the present, and that the richer a man is the
holier he is held to be.
>
>Early impressions are hard to eradicate from the mind.
>
>When once wool has been dyed purple, who can
restore it to its previous whiteness?
>
>Athletes as a rule are stronger than their backers; yet
the weaker presses the stronger to put forth all his
efforts.

And thus I capped a concoction fermented from a
cluster of grapes.  Mae West said &ldquo;Beulah, peel me a
grape&rdquo; in both editions of *Bartlett's*, but in the 1955
edition she said it in *She Done Him Wrong* and in the
1968 edition, it was in *I'm No Angel*.  Should this
inconsistency be pursued?  I think not.  One peeled
grape could lead to a bushel of slippery berries.

## Antipodean English: *Going Decimal*
*George L. Turner*

Linguists tell us that a language is a system in
which everything hangs together.  If that is so, we
would expect that a dislocation of elements in one part
of the system would introduce stresses, not always
foreseen, in related parts.  The Australian Government
has (unwittingly) provided us with an experiment to
prove that this is indeed so.

The beginnings of the experiment are just coming
of age.  It was on February 14, 1966, that decimal currency
was introduced to Australia.  Instead of a pound
of 20 shillings, each of 12 pence, we were to have a
dollar of a hundred cents.  There was some argument
about the use of the word *dollar*, since other countries
(Hong Kong, to name but one) already used the term,
but the new currency proved easy to use and immediately
popular.  Americans will find that easy to understand.

In fact, the word *dollar* was not entirely new to
us.  Few Australians know that Australia almost had
decimal currency 140 years earlier.  When Australia
was first settled by Europeans, no currency was provided.
Coins from visiting ships were used, Spanish
dollars being especially prominent.  *Dollar* was then an
everyday word; it gave a name to the *dollar-bird* with
its whitish patch in the center of each wing suggesting
the shape of a silver dollar.  Until 1826 when Britain
legislated that sterling should be used in the colonies,
it seemed likely that a currency based on a dollar
would be officially adopted in Australia.

The eventual adoption of decimal currency nearly
a century and a half later caused few linguistic problems.
Words like *penny farthing, penny wise, penny-pinching*
already had an old-fashioned ring and could
go on being used, perhaps with a fading awareness of
their origin.  A number of slang terms, *quid* for
'pound,' *bob* for 'shilling,' and the already less used
*zack* for 'sixpence' or *trey* 'threepence' were suddenly
unemployed.  Bookmakers thought the loss of the old
terms *spin* (&pound;5), *brick* (&pound;10), *pony* (&pound;25) and *spot*
(&pound;100) slowed business, but racing and betting
went on.

But decimal coinage was only a beginning.  Metrication
of weights and measures followed.  This time
there was no simple &ldquo;translation&rdquo; as &pound;1 = $2.  An inch
was now 2.45cm and a bushel 0.0364 cubic meters
(which we spell &ldquo;metres&rdquo;).  Despite the efforts of
authorities (such as prohibiting the importing of rulers
showing imperial measurements), people found it
harder to get used to the new terms.  I must admit that
I still invariably think of my weight as (well, ideally)
10 stone 7lbs (which Americans would, I think, call
147 pounds), and cannot visualize heights expressed in
centimeters.

The use of kilograms (usually now shortened to
*kilos*) in shopping presents few problems.  *Kilometer*,
however, divides Australians into two camps, those
who follow the recommendations of the metrication
board and analogy with (e.g.) *centimeter* and pronounce
with stress on *kil*-, and those who follow the
arguments, based on a sound knowledge of Greek, of
the former Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, and pronounce
with stress on -*lom*-.  Rules for abbreviated
forms had to be set.  The decision is to regard them as
symbols, not abbreviations, and write them without
points, &ldquo;2m,&rdquo; &ldquo;3cc,&rdquo; &ldquo;4 km/h,&rdquo; etc.

Metrication was far-reaching.  Volumes were to
be in liters and milliliters (the European continental
deciliter seems not to be used in Australia).  Paper sizes
were reorganized.  People who had just become used to
*calories* were expected to think in *kilojoules.  Acres*
gave way to *hectares*.  The one timber term everyone
knew, the *four-by-two*, perversely called a *two-by-four*
by Americans, seems not to be replaced by a
widely known term.  Fahrenheit thermometers were
scrapped for Celsius and one could no longer welcome
summer with a &ldquo;century&rdquo; temperature, though for a
while newspapers tried to keep up the excitement with
a coined &ldquo;celtury&rdquo; for a temperature just under 38&deg;C.

Problems arose in sport.  In Australian Rules football,
a *mark* was made only when a ball had traveled
ten yards.  For simplicity the required distance was
changed to ten meters.  But in cricket a popping-crease
is still four feet from the wicket and has to be defined
in Australia as 1.22m.

Measurements have not provided slang terms as
much as money has, but they have entered more
deeply into compounds and metaphors.  University
English departments are frequently asked to decide
what an official should call a number of kilometers
traveled when claiming payment for what used to be
called &ldquo;mileage.&rdquo;  There are place-names (*Mile End,
Five Mile Creek*), and while people might argue
whether a well-known song is called *Five Miles from
Gundagai or Nine Miles from Gundagai*, no one wants
to measure the distance in kilometers.  We are used to
expressions like *miles better, within an inch of his life,
every inch a king* (or, facetiously, *every inch a ruler*),
*an ounce of practice is better than a pound of theory*.
We use *mileage, milestone, yardstick*, metaphorically,
and will go on doing so perhaps until the miles
and yards and inches mean no more to us than the *ell*
connected to our *elbow*.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Take My Word for It*](https://www.amazon.com/Take-Word-Language-William-Safire/dp/0805006060)
William Safire, (Times Books, 1986), ix + 357pp.

Anyone interested in language is aware of the
ubiquitous, perennial presence of Bill Safire's column,
&ldquo;On Language&rdquo;: it appears in *The New York Times
Magazine* almost every Sunday and, on other days, in
other newspapers.  Occasionally, Bill is off on a holiday
somewhere—presumably keeping mum—and someone
else occupies his *personal space* (a sense that seems to be
missing from the *OED* and *Supplements*).  That adds
up to many a month of Sundays (to coin a clich&eacute;), and
his numerous columns have been collected in a series of
books, the main advantage of which (to a faithful
reader) is their indexes.  (I'll let Bill struggle with the
copula in that clause.)  Another (major) advantage is
that the correspondence he received relating to a particular
topic accompanies that article, providing better
continuity.

Safire is not always right in his linguistic observations—one
of his books is entitled, *I Stand Corrected*—
but his writing is always lively, and like most of us, he
gets more careful as he goes along.  I am occasionally
put off by the arch style of &ldquo;On Language,&rdquo; and a
book's-worth of it is a bit much.  But others do not,
apparently, agree with this criticism.  I am not suggesting
that commentary on language need be sobersided,
merely that in a perpetual attempt at being lighthearted
and clever, Safire frequently obscures the very
clarity he is trying to bring to his subject.

Notwithstanding the writings in *The Times*
[London], by Philip Howard, and those that appear
in VERBATIM, &ldquo;On Language&rdquo; is probably the most
widely read commentary on language—especially
English—in the world.  Its influence may therefore be
profound, and it behooves language-watchers to
attend to Safire's briefings, even if they are occasionally
misleading or deal with subjects that often seem
esoteric to those of us not in the midst of the Washington
maelstrom.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {John M. Balsam}

Concerning &ldquo;Our Playful Vocabulary&rdquo; by Burt
Hochberg [XIII, 2]:

He omitted several clich&eacute;s from the dice game of
craps:

*to crap out*: When one throws a two three or 12
on a coming out roll one loses.  This has passed into the
language as a synonym for 'drop out or fail' as, &ldquo;He
*crapped out* ('dropped out') from Bucknell in his freshman
year.  I was *aceing* ('getting a Grade of A in') a
biology course and then I got caught unprepared for a
batch of pop quizzes and crapped out ('failed').&rdquo;

Then there is the term *play the field*.  This comes
from a section of the crap table where the numbers 2,
3, 4, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are displayed.  Some layouts use
a 5 instead of a 9 and some pay double or triple on 2 or 12.  The term describes someone who is no longer dating
a particular person on a regular basis, but rather
anyone on a random basis: &ldquo;He was going with her,
but they broke up.  He's pretty depressed and doesn't
go out at all, but she is *playing the field*.&rdquo;

Lastly, there's the term *hard way*.  In craps this
consists of the numbers 4, 6, 8, or 10 made with a
pair, as an 8 with two 4's.  It is used to denote a difficult
way of doing something, as, &ldquo;The Mets were
expected to bear the Red Socks in 4 or 5 but they did it
the *hard way*&rdquo; (i.e., in 7 games).

One other term that I thought was used only in
Nevada has popped up elsewhere.  The game is Keno,
a relative of Bingo distinguished by its low price (one
can play for 70 cents) and long odds.  The odds for
example of catching 12 out of 12 spots are 500 million
to one.  A Florida friend of mine used it to denote a
cheap political shot, as in, &ldquo;A lot of *Keno* shots ('cheap
shots') were taken at Senator Paula Hawkens because
of her neck injury.&rdquo;  A friend in Massachusetts used the
term this way: &ldquo;Pittsburgh has only a *Keno* shot at the
division title next year,&rdquo; meaning, of course, 'Pittsburgh
at best is a very, very long, well-nigh impossible
shot to win the National League East Title.'

*[John M. Balsam, Las Vegas, Nevada]*

## &ldquo;I&rdquo; before &ldquo;E,&rdquo; except...
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

My seventh-grade English teacher, Mrs.
Huckins, had blue hair, wore a paisley smock,
and kept an avocado seed in a glass vase on the radiator.
I wish that everyone could have a Mrs. Huckins
for English, for she was the mentor who taught me the
basic spelling rules: how to drop the *e* in words like
*writing* and *dining*, how to drop the *y* and add *ie* in
words like *babies* and *studied*, how to double the final
consonant in words like *stopping* and *occurrence*, and,
of course: &ldquo;*i* before *e*, except after *c*.&rdquo;  Alas, though, as
I gradually attained the age of the sere and yellow
leaf, I came to realize that the last rule did not really
work.  Granted that an occasional exception may
prove a rule, but this rule has so many exceptions that
the exceptions bury the rule.

To begin with, the most famous of all spelling jingles
has a small amendment tacked on:

>*I* before *e*,  
Except after *c*,  
Unless sounded as *a*,  
As in *neighbor* and *weigh*.

The last two lines suggest exceptions such as *beige,
deign, eight, feign, feint, geisha, heinous, heir,
inveigh, inveigle, lei, neigh, neighbor, reign, rein,
reindeer, skein, sleigh, their, veil, vein, weigh*, and
*weight*.  That makes twenty-three exceptions to the *i*
before *e* rule already.

Another batch of exceptions consists of words in
which both the *e* and the *i* are sounded: *absenteeism,
agreeing, albeit, atheist, being, contemporaneity, fleeing,
freeing, guaranteeing, pedigreeing, plebeian,
reify, reimburse, reincarnate, reinfect, reinforce,
reinstate, reinsure, reintegrate, reinterpret, reinvent,
reinvest, reissue, reiterate, seeing, simultaneity, spontaneity,
teeing*, and *treeing*.  That raises the total of
exceptions to fifty-two.

Now it does not take a genius to realize that the *i*
before *e* rule does not work for the names of many
people and places: Eugene *O'Neill* and Dwight *Eisenhower*
drank *Budweiser* and *Rheingold* in *Anaheim*
and *Leicester*.  We could add a long scroll of names to
this cluster, like *Steinham* and *Weiss*, but we shall settle
for fifty-eight rule-flouters at this point.

Here are thirty blatant breaches of the *i* before *e*
dictum that do not involve names, separately pronounced
vowels, or the long *a* sound: *caffeine,
codeine, counterfeit, eiderdown, either, Fahrenheit,
feisty, foreign, forfeit, heifer, heigh ho, height, heist,
kaleidoscope, keister, leisure, neither, nonpareil, obeisance,
onomatopeia, protein, seismograph, seize,
sheikh, sleight, sovereign, stein, surfeit, Weimaraner*,
and *weird*.

We are now up to eighty-eight exceptions, with
miles to go before we sleep.  For we must remember
that the rule proclaims that *i* comes before *e*, except
after *c*.  This concept works perfectly well for words
like *receive* and *ceiling*, but what about words in
which *c* is followed by *ie*?: *agencies, ancient, concierge,
conscience, conscientious, contingencies, currencies,
emergencies, fallacies, fancied, financier,
glacier, mercies, omniscient, policies, prescient, science,
society, species, sufficient*, and *tendencies*.

Now have a look at three more words of this type:
*deficiencies, efficiencies*, and *proficiencies*.  Note that
these are double plays, each shattering the rule twice
within a few syllables.  But we shall count each as only
a single violation, bringing our accumulation to 112.

In the same category, if we are to move upward
and outward, we shall have to consult with a genius,
like Albert *Einstein*.  Einstein would point out that his
surname is another double violation.  But again we
shall be lenient and count him as one, bringing our
total to 113.

Einstein might also spout arcane words like *beidellite,
corporeity, cuneiform, deice, deictic, deionize,
eidolon, exigencies, femininity, gaseity, greige,
hermaphrodeity, heterogeneity, homogeneity, leifite,
leister, leitmotif, Manichaeism, meiosis, mythopoeic,
peiramater, reive, rheic, seity, sulphureity, weibullite,
weir, xanthoproteic, zein*, and *zeitgeist* (another
double).

These thirty everyday words raise our total of
exceptions to the *i* before *e* rule to 143, just one away
from proving that the famous spelling aphorism is
grossly misleading.

So we ask: is there one more common exception
that will bring the count to a satisfying dozen dozen?
For the answer we'll have to consult with the *Deity*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We can't make good grammar great.  But we want to
make flawed writing acceptable.&rdquo;  [Lance A. Miller, in the
*Wall Street Journal*, September 29, 1983.  Submitted by
Robert O. Vaughn, West New York, New Jersey.]


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

The recent letters [XI,3, et al] regarding palindromes
have had me coming and going.  As a longtime
aficionado in search of foreign examples, I've run
(backwards, that is) across most of the Greek and
Latin ones mentioned, and as a matter of (retro)
course, have found a handful in French and Spanish.
For example:

>&Eacute;sope reste ici et se repose.  'Aesop remains here
and is resting.'
>  
>&Eacute;lu par cette crapule 'Elected by that scoundrel'
>  
>L'&acirc;me des uns iamais [i.e., jamais] n'use de mal.
'The soul of some never makes use of evil.' 
> 
>D&aacute;bale arroz a la zorra el abad.  'The abbot was
giving rice to the she-fox [or prostitute, if you
prefer].'  etc.

But I've always wondered whether some of the more
orthographically esoteric languages, with lots of consonant
clusters, could possibly lend themselves to the
phenomenon.  It's hard for me to imagine palindromes
in, say, Polish.

Colleagues assure me that they do exist in German,
though they have yet to come up with any of
real substance.  (The compound noun Reliefpfeiler, a
'column sculpted in relief,' is the best they can do;
rather feeble stuff, I'd say.)  Others swear that they
have seen some in Russian, but suggest that they have
probably been stricken from the language as backward
Westernisms.  A Hebraist tells me that Hebrew creates
palindromes—prosthendromes?—rather easily, given
the absence of written vowels, but hasn't yet supplies
any examples.

Be that as it may, thanks to my friend, Joseph
Stasa, I have recently discovered an apparent treasure-trove
in, of all languages, Czech.  The &Ccirc;eskoslovensky
Svet of December 1985 documents the work of
one Stanislav Tvrd&iacute;k, from Praha-Radotin, who has
collected some 3500 palindromes—the Czech term is
r&aacute;&ccaron;ek, the word for the 'backward-walking cray-fish'—of
which well over 2000 are in his native
tongue.  The following examples display the same
delightfully forced logic typical of so many of the
palindromes we all know and love:

>Do h&aacute;je si Jan Ale&scirc; &scirc;el a naj&iacute; se jahod.  'Jan Ale&scaron;
went to the woods and will eat strawberries.'
>
>R&aacute;d l&iacute;bil se Vit sle&ccirc;n&aacute;m, Man&ccirc;e lstiv&eacute; sl&iacute;bil dar.
'Vit was glad that young ladies like him; he
promised a gift to the running Man&ccirc;a.'

And, if we accept the ch as an individual grapheme:

>Do chladu si m&iacute;su dal Chod.  'Chod put a bowl in
a cooler.'

I am assured that Mr. Tvrdik will welcome correspondence
addressed in care of &Ccirc;eskoslovensky Sv&ecirc;t,
Vinohradsk&aacute; 46, 1200 Praha 2, Czechoslovakia, which
will backward all mail to him.

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Adrian Room}

In his interesting musings on Uranus and its
name, &ldquo;Below the Belt Among the Stars&rdquo; [XII, 4],
Thomas H. Middleton says he never managed to discover
who actually did name the planet.  It was the
German astronomer Johann Elert Bode.  He proposed
the name in 1781, the year that Herschel discovered it.
His reasoning was that since Uranus was the father of
Saturn in Greek mythology, while Saturn was in turn
the father of Jupiter, it made sense to call the newly
discovered planet Uranus as the two planets nearest to
it already bore the names of Jupiter and Saturn.

Then in his perfectly fair review of my book
Dictionary of True Etymologies, Laurence Urdang
accuses me of misspelling Abraxas as &ldquo;Abrasax.&rdquo;  In
fact the name can be spelled either way, and I actually
based my version on the one selected for the etymology
of the word abracadabra in Collins English Dictionary,
of which Mr. Urdang was the Editorial Director.
So my &ldquo;misspelling&rdquo; is in good company!

*[Adrian Room, Petersfield, Hants.]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Brunner}

Mr. Lamar York states, in &ldquo;The Antepenultimate&rdquo;
[XII,4], that &ldquo;the South redounds&rdquo; (that's a nice
Spenserianism!) &ldquo;with thundering double trochees&rdquo; for
names of towns, cities and so on, and &ldquo;gives his vote&rdquo;
to the Indian origin of Pensacola, Tallahassee, etc., as
an explanation of the stress pattern he is discussing.

But surely he's overlooking the fact that dual
stress in town names is a very ancient format in
Europe.  Two of the pubs to which I walk the dogs on
Sunday morning are at Shepton Beauchamp (&ldquo;Beecham&rdquo;)
and Over Stratton.  A little further afield one
comes to Weston Zoyland or Castle Cary.  Here are
others that spring to mind, in no particular order:
Aston Clinton, Milford Haven, Wootton Bassett, Newport
Pagnell, Moreton Pinkney, Churston Ferrers,
Bognor Regis, Newton Abbot, Marston Magna, Chipping
Campden (likewise Chipping Norton—this is the
Norse influence, of course: cf. -k&ouml;ping), Burton
Bradstock....  The list is immense, and the adoption
of names bearing this stress-pattern hasn't stopped;
during the recent reorganization of the London boroughs
one of them became Tower Hamlets.

What is more, this trochaic form is familiar in
France (e.g., Clermont-Ferrand), Germany (e.g.,
M&ouml;chen Gladbach), and to a lesser extent in Scandinavia
(e.g., S&ouml;dert&auml;lje).

I'm afraid I must dismiss his case as &ldquo;not proven.&rdquo;

*[John Brunner, South Petherton, Somerset]*

[There are, of course, many others that spring to (my)
mind: Aston Abbots, Leighton Buzzard, Stony Stratford,
Stratton Audley, Sutton Courtney, Princes
Risborough [sic], Stanton Harcourt, Steeple Claydon,
Little Chalfont, (et al.), Aldermaston, Westcott Barton,
etc. —Ed.].

## Paring Pairs No. 26 (Gaelic Division)

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Concrete evidence of first Gael?  
(b). Annie Laurie in Scotland.  
(c). Gaelic sailor stern first at airfield.  
(d). Whistler catches Gael at genuflection.  
(e). If he hadn't bloomed, Gael would make history.  
(f). Gaelic bird call.  
(g). A Gaelic scheme born after seven.  
(h). Gael insensate at speed of sound.  
(i). Gael amazed at Indian blanket—this is straight.  
(j). Trim Gael.  
(k). Gael tells long country tale.  
(l). Gaelic bovine in Hong Kong harbor?  
(m). Composer for woodwinds?  
(n). Gaelic-Indian mother.  
(o). Noisy Gaelic lexico-grapher.  
(p). Gaelic weatherman.  
(q). Gaelic actor never went up on his lines.  
(r). Reagan's horizontal line of Gaelic descent.  
(s). Poetic relative of Gaelic uncle?  
(t). Attendance was spotty, Scotty, and you are tardy.  
(u). You win either way with Gaelic inventor.  
(v). Bashful Gael is the genuine article.  
(w). Gael given to insolent, elementary writing.

(1). Adam.  
(2). Awe.  
(3). Cauliflower.  
(4). Caw.  
(5). Cloud.  
(6). Cloy.  
(7). Cow.  
(8). Coy.  
(9). Cree.   
(10). Dowel.  
(11). Eight.  
(12). Guffey.  
(13). In.  
(14). Kneel.  
(15). Late.  
(16). Loud.  
(17). Mc, Mac, Mick.  
(18). Niece.  
(19). Number.  
(20). Or.  
(21). Ready.  
(22). Ron.  
(23). Rural.  
(24). Tar.  
(25). Tosh.  
(26). Truck.  
(27). You.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those received
in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A.  *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Illerate But Arrogant American.&rdquo;  [Headline for
Sylvia Porter's column in *The Warren Times Observer*,
Warren, Pennsylvania, May 17, 1985.  Submitted by Bill
Hill, Warren.]

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 25

(a). Vandals amok in Castro's fields.  (39,7) Raze Cane.    
(b). My dad, a weak hitter, is at the plate.  (37,50) Pops Up.  
(c). Bar patron fakes convulsion.  (13, 21) Counter Fit.  
(d). It's depressing to leave these lovely rooms.  (48, 45) Suite Sorrow.  
(e). St. Louis ball club's imported mascot could be a heart stopper.  (8, 53) Card Yak.  
(f). Gradually assembled luncheon to promote reconciliation. (34, 30) Peace Meal.  
(g). Universally heard in control towers.  (35, 17) Plane English.  
(h). Minor infection makes boss unreceptive to suggestions. (24, 11) Head Cold.  
(i). What she'll do when she goes back to that boutique on Main St.  (40, 1) Return Address.  
(j). Endurance test for an angry nation.  (15, 14) Cross Country.  
(k). Had cosmetic surgery, and now ... (28, 3) Knows Better.  
(l). Existentialist work violates fire laws.  (32, 18) No Exit.  
(m). Clowning actors spoil mood of Trojan War drama. (26, 36) Horse Play.  
(n). Token applause for deceptive move.  (20, 38) Feint Praise.  
(o). Champion Dervish took students for a spin.  (51, 9) Whirled Class.  
(p). Aspiring leftist physician serene about revolutionary movement.  (6, 27) Calm Intern.  
(q). Feds intercept pop-carrying coach.  (10, 5) Coke Bussed.  
(r). &ldquo;Officer down!&rdquo; Or is it just an excuse?  (12, 33) Cop Out.  
(s). Interrupted dairy snack by scaring &ldquo;h&rdquo; out of her. (46, 25) Spied Her.  
(t). Daunting ceremonies, even for one of publicized courage.  (52, 49) Writes Tough.  
(u). Discussion of terms of shipment leaves directors cold.  (22, 4) Freon Bored.  
(v). Monarch, soon to be executed, issues pronouncement. (29, 42) Louis Says.  
(w). Avoid impairment of countenance by wearing mask.  (41, 19) Save Face.  
(x). Gossips next door track our every move.  (31, 47) Neighbor Stalk.  
(y). It's not all bad news.  For instance, we can expect plenty of chicken.  (16, 2) Eggs Ample.  
(z). Some people rub Glaswegian star the wrong way. (23, 43) Grate Scot.  

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Tender parts of the art editor's midsection (11)  
9\. Photo of wild couples (5-2)  
10\. Young actress in genuine trouble (7)  
11\. Countryman takes A-Train in story (9)  
12\. I dispense with model (5)  
13\. Walks in street, then takes a cab (7)  
16\. I'd left a sign of spring in journals (7)  
17\. Returning, a Republican once more falls for a newlywed? (7)  
19\. Carnivorous plant from Florida upset wing-ding (7)  
21\. Narrow cassette user (5)  
22\. Heavenly gateman keeps frost to outskirts (9)  
25\. More smooth compliment (7)  
26\. Former spouse breaks in, sees good-lookers (7)  
27\. Prisoner makes beer for monetary awards (11)  

**Down**

1\. Posts filled by company subordinates (7)  
2\. Look inside for a story (5)  
3\. Laugh about desire to be a wild laugher (5)  
4\. Uses middle of knife cutting cobbler fruit (7)  
5\. Doctor has ache in the rear (4,3)  
6\. High official turning in shoddy rating I deserve (9)  
7\. Make assumption about resort city—it's second-rate (8)  
8\. Ladies to be raising hawk? (6)  
14\. Show up again to harvest fruit (8)  
15\. Give a lift to help reviewer with accent (9)  
17\. Tell of tiny switches (6)  
18\. Hopeful, getting rid of the last drug (7)  
19\. Divine metals included in professional charge (7)  
20\. Congressman comes up with uses for studies (7)  
23\. Mangle about ten with saw (5)  
24\. Sticker in front of the trumpet (5)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. HER-O-IN-E.  
5\. MA(CAB)RE.  
9\. SUSHI (hidden).  
10\. P(A-RENT)AGE.  
11\. ALLEGRO (anag.).  
12\. H(AIRC)UT (CAR I anag.).  
13\. IRENE CASTLE (anag.).  
18\. FRE(D A-STAIR)E.  
21\. RADI(C)AL.  
23\. K(NOW)ING.  
25\. STEV-EDORE (VEST anag.; ERODE rev.).  
26\. EXI(S)T.  
27\. DEB-A-TES (SET A BED rev.).  
28\. STAN-D IN.  
  
**Down**

1\. HIS-PANIC.  
2\. RESOLVED (anag.).  
3\. I-RING.  
4\. ESPIONAGE (anag.).  
5\. MARCH (two meanings).  
6\. CONT(IN)ENT.  
7\. B-RANCH.  
8\. ERECTS (anag.).  
14\. EFFI(CI)ENT (FIFTEEN anag.).  
15\. THANKLESS (hidden).  
16\. CITIFIED (anag.).  
17\. H(EIGHT)EN.  
19\. ERAS-ED.  
20\. ADVERB (anag.).  
22\. LOOTS (rev.).  
24\. O-PER-A.  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v14n1_Summer_1987)