--- 
title: "VOL XIV, No 2 [Autumn, 1987]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Sinister Dexterity [^a1]
*Karl F. Heumann and Hans H. Wellisch*

>*Right.* adj. 1.  Straight... 6.  Of actions, conduct,
etc.: in accordance of what is just or good...
7.... correct, proper.  Also, agreeing with
facts, true. 8. Fitting, proper, appropriate. 10.
Right side: that side of anything which is regarded
as the principal... 18.  The distinctive
epithet of the hand normally the stronger; by
extension also of that side of the body, its limbs,
their clothing, etc....
>
>*Left.* adj. 1.  The distinctive epithet of the hand
which is normally the weaker of the two ...
2.... implying inefficiency of performance.
>
>*Oxford English Dictionary*

A droitly as we try to avoid being gauche, we may
be left with an outright sense of loss of directions.
The *OED's* definitions of *right* and *left* in their
directional sense seem to us today to be curiously biased;
they are almost oblivious to the fact that congenital
lefthandedness is far more common than was perhaps
thought in Victorian times when the formidable
James Murray and his staff wrote their definitions.
Other dictionary makers down to our own times have,
however, followed in the footsteps of the *OED*, and
define *left* and *right* not just as terms for opposite
directions (derived from the terms for the two sides of
our bodies), but *right* with the additional meaning of
'correct, proper, just' and similar concepts; *left*, on the
other hand, has the connotations of 'awkard, improper,
unlucky,' and even 'ominous.'  During most of
recorded history, people have clung to the belief that
the left side is inferior to the right one.  Muslims are
even exhorted never to extend the left hand for greeting
because it is considered unclean (being used for
purposes of personal hygiene).

From a purely scientific point of view there is of
course nothing to indicate that either side of a (more-or-less)
symmetrical body in nature is the better or
more favorable one, and one of the earliest refutations
of such superstitious beliefs appeared, not unexpectedly,
during the Enlightenment, though it was not at
first based on pure reason but on a theological argument.
Leibniz observed that God could have chosen to
create either right or left first.  As a mathematician, he
was naturally concerned with symmetry (the two sides
of an equation must have the same value).  Another
famous and more recent mathematician, Herman
Weyl, in quoting him, said that &ldquo;Scientific thinking
sides with Leibniz.  Mythical thinking has always taken
the contrary view, as is evinced by its usage of right
and left as symbols for such polar opposites as good
and evil.  You need only think of the double meaning of
the word *right* itself.&rdquo;

Yet, in another branch of science, namely in
stereochemistry, the leftward direction does seem to
indicate properties that are unfavorable (at least from
the point of view of human beings and other higher
animals), in that many *levo*- compounds are the active
or benign forms of an organic compound, while the
*dextro*- forms are inactive or toxic.  The exact opposite
also occurs, however, thus apparently confirming the
general scientific view of nature not distinguishing between
left and right, up or down, inside or out.  That
was also the accepted view of all physicists, expressed
in the axiom of the Conservation of Parity, until about
some 30 years ago, when two physicists, Tsung-Dao
Lee and Chen Ning Yang, discovered that some nuclear
particles can and do &ldquo;discern&rdquo; as it were, between
left and right, and that they have a distinct preference
for the leftward turn.  As so often is the case, the subatomic
world is mirrored on the cosmic scale: astronomers
have found that a very much larger number of
galaxies spin leftward rather than in a clockwise direction.

The ambivalence of beliefs, whether mythical or
scientific, on left and right is aptly reflected in the
terms used for the two directions in the world's languages,
as a glance at the accompanying Table shows.
This Table shows the major families of languages with
their principal members and their terms for *left, right*
(direction) and *right* (as a synonym for, 'correct,
proper').  Practically all languages have several terms
for the latter concept.  If that is the case and one of
them denotes also the right side, that term was chosen
for the 'right' = 'correct' column.  The use of the same
word for the right-hand side and for 'correct, true,'
and related concepts is by no means a linguistic universal,
and does not hold true even for languages
which belong to the same family or branch.  Thus, all
Germanic languages use the same Indo-European (IE)
root[^a1] *reg* for the derivation of words indicating 'correct,
proper,' and the Latin word for 'king,' *rex*, is also
formed from the same root (hence, the notion of the
divine right of kings, and the legal principle &ldquo;the king
can do no wrong&rdquo;).  That root is, however, not used in
the three Scandinavian languages for the right side of
the body, nor are their words for 'left' related to those
used in English, German, or Dutch.

In the Romance languages, Latin *dexter* is at the
root of all words for the right side, and the words for
'correct' are all derived from the same IE root as
their German counterparts.  But some interesting developments
have taken place regarding the words for
the left side: the Latin *sinister* originally meant 'left'
and also 'favorable'; only later on, under Greek influence,
did the word come to mean the exact opposite,
'unfavorable,' and the left side or the left hand were
considered to be those to be avoided lest something
unlucky or untoward might happen.  Pliny used the
word *sinisteritas* in the sense of 'awkward behavior'
as opposed to *dexteritas* which meant to the Romans
exactly what its modern English form means to us.  In
French, *senestre* was in use until about the 15th century,
when all of a sudden *gauche* became the word
for 'left'; yet even the most modern and comprehensive
French dictionary cannot trace its etymology to
a definite source, which is shrouded in the mists of
the distant past: it probably had something to do
with being askew or turning aside.  In Spanish, *sinies-tro*
was used until the 12th century, e.g., in the epic
of *El Cid*; thereafter, the Basque word for 'left,'
*ezker*, began to be used throughout the realm of the
Visigoths as *ezquierro*, later changed to the modern
*izquierdo* and similar words in Portuguese, Catalan,
Gascon, and Proven&ccedil;al.  While Italian has retained
the *sinistro* of its direct ancestor, it also uses *manco*
for 'left hand,' derived from Latin *mancus* 'maimed,
infirm' (French *manqu&eacute;* 'lost, defective' is from the
same Latin word), again based on the idea of the left
hand being the weaker one.

| FAMILY      | LANGUAGE      |                       |                            | 'correct'      |
| ----------- | ------------- | --------------------- | -------------------------- | -------------- |
| Germanic    | English       | left                  | right                      | right          |
|             | German        | links                 | rechts                     | richtig        |
|             | Dutch         | links                 | rechts                     | recht          |
|             | Yiddish       | links                 | rekhts                     |
|             | Danish        | venstre               | h&phi;jre                  | rigtig         |
|             | Norwegian     | venstre               | h&phi;gre                  | riktig         |
|             | Swedish       | nster                 | h&ouml;ger                 | riktig         |
|             | Icelandic     | vinstri               | haegri                     | r&eacute;tt    |
| Italic      | Latin         | sinister              | dexter                     | rectus         |
|             | Italian       | sinistro              | destro                     | retto          |
|             | French        | gauche                | droit                      | droit          |
|             | Spanish       | izquierdo             | derecho                    | recto          |
| Romance     | Portuguese    | esquerdo              | direito                    | reto           |
|             | Catalan       | esquerre              | dret                       | recte          |
|             | Romanian      | nga                   | dreapt&abreve;             | drept          |
| Celtic      | Welsh         | aswy                  | deheu                      | cywir          |
|             | Irish         | ciot&oacute;g         | dheas                      | ceart          |
| Hellenic    | Greek         | aristeros             | dexios                     | orthos         |
|             | Albanian      | majt&euml;            | djatht&euml;               | drejt&euml;    |
| Slavic      | Russian       | levyi                 | pravyi                     | pravyi         |
|             | Czech         | levo                  | pravo                      | prav&yacute;   |
|             | Polish        | lewy                  | prawy                      | prawy          |
|             | Bulgarian     | liavo                 | nadiasno                   | pravilen       |
|             | SerboCroatian | levo                  | desno                      | pravo          |
| Baltic      | Lithuanian    | den&scaron;in&edot;n  | kair&eogon;                | teisingai      |
|             | Latvian       | kreisi                | labi                       | pareizi        |
| Iranian     | Armenian      | tzakh                 | atch                       | ughigh         |
|             | Farsi         | chap                  | rast                       | rast           |
| Indic       | Sanskrit      | v&amacr;ma            | dakshina                   | shuddha        |
|             | Hindi         | b&amacr;ny&amacr;n    | d&amacr;ny&amacr;n         | th&imacr;ka    |
| FinnoUgric  | Finnish       | vasemalla             | oikealla                   | oikea          |
|             | Estonian      | vasakul               | paremal                    | otse           |
|             | Hungarian     | bal                   | jobb                       | helyes         |
| Turkic      | Turkish       | sol                   | sa&gbreve;                 | do&gbreve;ru   |
| Mongolian   | Mongolian     | dz&uuml;&uuml;n       | bar&uuml;&uuml;n           | dz&ouml;w      |
|             | Chinese       | zu&#92;?&#92;         | y&ocirc;u                  | dui            |
| SinoTibetan | Burmese       | be                    | nya                        | to-            |
|             | Tibetan       | y&ouml;&ouml;         | y&euml;&euml;              | ts&ouml;&ouml; |
|             | Thai          | paisai                | paiqua                     | t&umacr;k      |
| —           | Japanese      | hidari                | migi                       | tadachii       |
| —           | Korean        | oenp'yon              | orunp'yon                  | parunyon       |
| —           | Vietnames     | b&ecirc;n tr&aacute;i | b&ecirc;n tay, ph&aacute;i | d&uacute;ng    |
| Malayan     | Indonesian    | kiri                  | kanan                      | patut          |
|             | Tagalog       | kaliwa                | kanan                      | wasto          |
| Bantu       | Swahili       | kushoto               | kulia                      | haki           |
| Semitic     | Arabic        | shmal                 | yamin                      | sakh           |
|             | Hebrew        | smol                  | yemin                      | nakhon         |
|             | Amharic       | gra                   | q&auml;nn                  | smami          |
| Artificial  | Esperanto     | maldekstra            | dekstra                    | prava          |

The Slavic languages show remarkable uniformity
in their use of terms for 'right' and 'left,' all of which
are based on the same roots and are practically interchangeable
except for minor differences.  Most Asian
and African languages as well as the two principal
Semitic languages do not identify 'correct' with the
right side, but surprisingly, Korean (a language probably
not related to any other known language or linguistic
family) shows the same usage pattern as English.

It is obvious that the compilation of the Table
could have been done only with the help of bilingual
dictionaries and in some cases that of native speakers
of a language.  Dictionary look-up proved to be unexpectedly
difficult.  Many dictionaries fail to indicate
the grammatical form of words, that is, whether the
foreign term for *right* and *left* is an adjective, adverb,
or noun, and whether there are differences between
these forms (in English there are none, but in inflected
languages there may be, which is not always made
clear by lexicographers).  In doing look-up, many times
it was necessary to verify the correct meaning of a
term in an English-to-foreign dictionary by consulting
also a foreign-to-English one, especially when no context
was given in the former; conversely, some large
dictionaries offer so many different shades of meaning,
illustrated by phrases, that it becomes difficult for the
uninitiated to grasp the meaning that would best express
the concept of right or left for the purposes of a
comparative table.  One is left to wonder how well
bilingual dictionaries perform their intended task if it
is difficult to figure out the correct term for such basic
notions as opposite directions.  For some of the less
well-known languages we resorted sometimes to the
types of small dictionaries or glossaries prepared for
tourists, on the assumption (both naive and mistaken,
as it turned out) that a traveler looking for directions
on the street would need to know the words for right
and left.  To our great astonishment, only very few of
these popular guides included what we were looking
for, while offering translations of phrases such as &ldquo;This
tablecloth is not clean&rdquo; and similar inanities.

The basic notions of right and left are not expressed
in any consistent pattern by the world's languages.
Many of them have the same terms for *right* in
both its English meanings.  Most languages have several
words expressing the concept of *right* in the sense of
'correct,' one of which may also be the word for the
right side of the body or the right hand.  Almost all
languages have only one word for *left*, and many of
them derive that word from one that expresses weakness
or has an ominous ring to it.  We shall let Oliver
Herford have the last word on both right and left:.

Ambidextrous: not letting your right hand
know who is holding your left hand.

***

[^a1]: From a phrase in James Joyce's *Finnegans Wake*, p. 384.26.

## The Morox
*David Galef, New York City*

Any student of language is familiar with oxymorons,
those self-contained contradictions such as
Milton's &ldquo;darkness visible&rdquo; in *Paradise Lost*, or Hamlet's
&ldquo;I must be cruel only to be kind.&rdquo;  The intent is to
produce a compact image of paradox, a comprehension
in the reader's mind of opposites coexisting and
reinforcing each other.  But consider the following sentence,
supposedly written by E.B. White when he
wanted to get a rise from his editor Harold Ross at *The
New Yorker*: &ldquo;It is a pretty ugly building and a little
big for its surroundings.&rdquo;  The two contradictions here
are a far cry from elegant oxymoron, and, for lack of a
better term, I will call them *moroxes*.

Just what is going on in a phrase such as *pretty
ugly* that disqualifies it from being an oxymoron while
enlisting it as a morox?  To start with, there is no intent
to make a skillful blend of opposites.  The speaker or
writer was simply trying to modify the adjective *ugly*
and used the qualifier *pretty* as a word to mean
'rather.'  Still, as Empson says in *Seven Types of Ambiguity*,
&ldquo;All languages are composed of dead metaphors
as the soil of corpses.&rdquo;  And dead metaphors, as well as
old or simply other meanings of words, have a tendency
to reawaken.  When someone describes Times
Square as being &ldquo;far nearer&rdquo; than Port Authority, he is
committing the same imprecision, using *far* as an
intensifier without reference to its more regular meaning.
One can spot *many fewer problems, greatly lessened
faculties*, a plenipotentiary who is *largely
insignificant*—but here, if one is going to start hunting
for moroxes actively, he must introduce a rule: the
happy morox should have a fortuitous quality, the
sense of being unintentional.  Hence, the candidates
*obscenely decent* and *calmly angry* are suspect, having
that slightly artistic tone that would place them in the
category of oxymorons.  So throw those out and try this
one instead: *barely clothed*.

Moroxes in their befuddlement are the near-opposite
of a structure known as the Tom Swifty, where the
adverb modifies a verb or noun to form a pun.  *The
organ-donor gave wholeheartedly* is a Tom Swifty.
*The town was wholly fragmented over the election* is a
morox.  Other prime moroxes are *unbelivably real*
(popular among the video generation), *awfully good*
(British usage), and *kind of cruel* (a morox version of
the *Hamlet* oxymoron cited at the beginning).

What one learns in the hunt for the morox—
which sounds like a line from either Dr. Seuss or Lewis
Carroll—is that bad examples abound, and the moot
validity of borderline instances may keep one awake at
night.  Does *terribly nice* qualify?  How about *acutely
unaware or exactly wrong*?  Or does the faint smell of
contrivance hang around them?  *He is completely
partial*—now, there's a morox, depending on an unintentional
meaning of *partial*—but how about the old
gas-tank observations, *half full* and *half empty*?

One starts to collect likely-looking adverbs and
adjectives for moroxes, such as *simply*— —, *strongly*—
—, and *strangely*— —.  Except that *simply complex*
doesn't cut it, and neither does *strongly weak* or
*strangely normal*.  Contrived, all of them, though the
last may qualify as a legitimate oxymoron.

The latest ones I am working on include *absolutely
relative, just unfair*, and maybe—just maybe—
*acutely dull*.  I am also experimenting with smaller
units in sentences, such as, *Usually, I go out in the
street, but on off days, I stay at home*.  The *out in* and
*on off* combinations are perhaps second cousins to
moroxes, but they have that same solecistic slippage,
to coin an alliteration.  I continue the search for
moroxes, but it is hardly easy.


#### EPISTOLA {Edward D. Graham}

Robert R. Rasmussen's piece on the names of
people from... [XIII, 3] was a delight.  Perhaps because
of his Californian remoteness, however, or his
*Californesque* insouciance, he ducked a pair of tough
ones which have dogged my life.

I now live in Michigan, where the controversy lies
between *Michiganian* (which sounds like a made-up
Indian name) and *Michigander* (which sounds avian
with sexist overtones).  A friend who speaks Yiddish has
suggested, as a compromise, *Michigass*.

But there is worse.  I grew up in Maine.  Recently
the *Detroit Free Press* ran a headline which contained
the word *Mainer* with no qualifier.  This, by Maine
standards, is all wrong, for the correct form is the
phrase *State of Mainer*.  Of course, the wags always
suggested *Maniac*.

*[Edward D. Graham, Michigan State University]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Legal Terminology: An Historical Guide to the Technical Language of the Law*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/legal-terminology-an-historical-guide-to-the-technical-language-of-law_daniel-williman/1348053/#edition=5335912&idiq=7122605)
Daniel Williman, (Broadview Press, 1986), 160 pp.

There seems to be nothing in the background of
the author of this book to indicate a Cockney background,
so the &ldquo;An Historical...&rdquo; in the subtitle is
all the more surprising; for consistency, *judgement* is
spelt with an *e*.  The book must be for lawyers, for it is
divided into chapters that treat subjects like &ldquo;Judgement
and Enforcement,&rdquo; &ldquo;Crime,&rdquo; &ldquo;Criminal Procedure,&rdquo;
and so forth.  Many of the twenty-one chapters
are introduced by a brief comment describing their
subjects.  The apparent purpose of the book is to provide
etymological information and definitions of the
modern applications of the terms listed.  Most of the
information, however, is not etymological: the author
merely gives a translation of the phrase or word from
its original language, followed by a definition which is
not always clear—at least to a layman.  Those etymologies
that are given are not always accurately stated
(e.g., we are told that *law* is &ldquo;apparently not cognate
to *lex* and *legal*,&rdquo; which suffers from a lack of familiarity
with the idiomatic use of *cognate*, among other
things).  The definitions are scarcely a paragon of clarity,
to wit:

>*oyer and terminer* [L &gt; F] the Law French version
of terms from English judge's commission
for criminal causes, *audire et terminer*, &ldquo;to hear
and bring to an end&rdquo;.  So, circuit commissions
and courts, often paired in England with *general
gaol delivery*.

This is about as clear as mud (to coin a clich&eacute;),
and is rather typical of the rest of the book.  Any good
law dictionary—*Black's, Ballentine*, etc.—would serve
anyone, layman and professional, far better.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Penguin Wordmaster Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/Penguin-Wordmaster-Dictionary-Reference-Books-Manser/30891912707/bd)
Martin H. Manser and Nigel D. Turton, (Penguin, 1987), xxiii + 839 pp.

This is an interesting dictionary, but it must be
emphasized at the outset that it is British and is unlikely
to be sold in the U.S.A. in its present form.  The
alphabetical entries are pretty much what one would
expect to find in a chunky paperback: the definitions
are brief, but to the point, example contexts are given
for many of them, short etymologies abound; for a
quick reference, the book serves well.  The pronunciations
are given in the International Phonetic Alphabet:
the IPA, universally employed in European dictionaries,
is relatively easy to use, though most Americans
are accustomed to the respelling systems that have long
appeared in dictionaries made in the U.S.

What sets the book apart from others are the vignetted
etymologies and usage notes that appear on
every page.  Some of these are quite full (compared
with the normally terse lexicographic treatment in this
kind of book) and are generally interesting.  Opening
the book in the middle we find the following:

>p. 432: *maudlin* - sense refinement and etymology.  
p. 433: *mausoleum* - etymology.  
p. 434: *measles* - note on *German measles* and
comment (with examples) of
medical synonyms, e.g., baldness = alopecia.  
*meat* - discussion of historical meaning
change.  
p. 435: *media* - usage note on singular *vs*.
plural.  
p. 437: note on *don't mention it!*  and other
stereotyped acknowledgments.
*mentor* - discussion of etymology.  
p. 439: *meter* or *metre* - (British) spelling practice
of measurement unit *vs*.
device.  
p. 440: *mews* - etymological discussion.  
p. 441: *militate/mitigate* - distinctions.  
p. 443: *milliner* - etymology note.  
*mind your p's and q's* - sense embellishment
and etymology note.  
p. 443: *miniature* - etymology note.

Thus, in a dozen pages, a baker's dozen of
&ldquo;panels&rdquo; is provided.  These range from useful to interesting
and do much to enhance the browsing features
of the dictionary.  The over-all variety is greater than
that found in these few pages and goes a long way
toward presenting in a form far more palatable than
that encountered in ordinary dictionary entries the
kinds of information that many people seek from dictionaries
but seldom find because they are compelled
to wade through a morass of ugly, complicated typography
and boring, irrelevant matter.  The style is informal
and user-friendly, and the material should appeal
to students and general users alike.  Entries discussed
carry a reference to the appropriate panel.  I was disappointed
by the absence of a panel on *will/shall* and
by the failure to mention, under *would/should* some of
the &ldquo;*will/shall*&rdquo; aspects of that pair (e.g., *I should like
to go/I would like to go*—that is, not the 'ought' sense
of *should*, which is adequately covered).

All things considered—space available, readership
level, etc.—the special features are very well done and
will do much to increase the user's awareness of and
interest in some of the more engaging aspects of the
language.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Berliner Park is the biggest park of its size in Central Ohio.&rdquo;
[From the 6 p.m. newscast on 21 October 1984, Channel 6
TV, Columbus, Ohio.  Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus,
Ohio.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Penguin Dictionary of English Idioms*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780140514810/Penguin-Dictionary-English-Idioms-Gulland-0140514813/plp) and [*Chambers Idioms*](https://www.amazon.com/Idioms-M-Kirkpatrick/dp/0550118233)
Daphne M. Gulland and David Hinds-Howell, (Penguin, 1986), 300 pp. and E.M. Kirkpatrick and C.M. Schwarz, eds., (Chambers, 1982) vi + 432 pp.

I have always found idioms fascinating and I like
books on idioms.  It is a bit perplexing, though, to
come to grips with the organization of the *Penguin*.
The organization of any book must conform to some
rationale which, in turn, depends on the purpose of
the book.  Let us consider three possible applications of
a book: it may be a teaching text; it may be a reference
work; it may reflect a theory about the content.  Each
of these approaches could well result in different organization
criteria: a theory about idioms might lead
to an ordering based on types of idioms, their structure,
their semantics, their grammar, their origin, or
other characteristics; a specialized dictionary, as a
look-up reference, might list idioms in alphabetical
order, with ample cross references to take care of variants,
key words, and other characteristics; as a teaching
text for learners of English as a foreign language, it
is uncertain which approach one might take—perhaps
frequency, social situations, and other categorial criteria
might be useful.

As this last is the avowed purpose to which the
*Penguin* is to be put, I am somewhat confused by some
of the 33 main categories into which these few thousand
idioms have been classified.  (I hasten to add that,
counting subcategories, there are many more than 33.
For instance, INSECTS has nine subcategories, CLOTHES,
44, and so on.)  These are not semantic categories,
since they have nothing to do with the meanings of the
idioms: *What a dish!, dish out*, and *flying saucer* have
nothing semantic in common, yet they appear in the
same subset (Plate, Dish and Saucer) under FURNITURE
AND HOUSEHOLD ARTICLES.  If such categorization were
reflective of some theory or of some practical teaching
(or learning) apparatus, its expression eludes me, and
the front matter, though it explains the system clearly,
is silent as to its purpose.

One must refer to the alphabetic index (which is
good) to use the book as a dictionary, though this
involves the minor inconvenience of looking up everything
in two places (till the categories are memorized,
which may be never: I, for one, wouldn't look up
*snails* under INSECTS.  If one looks up *be a head-ache*,
the next entry (under Aches) is *belly-ache*.  These are
united by a categorial bond that is so tenuous as to be
conceptually worthless.  Is it conceivable that anyone
would find a reason for learning idioms in such categories?
If there is, it is beyond me.

As to the treatment, there are some shortcomings,
two of which emerge in these two entries:.

>to *be a headache* - to be a great trial to other
people, due to one's misbehaviour and bad
temper.

The use of *due to* for *owing to* is technically considered
a solecism, albeit not a serious one.  Nonetheless, anything
even slightly tainted ought to be avoided in a
book for learners.  The other is:

>to *belly-ache* (Australian) - to complain continually.
The phrase is now becoming fashionable in
Great Britain.

In the first place, the term is just as common in the
U.S. (where it might have originated) as it may be in
Australia, hence the label is plainly wrong.  Second,
I'm not satisfied that &ldquo;fashionable&rdquo; is the *mot juste*:
&ldquo;common&rdquo; would serve the same purpose semantically
and would have the connotative advantage, as well.
Third, the expression is (in the U.S., at least) not likely
to be encountered in formal conversation, regardless of
what they may say in Australia and Great Britain, yet
there is no warning label.

Labels are sparse throughout the book, which
leaves the poor student in the lurch: he has no way of
knowing that *intellectual myopia, hit the bottle,
proper Charlie*, and a *two-fingered gesture* are not all
at the same level.  Moreover, if, as one might assume
from the cover, the same edition is to be sold in the
U.K., Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the
U.S.A., how is the student in the U.S. to know that *go
like a dream, love in a cottage, steal* someone's *clothes,
take silk*, and scores of other idioms are not used or
encountered there?  Similar problems are likely to occur
for users in other countries.

The definitions are not always accurate; some of
the otherwise generally useful contextual examples are
awkward, some entries not requiring them at all.  For
instance, 'you can judge the character of a person by
the company he keeps' is not a definition for *birds of a
feather*; 'attractive' does not define an *eyeful*.  Substantives
are used to define adjectives, adjectives substantives,
substantives adverbs, and so on.

*Chambers Idioms* is not a completely straightforward,
alphabetic dictionary either, but the headings
under which entries are arranged are key words of the
idioms.  As the editors point out in the Preface,

>Trying to find idioms in a dictionary is often not
easy.  Sometimes they are listed under the first
word and sometimes under what is considered to
be the most important word in the idiomatic
phrase.  It is difficult for the user to decide
where to look.  In this book we have made the
task easier by including many cross-references.

Thus, if you are looking for *a bitter pill (to swal
low)* or *until/till/to the bitter end*, they can be found
under *bitter*, but they are not entered at *pill* or at *end*.
It is not easy to see how the editors chose those items
that merit listing under more than one key word:
under *bite* we find three entries defined (*bite off more
than one can chew; once bitten, twice shy*; and *what's
biting you?*) and five cross references (*bite someone's
head off see head; bite (on) the bullet see bullet; bite
the dust see dust; bite the hand that feeds one see
hand; have two bites at the cherry see cherry)*.  This is
fine, but why aren't *bite off more than one can chew*
and *once bitten, twice shy* shown as cross references
under *chew* and *shy*, respectively?  The answer probably
lies in the restrictions on space, a source of frustration
to all compilers of reference books.  It may seem
to native speakers that *bite off more than one can chew*
need not be listed under *chew* as well as *bite*, and,
given the stringencies, I tend to agree.  But I am not so
sanguine about the (naive learner's) ability to find the
phrases that are coordinate and entered under only
one of the key words.  That is, *in black and white* could
just as well be *in white and black* (to the non-native
speaker if not the native, who is so familiar with this
clich&eacute;), and a reference at *white* would have been in
order.

*Chambers Idioms* is self-indexing—all entries and
cross references are given in a single alphabetical listing—which
makes it more convenient to use in that
one is quite likely to find the entry on the first try (as
compared with the *Penguin*, where the only useful
access is through the index, requiring a double look-up
every time.)  The definitions are simple and straightforward,
better than those in the *Penguin*, and sample
contexts are provided.  Although the labeling of entries
is somewhat better, this book, though marketed in the
U.S. and Canada, was clearly made for the consumer
in Britain, as there are no labels provided for idioms
like *in for a penny, in for a pound; in penny numbers;
the penny drops; a penny for them*; and *spend a
penny*.  (Curiously, now that I notice it here, *penny
wise and pound foolish* is as common in America as in
Britain, despite the currency differences, but that is
probably because it is more of a proverb than an idiom.)
The *Chambers* has useful usage labels, like *formal,
often* or *usually facetious, derogatory*, and so on.
The fault is that the dialect labels (*British*) are scantily
applied.  In the list of labels appears *NY*, but, without
reading every entry, I was unable to find those to
which it might apply.

In general, the *Chambers*, despite its shortcomings,
is preferred over the *Penguin*, but, without
proper labeling, neither is suitable for marketing in
the U.S.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Barbara R. DuBois}

Thomas H. Middleton's worry about the pronunciation
of *Uranus* [XII, 4] reminds me of a story.  One
morning during WWII, chemists working in a government
laboratory in Chicago got the word that they
were not to say &ldquo;uranium&rdquo; anymore, but instead the
code word &ldquo;tuballoy.&rdquo;  At noon, when someone said,
&ldquo;Let's go to lunch,&rdquo; the answer came, &ldquo;I'll be right with
you, but first I have to tuballate.&rdquo;

*[Barbara R. DuBois, Socorro, New Mexico]*

## Time and Life
*Julienne Eden Busic, Dublin, California*

Language serves not only to communicate ideas
but to obscure them as well, transforming them
according to the psychological needs of the individual
speaker.  In most cultures, for example, words and
images with loaded meanings are dealt with indirectly,
euphemistically, as though their essence could be altered,
even denied, by assigning them new labels.  The
extent to which this linguistic transformation occurs
indicates the way the culture assimilates or rejects the
loaded concept.  The type of transformation is important
as well.  In our society, for example, one does not
simply die, one *passes away, goes either on to greener
pastures or west, meets one's Maker*.  One also *croaks*
or *kicks the bucket*.  Here the idea of death, of eternal
nothingness, is defuzed through the use of substitution,
or of humor.  Death is deprived of its sting, in
both instances, either by prettification or ridicule.
Fear and apprehension of the ultimate existential void
are replaced by a certain whimsicality, a capacity to
confront and accept the inevitability of death.  The
greater the anxiety felt within a culture or even by an
individual about a concept, the more extensive the
euphemistic system designed to obscure it, to render it
tolerable.

The use of and need for euphemism is nowhere
more apparent than within a prison population.  In
this highly specialized subculture, the psychological
need to disguise and transform unpalatable realities
becomes critical.  In fact, conclusions about the nature
of prisoner mentality, perception, and philosophy can
be reached by examining the form these transformations
take and the area in which they most often occur.
In prison, the entire consciousness is consumed with
the notion of time: how much time one has, what
portion will have to be served, whether the time is
concurrent or consecutive, whether &ldquo;you do the time
or the time does you.&rdquo;  Time is synonymous here with
life.  Of what else does life consist?  What, indeed, is its
very essence?  The way, then, in which people relate to
time is indicative of the way they relate to life in general,
and this relation is nowhere more clearly illustrated
than in a study of the language used by prisoners
to talk about time.  Some very basic psychological
elements of the alleged &ldquo;prisoner mentality&rdquo; emerge
during the course of such a study, lending insight into
theories set forth by many social psychologists that
such a mentality reflects special ways of looking at the
world.

The length of a sentence, if it falls within an area
between the two extremes of a very short period and a
very long one, is expressed not in terms of years but of
money.  Generally, any sentence of less than five years
does not merit its own particular expression and is
referred to, if not derisively, then with a certain
amount of condescension.  A one-year sentence is one
of the few exceptions.  This sentence is called a *bullet*,
taken from card-players' terminology for an ace.  Anyone
with a *bullet* has been dealt a good hand, one that
is superior to most others.  Short sentences are those
which can be done *standing on one's head* 'with small
inconvenience.'  The longer sentences, though, are described
in monetary terms, perhaps because prisoners
often equate time with money and all time spent in
prison is money lost.  A prisoner with a five-year sentence
is *pulling a nickel*, ten years is *pulling a dime*,
and twenty-five is *pulling a quarter*, all small change.
These sentences are still relatively manageable and accessible
to humor; however, the expressions for types of
life sentences move away from concepts of money.  In
state prisons, those with three felonies are given
twenty-to-life sentences.  Those with more than three
felonies are given fifty-to-life sentences.  Thus, one has
either *the little bitch* or *the big bitch* laid on him,
derived from *habitual* in the Habitual Criminal Act.
The prisoner is in the passive role; he doesn't admit to
having done anything actively to get the sentence: it is
*laid on him*.  Doing life means adjusting the consciousness
to the fact that the prisoner ceases for the most
part to be an autonomous entity.  Things are done to
him; he does little himself.  A straight life sentence
with a possibility for parole is referred to as *all day
long*.  Life without parole is *one dark day*.  Time is no
longer divided here into manageable units but becomes
a continuum without end and without hope.
The lightness and humor used to describe the shorter
sentences are gone.  There is simply no escaping reality,
there is little left to joke about.

Humor, however, is a constant in the prison euphemistic
system; it enables the prisoner to cope with his
sentence, to defuze the tragic implications of his imprisonment.
This whimsicality lends itself especially to
the subject of concurrent and consecutive sentences.
Concurrent sentences are two or more that are served
simultaneously; for example, two five-year sentences
are merged into one.  With a consecutive sentence, one
five-year sentence must be served before the second
begins.  Because a consecutive sentence is far more devastating
and psychologically loaded to the prisoner,
more humor is used to speak of these particular
sentences to make them tolerable.  Thus, two five-year
sentences given consecutively become, in prison terminology,
*two nickels running wild, running cockeyed*,
or *running bowlegged*.  One understands not only the
humor here, but also the deeper currents of feeling
which run throughout, the images which conjure up
disorganization, chaos, a loss of control, lack of coordination,
all states of mind typical of a human being
left powerless, disenfranchised, imprisoned, without
any control over his own actions or destiny.

Other expressions for consecutive sentences add
yet another dimension to the prisoner's perception of
the world and his role in it.  A consecutive sentence
becomes *a shove and a kick*.  The prisoner is a passive
agent, he does no initiating, he is acted upon, as an
object.  First he is shoved, then he is kicked, and no
mention is made of who is perpetrating this violence.
The analogy to a nameless, faceless, uncaring bureaucracy
is inescapable.  The prisoner's perception of himself
is, again, that of a powerless entity, a victim of the
fates and a universal injustice.  Two nickels *boxcarred*
or *stacked* further reinforce this perception.  The first
evokes images of involuntary connection, the state of
being boxed in, stuck on one track from which there is
no escape.  The second, a *stacked* sentence, conjures up
blocks piled one upon another, each standing in a state
of extreme precariousness, and completes the prisoner's
psychological view of himself as existing in a
type of limbo, in danger of toppling over at any time.
In fact, there are no expressions presenting the prisoner
in an active role save one, *riding the buffalo*, used
to express what a prisoner is doing who has been told
by the Parole Board to serve all of a five-year sentence.
However, though he may be *riding*, he is not necessarily
in control or determining the course the animal
takes.  The animal remains the more active agent, the
prisoner the more passive.  Actually, prisoners who are
given harsh decisions by the Board are more often
*slammed* or *stretched* or told to *flatten it* [their sentence]
*out*.  They are put into a *time tunnel*.  These last
images are more representative of the prisoner's view
of himself as being a powerless mote in the universe,
exploited, maligned, and maltreated.

The use of the passive voice to assign him permanently
to a fixed and static role, humor to make his
assumption of the role bearable, even though the humor
tends to reinforce the negative psychological state
in which a prisoner perceives himself—all these linguistic
manifestations provide clues to understanding
the fatalistic way in which prisoners in general relate
to the world and their corresponding role in it.  Language
is not merely a means for communicating ideas
but for predicting behavior as well.  To the prisoner,
the most important concept in his circumscribed existence
is time and, by extension, life.  Any prisoner,
when speaking about these, continually casts himself
in a passive role and uses images that reinforce his
sense of powerlessness and disintegration.  In so doing,
he perpetuates, consciously or not, a state of mind that
precludes any modification of his behavior or of his
perception of the world.  This study indicated that
those who regularly used this type of terminology were
recidivists, while the others who avoided it tended to
be innocent of prior criminal records and did not commit
new crimes after release.  While this hypothesis is
hardly a new one, it does reinforce the idea propounded
by many social psychologists that recidivist
prisoners have low self-esteem, lack confidence in their
abilities, and view themselves as passive pawns in a
game that has been manipulated to their disadvantage.
Prison slang and euphemism, developing and existing
in a closed environment, change slowly—if ever.
Therefore, the views of the world expressed by such
language are reinforced and passed on from population
to population.  The results of this short study indicate
that prisoner philosophy has changed little
in the last twenty years, a notion unlikely to inspire
optimism in those who continue to believe in &ldquo;rehabilitation.&rdquo;

## Antipodean English: *Divided by a Common Tongue*
*George W. Turner*

Those who grow up as members of a minor speech
community have one advantage, a strong incentive
toward bilingualism.  But speakers of a major language
such as English have at least some faint shadow
of this through their access to a number of literary
sublanguages such as Welsh English, Scots, Indian
English, British, American, Australian, and other varieties
of English.  Some more limited passive understanding
of varieties of spoken language is also possible.
Australians seldom speak of *thumbtacks,
sophomores*, or *tuxedos*, but would recognize the
words and understand their meanings.  They know
Americans call *lifts elevators* and *petrol gas, lollies
candy, railways railroads* and *trams trolleys* or *street-cars*
(known especially because of the play, *A Streetcar
Named Desire*).  Particularly strange is the pronunciation
*zee* for *zed*.  Australians may not recognize in *tick
tack toe* a simple game of *noughts and crosses* and they
might not know exactly what a *drugstore* sells, but
they know the New York *subway* is not a pedestrian
underpass.  They rather admire the use of *through* to
indicate inclusive dates.  Similarly, British English expressions
not current in Australia may be understood,
*cinema, wellington boots*, or *wing* to refer to the mudguard
of a car (what Americans equally strangely call
the *fender*).

Not infrequently, however, differences result in
misunderstandings.  If I am told someone called, I assume
that that person visited the house; an American
or someone influenced by American usage might be
referring to a phone call (we do use *call* in that
phrase).  When my luggage (all right, *baggage*) was
stolen from a car (*automobile*?) in England, my wife,
staying in the U.S. and, it appears, already contaminated
with its usage, asked if I had locked the *trunk*.  I
took this to mean the suitcase but she meant the *boot*
of the car.  (In reporting this I have hesitated at the
word *car*, thinking it might suggest a *railway* (often
*railroad) carriage*!

We understand that *suspenders* are not only for
socks, have given up trying to distinguish *scones, cookies,
biscuits*, and *crackers*, and, in another context,
have learned that British speakers talking of *corn* do
not necessarily mean sweet corn (maize, Indian corn).
More likely to cause trouble are references to a *first
floor*, which we, like the British, would call a *ground
floor*, or varying references to *billions* where, like the
British, we are beginning to follow American usage, or
*gallons* where the same name refers to different
volumes in Britain and the U.S.

Australia has traditionally been attached to Britain
and in theory follows British usage.  There is a good
deal of similarity in fact, and where there are differences
it is often because there are local Australian
developments.  We follow English usage in saying *tap*
much more often than American *faucet; got*, not *got-ten*;
named *after* consistently, not *for; engine-driver*,
not *engineer; bonnet* not *hood* for *top* of a car;
*draughts*, not *checkers; pram*, not *baby carriage; autumn*,
not *fall; standard lamp*; not *floorlamp*; and
*swede* (consistently), not *rutabaga* (sometimes misnamed
*turnip*).  We are likely to call a two-week period
a *fortnight*, and children don't always know not to call
an eraser a *rubber* when they go to the States.  To *tick
off* is for us to 'scold,' not to 'anger.'

Sometimes it is the American word which is established
here against the British.  We talk of *semi-trailers*,
or *semis* (pronounced SEMeez), not *articulated lorries*
(though New Zealand usage appears to differ); our
*cuffs* may be on trousers (British *turn-ups*) as well as
sleeves; we say *mail*, not *post; sedan*, not *saloon car*;
are familiar with *bleachers* or a university *campus*; say
*station-wagon*, not *estate car*; know no other name for
a *crew cut*; tend not to distinguish *around* from *round*
and use it with figures to mean 'about'; and would be
more likely to say &ldquo;Please come in&rdquo; than &ldquo;Do come in.&rdquo;

It often happens that we are bilingual and use
either a British or a U.S. term without distinction of
meaning.  There is no difference here between a *broad
jump* and a *long jump*.  Our *luggage* might equally
well be *baggage*; a (car) *muffler* is another name for a
*silencer*; a *zucchini* the same as a *courgette*.  An *egg-plant*
can be called an *aubergine*, a *squash* a *marrow*.
*Lorry* has a somewhat British flavor as a name for a
*truck*, but *crib* retains a faint American flavor as a
name for a *cot*.  Oddly the U.S. *stove* sounds more
traditional than the English *cooker* (which I somehow
associate with advertisements).  *Yard* (if without vegetables
or flowers) is favored over *garden* here, and
there is local variation in Australia between *runners*
(Victoria) and *tennis shoes, sandshoes*, or *gym shoes*
(but *plimsolls* is decidedly British).

Americanisms in Australian English seem likely to
increase as ties with Britain weaken and the Pacific
region gains importance.  There is a tendency for
Americanisms to &ldquo;take on.&rdquo;  There is much opposition.
Even English teachers, untrained in linguistics, are apt
to confuse colloquial and regional with substandard,
and equate American influence, especially its more
colloquial and disputed reaches, with a kind of disease
in language.  There was once a campaign against the
use of *overall* to mean 'general(ly),' then *hopefully* as a
sentence adjunct came under fire.  *Presently* meaning
'at present' is attacked, and even the present liberalminded
writer has qualms about following *different*
with *than* (useful though that construction is).  Where
American flavor is less evident (as in using *flashlight*
for *torch* or *dessert* for *sweets*) there is less likely to be
opposition and in at least one case, the formula &ldquo;You're
welcome&rdquo; as a reply to &ldquo;Thanks,&rdquo; there should surely
be general acceptance.  Sometimes opposition is deeper
to commercial penetration by American interests
(*French fries* rather than *chips*), or an Americanism is
left mainly to advertisers (*drapes* for *heavy curtains*—though
*stroller* seems to be making some headway
more generally against *push-chair* or *pusher*).  Angry
letters to newspapers by adults who hear a child
call a *skipping-rope a jump-rope* presumably fear that
it represents some threat to our independence.  The
degree of opposition to colloquial Americanisms is a
measure of their attraction, especially to the young.
There is a pleasure in saying *for free* or *meet up with*
or *miss out on* which seems to be more than a liking
for the forbidden.  Unfortunately there is a further tendency
to add a rich dose of what is taken to be American
slang and so we have a stereotype American that
most real-life Americans would be glad to disown.
Never mind.  They will have their revenge as a new
stereotype invades their shores, the uncouth *dinkum
Aussie* of some popular Australian films.


#### EPISTOLA {John M. Buckley}

Richard Veit's contribution [XIII,4] was welcome
and amusing, especially to those of us who are concerned
with the problems of general education and
basic skills of new students.  Unfortunately, he has
erred in his first paragraph.

The Toyota *Tercel* is not a newly coined word, as
the Honda *Acura* is.  A *tercel* (also, especially formerly,
*tiercel*), is a 'male hawk,' and, as such, its use as a car
name is part of a long-standing tradition which includes
Thunderbird and Falcon.

Mr. Veit should not feel too bad.  Even Marianne
Moore missed this one in her correspondence with the
Ford Motor Co. Let me close by saying what a pleasure
it is to see your magazine in my mailbox each
quarter!

*[John M. Buckley, Long Island City, New York]*

[Similarly from Douglas E. Blakely, Susan Forthman,
Hugh W. Handsfield, Herbert I. Harris, M.D., Capt.
John M. Le Cato, and, by press time, others.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Phonetic Symbol Guide*](https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/P/bo3634736.html)
Geoffrey K. Pullum and William A. Laduslaw, (University of Chicago Press, 1986), xxx + 266 pp.

Surveys have shown that pronunciations are
among the least used of the kinds of information provided
in general English dictionaries for the English-speaking
public.  Considering the increasing number of
spelling pronunciations one encounters these days, that
is not surprising: affl&uacute;ent, instead of affluent, probably
because the traditional stress pattern makes the
word sound like *effluent*.  (This was not a confusing
problem in the past, because fewer people then talked
about ecology and *effuents* than today.)  Other
changes, some from Britain, seem to be born of sheer
perversity: controversy, regul&aacute;tory, discipli&nacute;ary, etc.
At best, determining the pronunciation of an English
word can often be a pain in the neck for the casual
dictionary user: interpretation of the key to the respelling
system, usually repeated at the bottom of
every other page, requires some effort, and even then,
with variants given, users are often confused: if two or
more pronunciations are shown, are they equally appropriate
in the user's dialect area or is the first &ldquo;preferred&rdquo;
by 80 percent of the speakers and the other (or
others) used by the rest?  Are the variants shown distributed
geographically?  If so, how?  The information
provided in general dictionaries about pronunciation is
very sketchy and, for the layman, hard to understand.
(Most laymen misunderstand the term *preferred*, taking
it to mean &ldquo;preferred by the experts,&rdquo; rather than
'preferred by the majority of users of English'—or,
more accurately, 'preferred by the majority of users
*according to the information at hand*.'  In many cases,
for instance, where *preferred* may refer to the ordering
of definitions, the data for huge numbers of the senses
listed in a dictionary is very sparse.)

Although the stated purpose of this book in no
way suggests that general dictionaries or laymen were
even remotely considered in its compilation, it is a
disappointment that they were not, for it would not
have required much more space to have examined and
reported on the phonetic representations of sounds in
the major dictionaries.  After all, the body of people
affected by such words is far, far greater than the
readership to which this book will appeal.

Notwithstanding the disappointment, for it is the
function of a reviewer to comment on the book at
hand, not the one he wishes had been written, this is
an extremely good treatment and discussion of the
symbols of the systems used by linguists, phonologists,
phoneticians, and others who work in those areas professionally.
The sources analyzed include IPA (International
Phonetic Alphabet), which is widely used outside
of the United States, and various other
transcription systems devised by linguists, chiefly those
used by Chomsky and Halle in *The Sound Pattern of
English*, by Trager and Smith, by Gleason, etc., which
generally represent a modification of IPA.  Because no
general or bilingual dictionaries, American or British,
are represented, many of the special symbols developed
by phoneticians working with lexicographers to
produce the relatively broad transcriptions shown
in dictionaries—hence familiar to most of us—are
not here.

Each symbol is shown clearly, as far as is practicable
in alphabetical order, with a brief discussion of its
application.  Diacritics are also covered; there is a glossary
of relevant terms and several pages of charts and
diagrams showing the vowels and consonants in the
systems covered.  A comprehensive, useful bibliography
is included: for anyone interested in phonetics, the
bibliography alone provides an excellent, if somewhat
specialized reading list.

In all, this is a unique and valuable book for linguists
and phoneticians, as well as for lexicographers
and other professionals who work with transcriptions
of spoken language.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Amo, Amas, Amat and More: How to Use Latin to Your Own Advantage and to the Astonishment of Others*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780061812491/Amo-Amas-Amat-Use-Latin-0061812498/plp)
Eugene Ehrlich, (English Index, Harper &amp; Row, 1985), xxii + 328.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Perhaps it has taken a longer than usual time for
this review to appear, but with the subject being Latin,
it never seems as if passage of time is of great concern.
Latin evokes a sense of permanence, immutability, and
grandeur (*pace* Edgar Allan Poe; by the way, *pace*,
surprisingly, is absent).  Such is the mystique of the language
that, when one uses a Latin term (outside of a
legal or medical context) or announces his knowledge of
that venerable tongue, people react with expressions of
wonderment, incredulity, or the strong suspicion that
the pope will soon appear.  Hence the author rightly
notes in his subtitle that use of Latin will bring astonishment
but emphasizes that the book will turn this to
the reader's advantage.  And so it may.

Ehrlich is an experienced editor and lexicographer,
and the sort of care and consistency one should expect
from such an author is evident throughout.  The style is
that of a dictionary, with entries set on a very open
page, in comfortably large type, accompanied by
pronunciations, and occasional &ldquo;filler&rdquo; illustrations.  The
pronunciations are given in the style of the &ldquo;Moo Goo
Gai Pan&rdquo; school, e.g., *bona fide* is &ldquo;BAW-nah FIH-deh&rdquo;
and *intra vires* is &ldquo;IN-trah WEE-rays.&rdquo;  The approach is to
give the so-called restored pronunciation, that is, the
sounds that classics scholars think is closest to the way
Caesar, Horace, and their contemporaries would have
said things.  This betrays Ehrlich's education as a classicist
and, while arguably a scientific method of showing
pronunciation, it runs counter to the way non-classicists
use or have heard Latin pronounced.  (Though, in the
example for *intra vires* given above, Ehrlich's pronunciation
suggests a final *z*-sound by the use of &ldquo;-rays,&rdquo;
when final *s* is technically correct, and &ldquo;-race&rdquo; would
have been a better rendering.  Of course, the more common
English pronunciation of *vires* in the expression
would be &ldquo;VIH-rays,&rdquo; so Ehrlich's version is here really a
hybrid.)  Lawyers particularly are given to highly anglicized
pronunciations—just ask a lawyer to pronounce
&ldquo;writ of certiorari&rdquo;—and that tradition, along with the
(now fading) &ldquo;Church&rdquo; pronunciation of Roman Catholic
liturgy, is much stronger among the general public
than the classicists'.  Ehrlich's pronunciation for &ldquo;*de iure*
(or *de jure*)&rdquo; is &ldquo;day YOO-reh.&rdquo;  This sort of style is precious,
on two accounts: *de jure* is by far the more common,
not the secondary spelling in English; and virtually
no one says anything but &ldquo;day JUH-ray&rdquo; in English
contexts.  Many would lament the decline of training in
the classics in our society, but that sentiment does not
lend authority to the use of a scholar's mode of pronunciation
in a dictionary for popular consumption.  (To
baldly state, as is done in the &ldquo;Pronunciation Notes,&rdquo;
that &ldquo;the Latin *c* is pronounced as though it were a *k*.
Thus, *Cicero* is pronounced KIH-keh-roh&rdquo; is overly simplistic
and very misleading.)

The real stuff of the dictionary is, as it should be,
the definitions, and they are both very good and very
readable.  Accuracy and completeness of defining—with
both literal and metaphoric, or extended senses set
forth—is everywhere in evidence.  The definitions often
provide a window into a bit of Roman cultural heritage—all
without dry or preaching pedantry.  The almost
studied unattractiveness and stodginess that characterize
so many classical references and texts (a subtle
but contributing factor to the decline of interest?)  are
refreshingly absent from this book, as these examples
may illustrate:

>*horribile dictu* horrible to relate
>
>In describing a particularly bloody automobile
accident, for example, one might interject
*horribile dictu* just before launching into the
most shocking details of the narrative.  (See
MIRABILE DICTU.)
>
>*mirabile dictu* wonderful to relate
>
>The phrase to use when one wishes to express
astonishment while recounting an event of
overwhelming significance or accomplishment or
irony.  &ldquo;Then, as the child watched, the figure,
*mirabile dictu*, rose high in the air and vanished.&rdquo;
&ldquo;As he left the penitentiary, where he
had just completed a two-year sentence for stealing
public funds, he announced, *mirabile dictu*,
that he would be a candidate for a second term
in the United States Senate.&rdquo;

A lightness of tone that is indication of the author's
joy for the subject pervades this dictionary and is
one of its most gratifying features.

In addition to the higher frequency terms that
one is likely to encounter—*alma mater, cum grano
salis, ne plus ultra*, and *sine qua non* are all here,
and nicely defined—certain more common and insightful
proverbial expresssions were selected, too, for
inclusion among the roughly 1400 entries.  These add
an element of human interest to the dictionary:

>*bis vivit qui bene vivit* he lives twice who lives
well
>
>Milton, in *Paradise Lost*, couched the same
wisdom in these words:
>
>Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou
liv'st
>
>Live well; how long or short permit to
Heaven.
>
>So we are being told that quality of life is much
more important than longevity.  But *bis vivit qui
bene vivit*, besides counseling us to lead productive
lives, offers a consoling thought to recall
when a friend dies young.
>
>*disputandi pruritus ecclesiarum scabies* the theologian's
urge to debate is an incurable disease
>
>Sir Henry Wotton, 1568-1639, an English
poet and diplomat, wrote this sentence, literally
&ldquo;an itch for disputation is the mange of the
churches,&rdquo; in *Panegyric to King Charles*, and it
was later used as part of Wotton's own tombstone
inscription.  (Wotton is also recalled for his
definition of an ambassador: &ldquo;an honest man
sent to lie abroad for the good of his country.&rdquo;)

There is no denying that *Amo, Amas, Amat* and
*More* is a source of real enjoyment and enlightenment,
a rare enough combination.  It is likely to remain serviceable
for as long as the pages hold up.  (One annoying
technical flaw: the copy reviewed had several
pages where the printing was blurred, not, one hopes,
evidence of generally low-quality production standards.)
And it is well worth adding that Ehrlich fashioned
his dictionary around a sound and clearly stated
concept, then executed it with diligence and grace.  It
is hard to imagine that anyone could be justifiably
disappointed with this book.  It is a dictionary of real
and enduring value—and fun, too.

*Frank R. Abate*

## Clue Me in to Anagrams
*John R. Harris, Toronto*

The anagrams given below form a set, and the set
constitutes a clue to all of the answers.  For that reason,
the answers are not given (and will not be, unless
readers object with great vigor).

The clue: each anagram is for a state and its
capital.

>&ldquo;Ahoy&rdquo;: a look at macho milk.          
A low hula?  I, uh, I...no         
AA: spoken task.                   
Admiring rich *vino*.   
Ali in a macro corn feast.         
Andy cites car: Nova.              
As aunt exits.                     
Bashed?  Oi, oi!                   
Blacker Sloan Inn.                 
Boo a lame, a mangy Mr. T.         
Chalky is late, taut.              
Con shrewder champion.             
Diana aids pain in loin.           
Drain all soap, Manny.             
Drool craven ode.                  
Envy pang: slur brains, hair.            
Fiji cry: &ldquo;One first mousse!&rdquo;    
Goal in a regatta.                 
Heal mean, no tan.                 
Hell, or Carthaginian, or...       
I mulch bus...ooo!  
I shred, pin dead clover on.  
I, humus, a botanical color.       
I. e., detour a top shark.         
I'm changing nails.                
I'm not showing a play.            
Is Moose Wade in?  
Jenny O. Wren Street.  
Jim cops I. Spinks, as is.  
Martha Roots, bank dick.  
Maui tuna ages.  
Mm!  Prettier novel, no?  
Noah in a prize ox.  
One yawn by lark.  
Or a Thai flees Dallas.  
Pries in solid filling.   
R.C. Knott, funky faker.  
Regales moon.  
Sauna &agrave; la juke.  
Sheets enliven lanes.  
Swamis in non-disco.  
Taint sample on us.  
Tastes ham, buns, scoots.  
Taxes fame, new coin.  
Ten trivial cases who grin.  
Thin cod, craft counter.  
Track rises at a knoll.  
Unable to go, as IOU rain.  
Weave, dear Lord.  
Why conmen eye gin.

***

*Verbatim Quotations*

&ldquo;Many are picked, but few are frozen.&rdquo;—Motto of Frozen
Fruit Company.

&ldquo;God's frozen people.&rdquo;—Motto of Inuit Eskimos.

&ldquo;A plaque on both your houses.&rdquo;—Landmark Commission
letter to the owner of two buildings of historical importance.

## American Slurvian
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

Language lovers have long bewailed the sad state
of pronunciation and articulation in the United
States.  Both in sorrow and in anger, speakers afflicted
with sensitive ears wince at such mumblings as
*guvmint* for *government* and *assessories* for accessories.
Indeed, everywhere we turn we are assaulted
by a slew of slurrings.  We meet people who *hafta,
oughta*, or are *gonna* do something or who *shoulda,
woulda*, or *coulda* done it.  We hear how they love
&ldquo;drinkin outa bahls&rdquo; ('drinking out of bottles') or how
they've &ldquo;just been Nittly&rdquo; ('just been in Italy').

Here's a typically American exchange:

>&ldquo;Jeet jet?&rdquo;  
&ldquo;No, jew?&rdquo;  
&ldquo;'Sgo.&rdquo;  
(Translation: &ldquo;Did you eat yet?&rdquo; &ldquo;No, did you?&rdquo;
&ldquo;Let's go.&rdquo;)

In a 1949 *New Yorker* article, John Davenport
labeled this kind of sublanguage with the delightfully
appropriate name &ldquo;Slurvian.&rdquo;  Taking Davenport's
lead, H. Alan Wycherley, in the now defunct pamphlet
*Word Study*, distinguished between the pure
and impure uses of Slurvian.  Impure Slurvian produces
nonsense sounds such as those listed above.  But
Slurvian in its purest form mispronounces English
words into *other* English words.

To help to translate Slurvian into English and to
preserve the growing canon of non-enunciation, I
offer VERBATIM verbivores a grotesque glossary of pure
Slurvian.  The list is evenly split between entries from
Davenport's and Wycherley's disquisitions and atrocities
that I have collected during the past five years.

>*bar* to take temporarily: &ldquo;May I bar your
eraser?&rdquo;
>
>*calvary* a mobile army unit: &ldquo;At the last
minute, the wagon train was saved by the
calvary;&rdquo;  A rare example of spoonerized
Slurvian.
>
>*dense* a tooth expert.  &ldquo;I have a dense
appointment today.&rdquo;
>
>*forced* a large cluster of trees.  &ldquo;Only you can
prevent forced fires.&rdquo;'
>
>*formally* earlier.  &ldquo;Today she's a millionaire
investor, but formally she tried to make a living
as an English teacher.&rdquo;
>
>*girl* an article of clothing.  &ldquo;She had to work
hard to get her girl on.&rdquo;
>
>*granite* conceded.  &ldquo;Too many people take the
good life for granite.&rdquo;
>
>*intensive* an idiom, as in &ldquo;for all intensive
purposes,&rdquo; rather than the correct &ldquo;for all
intents and purposes.&rdquo;
>
>*lays* the opposite of &ldquo;gemmen.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Lays and
gemmen, I now introduce our speaker.&rdquo;
>
>*less* contraction of &ldquo;Let us.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Less get started.&rdquo;
>
>*lining* electrical flash of light.  &ldquo;Thunder and
lining.&rdquo;
>
>*Mayan* possessive pronoun.  &ldquo;What's yours is
yours, and what's Mayan is Mayan.&rdquo;  A rare
example of Slurvian created by adding a
syllable.
>
>*mere* a reflecting glass.  &ldquo;Mere, mere on the
wall, who's the fairest one of all?&rdquo;
>
>*mill* between the beginning and the end.  &ldquo;A
table stood in the mill of the room.&rdquo;
>
>*mince* unit lasting sixty seconds.  &ldquo;I'll be back in
a few mince.&rdquo;
>
>*neck store* adjacent.  &ldquo;I'm in love with the girl
neck store.&rdquo;  A rare double play.
>
>*nigh* opposite of day.  &ldquo;She woke screaming in
the mill of the nigh.&rdquo;
>
>*of* have.  &ldquo;I could of danced all night.&rdquo;  Perhaps
the most common of all Slurvian examples.
>
>*pain* giving money.  &ldquo;I'm tired of pain these high
prices.&rdquo;
>
>*pal* to propel a craft on water.  &ldquo;It's your turn to
pal the canoe.&rdquo;
>
>*paramour* a modern grass-cutting instrument.
&ldquo;I mowed the lawn with my new paramour.&rdquo;
>
>*pitcher* an image or representation.  &ldquo;As soon as
we get the pitcher framed, we'll hang it above
the sofa.&rdquo;
>
>*please* officers of the law.  &ldquo;My house was
robbed! Call the please!&rdquo;
>
>*then* conjunction introducing an adverb clause
of comparison.  &ldquo;I can jerk more pounds then
you can.&rdquo;
>
>*torment* a competition.  &ldquo;Mabel and I have
entered the bridge torment.&rdquo;
>
>*whore* inspiring terror.  &ldquo;Whore films always
scare the pants off me.&rdquo;
>
>*win* movement of air.  &ldquo;He was awakened in the
mill of the nigh by flashes of lining and gusts of
win.&rdquo;
>
>*winner* opposite of summer.  &ldquo;The Pilgrims
faced many a hard winner.&rdquo;

Slurvophobes unite!  Keep your ears open and
your notebooks handy, and send me more examples,
care of VERBATIM.  Together we can record an important
second language in the United States and publish
a useful new lexicon—*The Concise Dictionary of
American Slurvian*.


#### EPISTOLA {Arthur J. Morgan}

I can only envy David Miles [EPISTOLAE, XII,4] his
enjoyment of the opera at La Scala when, as a student
of elementary Italian, he could doubtless understand
many of the words.  At that point, proud of his knowledge,
he was sure he heard the feminine singular and
the masculine and feminine plurals of the adjective
*bravo* being shouted by others in the gallery, even as
he himself was calling them out at appropriate
moments.  But anyone who shouted &ldquo;*brava*,&rdquo; &ldquo;*brave*,&rdquo;
or &ldquo;*bravi*&rdquo; was, unfortunately, quite wrong.

There are three homonyms in Italian, all spelled
&ldquo;bravo,&rdquo; (1) an adjective, (2) a noun, and (3) an interjection.
The adjective, which agrees with the noun
which it modifies in gender and number, is a very
low-key descriptive, as the following examples, all
taken from Italian dictionaries, will show.

>*Era un bravo cavallo*.  He was a good horse.  
*Ha un cane assai bravo*.  He has a very good dog.  
*Un bravo folegname*.  A skilled woodworker.  
*Una brava cuoca*.  A good cook.  
*Il tuo amico &egrave; una brava persona*.  Your friend is a
decent guy.  
*Sii bravi mentre la mamma &egrave; fuori*.  Be good (children)
while mommy is out.

The noun, which is pejorative and always masculine,
is defined as 'cutthroat.'  The Italian synonym is
*sgherro*.  I think we would all agree that that was not
being shouted at La Scala.

And finally we come to the interjection, *esclamazione*
in Italian.  The synonyms given in the ItalianItalian
dictionaries which I consulted are *Bene!* and
*Bis!* These mean 'well (done)' and 'encore.'  It is clear
that these words refer not to the performer, but to the
performance.  The Italian-English dictionaries generally
translate *Bravo!* as &ldquo;Capital; Well done.&rdquo;  One
dictionary added &ldquo;Hurrah, Hurray!&rdquo;  Again, we see
that *Bravo!* refers to the performance.  Even if the
word were not invariable, which it is, why would it
agree with the *performer* in gender and number?

That the word is indeed invariable is shown by
the following example: *accogliere dei &ldquo;bravo!&rdquo; che
non finivano pi&ugrave;*, &ldquo;to receive bravos that were neverending.&rdquo;
(From *A Short Italian Dictionary*, Hoare,
Cambridge University Press, American Edition, 1967.)
So that even as its own plural (as proved by *dei*),
*Bravo!* does not change its form.

Finally, to revert briefly to the adjective; who
would apply a wet-rag adjective like *bravo*, used
mainly for animals, children, and workingmen, to a
diva like Montserrat Caball&eacute;?  It would be the ultimate
example of damning with faint praise!

*[Arthur J. Morgan, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dwight Bolinger}

Regarding Basil Wentworth's observation on the position
of *alive* [XIII,3], that &ldquo;it apparently can appear
only after the word it modifies,&rdquo; we can refer to Cecily
Raysor's article, &ldquo;An Unexpected Usage: 'Ahead,' 'Alive,'
and the Like, Before Nouns,&rdquo; *American Speech* 34
(1960) 302.

>All he has to do is belong to a reasonably alive
organization or be willing to join one.
>
>—*The Progressive*, September 1962, p. 36.
>
>*Away games* is now standard as the antonym of
*home games*.
>
>For the moment all the aghast mate's thoughts
seemed theirs.—*Moby Dick* (Chapter 123).

In 1977, Yuri Buzhor examined 40,000 pages and
culled 93 examples of this phenomenon.  His findings,
unfortunately, are available, as far as I know, only in
the published Ukrainian article in *Inozemna Philologija*
46 (1977) 10-14 (Lvov).  Among other citations is
one from Faulkner, *It was like alive ice*....

I'm still looking forward to capping my next trip
to Japan with a stay at the Akimbo Arms Motel.

*[Dwight Bolinger, Palo Alto, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Cosima V. Lyttle}

Elmer Suderman [XII, 1] speculates on other
words for various varieties of farts.  Nathan Bailey, in
his numerous dictionary editions (1721-85), gives the
noun *feist* 'a fart without noise,' also the verb *fizzle* 'to
break wind backwards without noise, to feist or to
foist,' and also *poop* 'to break wind backwards softly.'
He further defines *fart* 'an eruption of wind backwards'
and *belch* 'to break wind upwards.'

*[Cosima V. Lyttle, Decatur, Georgia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robin D. Gill}

I found Paul V. Axton's article, &ldquo;The Nihongo
Religion&rdquo; [XIII, 2], a bit too much to stomach.

&ldquo;According to Whorf, language determines perception
regardless of race....  For Tsunoda, race and
language are so intertwined that they cannot be separated.&rdquo;

Nonsense! Dr. Tsunoda makes it very clear in
*Nihonjin-no-No* ('*The Japanese Brain*') that the process
by which speakers of Japanese acquire their unique
brain functions is epigenetic and that anyone *of whatever
race* who learns Japanese before the age of seven
or eight develops in an identical &ldquo;Japanese&rdquo; manner.
Moreover, Tsunoda admits that people who have
grown up speaking vowel-heavy Polynesian languages
share the Japanese brain functions in question.

To be fair to Mr. Axton, it would seem he picked
up the mistaken view of Tsunoda's work from linguist
Roy Andrew Miller who (knowing Japanese) should
have known better.

&ldquo;His experiments,&rdquo; he claims, &ldquo;show a marked
drop in activity in the creative brain of second-generation
Japanese living overseas, of Koreans, Indians,
Westerners, or, it seems, anyone who is not Japanese.&rdquo;

Nonsense! Tsunoda does indeed claim native Japanese
speakers speaking English show even a stronger
left hemispheric bias than they normally enjoy/suffer.
(Koreans, on the other hand, can speak English without
particular stress because they don't share the
Japanese brain-function.)  But he never writes that
non-Japanese are not as creative as Japanese.  Rather
he points out that Japanese overdependence on the left
hemisphere may be responsible for a lack of truly creative
work in Japan and therefore suggests that Japanese
listen to Western classical music (harmonic music being
one of the few sounds to be received by the right
brain hemisphere of Japanese) in order to stimulate
their creativity.

Ironically, Mr. Axton's article has much in common
with Dr. Tsunoda's book in that both tend to
mush together Tsunoda's scientific experiments and
amateur hypotheses.  Tsunoda's discovery of differences
in sound cognition between, on the one hand,
Japanese and Polynesian native speakers and, on the
other, all other peoples he has tested to date is the
result of a carefully conducted series of hearing tests.
But his interpretation of the cultural significance of his
finds was strongly biased as he took the preexistent
Japanese self-image and other (Western) images as gospel
and fit his interpretation to them.

Paul Axton's heavy reliance on Andrew Miller also
explains the numerous referrals to Professor Suzuki
Takao who is unfairly depicted as some sort of high
priest of &ldquo;The Nihongo Religion.&rdquo;  Please note that
when Suzuki wrote &ldquo;Foreigners properly ought not to
understand the language at all,&rdquo; he was not expressing
his opinion—which is just the opposite—but the unfortunate
attitude of many if not most Japanese when
confronted with a Japanese-speaking person with
non-Japanese features.  Suzuki did a great service by
eloguently pointing out the problems arising from
equating race with language and surely deserves better
from Miller and, now, Axton!

I refrain from dealing with every mistaken fact
and unfair innuendo in the article because it is Christmas
Day here in Tokyo and I have better things to do,
including correcting the galleys of my next book:
*Goyaku Tengoku* ('Mistranslation Paradise'), an
expose of the poor quality of English-Japanese translation
centering on Peter Farb's *Word Play*, which was
horribly mistranslated.

*[Robin D. Gill, Tokyo]*


#### EPISTOLA {D.S. Bland}

I have no intention of *driving a coach and horses*
through Richard Lederer's article [XIII, 1] on equine
elements in the language.  He himself has admitted to
gaps in his compilation, and in any case the above
idiom applies to the demolition of a shaky argument,
which is not in question here.  No, I simply wish to add
to Lederer's list and have no wish to *snaffle* any of his
kudos.

The first example that occurred to me was *tandem*,
a piece of serendipity in that it provided a storyline
on which to hang the rest of this article.

When Daisy left the church after her unstylish
marriage she did so on a &ldquo;bicycle built for two.&rdquo;  If she
had lived before the invention of that useful mode of
transport she would probably have *ridden pillion* on
her husband's horse, and these days would do the same
thing on his motor cycle.  (Let us hope that her *girth*
would not impede their progress.)  But if he could have
&ldquo;afforded a carriage&rdquo; he might have driven his horses
in tandem, that is, one behind the other.  The etymology
is a translated pun on the Latin meaning—at
length—and it was a natural transition to move the
word from horses after the invention of the two-seater
bicycle.

Did Daisy's boy-friend propose by *post*, and if so
was he aware that this mode of communication was
associated with horses?  In origin, to quote the words
of the *OED*, a post was &ldquo;one of a series of men stationed
along roads at intervals, the duty of each being
to ride forward with letters to the next stage.&rdquo;

Daisy might have spent a day of her honeymoon
at the races.  If she put &pound;1 on a winning horse at odds
of 25 to 1 she would have collected a *pony* (&pound;25).  If she
lost, she could console herself with the thought that
there are *horses for courses*, which is a metaphor for
fitting the right person to the job in hand.  Luckily, she
did win and treated her husband to a night out at the
*Hippodrome*.

We don't know how Daisy's marriage turned out
after that.  She might have made an unfortunate
choice (being *blinkered* by love) and found herself
*hitched* to a man who was *hairy on the hoof*, a now
obsolete idiom which expresses class distinction in
equine terms.  When the knight in armor disappeared
his &ldquo;high horse&rdquo; descended to being the working horse,
managed by farmers and peasants.  Such horses tend to
have hairy fetlocks, but hunters and race-horses and
other such well-bred equine aristocrats have clean
ones, and they became the perquisite of the upper
classes.

So Daisy might have had to *take the bit between
her teeth* and go out to work.  If so, she might have
cause to complain of being *on the collar*, like a horse
that strains to drag a heavy load.  Coming home at
night she might well exclaim &ldquo;I'm *knackered!*&rdquo;—that
is, only fit to be taken to the knacker's (horse-slaughterer's)
yard.  She would be much too tired to
indulge in *horseplay*, but at least she *had the whip-hand
over* her husband.

Poor Daisy!  I fear she did not *have a good run for
her money*, and ended up quite *jaded*, a jade being a
wearied or worn-out horse.

*[D.S. Bland, Southbourne, Dorset]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman Shapiro}

Your review of Neaman and Silver's *Kind Words:
A Thesaurus of Euphemism* [XI,4] prompted me to
reflect on the vagaries of eponymous celebrity.  Some
great minds are destined to illuminate and energize
the world as *amperes, curies, ohms, watts*, and such.
Others, like a certain sanitation-minded Parisian prefect
of the 1880s, live on in the ignominious immortality
of the *poubelle* 'garbage can.'

I had always thought that the most ignoble of all
these posthumous glories was that of the Roman
emperor Vespasian, who gave his name to the famous
French sidewalk urinals, *vespasiennes*.  The review
reminded me of an equal ignominy.  One cannot but
have compassion for the eminent Jesuit Louis Bourdaloue
(1632-1704), the pride of French ecclesiastical
rhetoric—remembered today only by divinity students
and some Ph.D. candidates—whose interminable sermons
were supposedly the inspiration for a concealable
oblong chamberpot, the *bourdalou*.  (Note the
spelling: not &ldquo;bourdalon,&rdquo; with an *n*, as reported.)
The good churchman's shades can take comfort in the
knowledge that, unlike the everyday *poubelle* and
*vespasienne*—the latter disappearing, but still of redolent
memory—the *bourdalou*, both word and object,
has long since fallen out of French vocabulary and
usage.

That consolation would, however, be somewhat
tempered if, as suggested by authors Neaman and Silver,
the last syllable were, in fact, the origin of the
English *loo*.  I don't know what evidence the cited
Honour and Fleming's *Dictionary of Decorative Arts*
offers for this etymology; but unless it is compellingly
well documented, it seems unlikely, even illogical.
The *bourdalou*, after all, was a thing, not a place,
used when the place in question—the &ldquo;loo&rdquo;—was
inaccessible; used, indeed, in lieu of same.  Which
leads me to a long-held assumption—*gardyloo* and
other etymologies notwithstanding—that *loo* is nothing
more complicated than the English pronunciation
of the French *lieu*, used euphemistically, like so many
Gallic expressions for a variety of taboo terms (*lingerie,
derri&egrave;re, douche*, et al.).

The supposition is all the more reasonable if we
consider that the French themselves commonly refer to
the *lieu(x) d'aisances*, 'latrines'—or simply the *lieux*—
as euphemisms for the *toilette* (itself originally a
euphemism as well, but that's another matter).

*[Norman Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ian J. Bald}

The article by Marc A. Schindler, &ldquo;Unusual Place
Names in Canada&rdquo; [XIII, 1] was of special interest to
me as a native of Canada.  I was born in a town with
an unusual name, *Penetanguishene*, a port on Georgian
Bay in Lake Huron.  It is an Abenaki Indian name
meaning 'the place of the falling white sands.'

I wish to correct one item in Mr. Schindler's article.
In section 1, &ldquo;The Whimsical Names of Newfoundland,&rdquo;
he states that *L'Anse aux Meadows* is a &ldquo;feat of bilingual
redundancy,&rdquo; since *Anse* means a 'meadow.'  But *Anse*
means a 'cove, small bay, or creek,' and thus there is no
redundancy.  The original name, given by early French
explorers, was *L'Anse aux M&eacute;duses*, meaning 'Jellyfish
Cove.'  Since *M&eacute;duses* sounded roughly like *meadows* to
the later English-speaking inhabitants, the spelling was
changed accordingly.  Presumably the early French settlers
found medusas, or jellyfish, in the water of one of
the many coves on the north shore of the island, and
perhaps suffered some painful stings from their tentacles.
The original name thus made good sense until it
was corrupted to its present bilingual form.

The name is certainly unusual and deserves a
place in Mr. Schindler's article, not for the reason he
cites, but mainly because it was originally given to a
body of water but is now used for a land area, the site
of an 11th-century Viking settlement, excavated in the
1960s.  How and when did this migration of a place
name from sea to land occur?  Perhaps Mr. Schindler's
further research will reveal the answer to this question
and others regarding unusual place names in Canada.

*[Ian J. Bald, Washington, D.C.]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert M. Sebastian}

As my subscription began with XIII,l, I don't
know whether the *Caveat Viator* [XI,4] mentioned the
glee *Il Duce* used to create in referring to &ldquo;Franklin del
ano Roosevelt.&rdquo;

The Florence Goldman letter [XII,1] reminded
me of a visit a Venezuelan geologist of ours made to
Philadelphia some decades ago.  He was an ebullient
*tipo* who prided himself on his command of English.
We were having after-dinner coffee when the name of
our Maracaibo paleontologist came up.  This was a
gentleman who bore a recognizable resemblance to the
fur-bearing seal, a fact which, alack, could not prevent
the sudden tension that seized us all when our
visitor exclaimed, &ldquo;You know, he look just like an old
*foca!*&rdquo;

*[Robert M. Sebastian, Philadelphia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ines Swaney}

With reference to Mr. Rasmussen's essay, [XIII,3]
&ldquo;What Do You Call a Person from...?,&rdquo; the following
detail should be pointed out:

Mr. Rasmussen is erroneous in his translation of
the term *Peruvian* into Spanish.  The correct Spanish
word, as can be verified in any Spanish-English dictionary,
is *peruano*, not &ldquo;peruviano.&rdquo;

*[Ines Swaney, Oakland, California]*


### OBITER DICTA
*Herbert H. Paper, Hebrew Union College*

For years now, we have had the works of the &ldquo;pop&rdquo;
grammarians appear as best sellers.  Edwin Newman,
John Simon, and others—on numerous weekly occasions
also William Safire—reign supreme in the public mind.
In a recent issue of VERBATIM, the detailed review of a
book by Jacques Barzun is an excellent example of the
apodeictic views of that self-elected language guardian
who really ought to know better after these many years
of the debate.  Urdang, the reviewer, documents the
many instances where Barzun simply ignores the available
evidence; not that it is a matter of descriptivism
versus prescriptivism: it is just a plain ignoring the facts
of the language.

Even the recently published book, *The Story of
English*—the much touted companion to the generally
quite good television program on Public Television—contains
statements that are a bit too much for
my linguistic digestion.  For example, we are told (p.
1)  that &ldquo;English has three characteristics that can be
counted as assets in its world state.  First of all, unlike all
other European languages, the gender of every noun in
Modern English is determined by meaning, and does
not require a masculine, feminine, or neuter article.&rdquo;
Somehow, Latin—in its own time and world
state—seemed to have had considerable sway and influence
despite its three (grammatical—that is, nonsexual)
genders.

&ldquo;The second practical quality of English is that it
has a grammar of great simplicity and flexibility.&rdquo;
Really?  Just because of its &ldquo;highly simplified word-endings&rdquo;?
The examples that follow concentrate on the
fact that many words in English function as both noun
and verb.

And finally, the third of the great characteristics
of English that give it its world-sway cachet is &ldquo;its
teeming vocabulary, 80 per cent of which is foreignborn.&rdquo;
Really, Messrs. McCrum, Cran, and MacNeil?!
Are there no historical or political factors that have
given English its present position in the world?  There
is a rather large portion of the world, I would remind
our three authors, where a language holds sway with
three genders and lots of complicated word-endings
and prefixes.  It is called Russian.

Then we have the following incredible statement
(p. 51): &ldquo;In the course of one thousand years, a series of
violent and dramatic events created a new language
which, by the time of Geoffrey Chaucer, is intelligible
to modern eyes and ears *without the aid of subtitles*.&rdquo;
[Italics mine. —HHP.]  When was the last time that one
of these authors read a page of Shakespeare—closer to
our own age than Chaucer—and was able to understand
it fully without recourse to the glosses and notes
at the bottom of the page?

And then in the very next paragraph we have the
following statements as a prelude to discussing Sir William
Jones and his remarkable insight which later developed
into the notion of comparative Indo-European.
&ldquo;The English have always [Always?—HHP] accepted
the mixed blood of their language [Awful terminology.
—HHP].  There was a vague understanding [Really??
—HHP] that they were a part of a European language
family, but it was not until the eighteenth century that a
careful investigation by a gifted amateur linguist began
to decipher the true extent of this common heritage.&rdquo;  To
refer to Sir William Jones as a &ldquo;gifted amateur linguist&rdquo;
is a bit much.  He deserves more than that designation
surely.  He was a master of most old and modern European
languages, had written poetry in both Greek and
Latin, and was well versed in Hebrew, Arabic, and
Persian.  He wrote and published a grammar of the last
language, and soon after arriving in India to take up his
duties as a jurist he began to study Sanskrit and produced
the first translations into English from Sanskrit
literature.  Is this then no more than &ldquo;a gifted amateur
linguist&rdquo;?

Or, turning for a moment to matters phonological,
we find this generalization (p. 123): &ldquo;The English
speak quickly; the Americans tend to be more deliberate;
the English tend to use a greater variety of tone;
Americans tend to a certain monotony.  It is as much
the variety of tone as the different pronunciation of
words that makes English speech so different to American
ears.&rdquo;  This in a book that purports to bring the
general reader up to date in matters of language.  *Quo
usque tandem abutere*... *patientia nostra*... to repeat
the words of a famous user of the ancient &ldquo;world
language&rdquo; that seemed to operate quite uninhibitedly
in a large part of Europe for some centuries.

On page 128 we read, &ldquo;Shakespeare and his contemporaries
had experimented with the English language
as no other writers before or since.  There was an
air of childish innocence in the ease with which they
broke the rules and made the language sing.&rdquo;  Really?!
What self-induced romantic nonsense!

These citations may strike my reader as a personal
indulgence in &ldquo;nit-picking.&rdquo;  But they are only a few of
the really unbelievable and wrong-headed formulations
that I came across in a first leisurely reading of
the book—a book intended for the interested lay public
and intended to inform, to educate, and to update
knowledge about the language.

So what has happened in all these intervening
decades of efforts by linguists researching and writing
on these matters?  How can I be convinced not to
despair?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;If you don't know who your roommate is going to be, write
to them and find out what they're bringing.&rdquo;  [From an article
on how to furnish your college dorm, *The Indianapolis
Star*, 22 September 1984.  Submitted by Robert E. Koontz, Muncie, Indiana.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Language of St. Louis, Missouri, Variation in the Gateway City*](https://www.amazon.com/Language-St-Louis-Missouri-University/dp/0820403245)
Thomas E. Murray, (Peter Lang Publishing, 1986), 272pp.

The body of Murray's work, which is amply augmented
by various statistical tables, is based on data he
collected from 240 respondents, all of whom are &ldquo;native
St. Louisans.&rdquo;  Having been born in St. Louis and
having lived there for at least 25 years, I was able to
recognize many of the characteristic pronunciations
and grammatical constructions favored by Murray's informants.
I, however, do not qualify as a native St.
Louisan, according to Murray's criteria—&ldquo;one of the
requirements... was that both [the informants] and
their parents had to have lived in St. Louis all their
lives.&rdquo;  Unfortunately, for Murray's purposes, this criterion
ruled out using blacks as respondents.  He states,
&ldquo;It is true that inner St. Louis is now populated almost
exclusively by blacks, but the vast majority were born
in other parts of the country and then migrated to the
Gateway City; thus I could not, strictly speaking, label
their speech 'the language of St. Louis.' &rdquo;

The text of Murray's work is peppered with linguistic
&ldquo;in-jokes&rdquo; and other references, as well as examples
of the author's distinctive brand of wit.  Murray
alludes to &ldquo;the well-known 'danger of death' question,&rdquo;
and to the &ldquo;well-known department store survey&rdquo; conducted
by Labov in 1972.  He also observes that &ldquo;St.
Louis does seem to have an inordinately high population
of androgynous beings, supplemented with the
typically small subcultures of transvestites, bearded
women and so on...&rdquo;

Murray attempts to end the debate concerning
whether St. Louis speech is typically &ldquo;North Midlands,&rdquo;
&ldquo;South Midlands,&rdquo; or a mixture of the two.  He
examines the language of St. Louis through a metaphor
he creates around the term *hoosier*, remarking,
&ldquo;I can show conclusively that the linguistic choices of
St. Louisans are heavily influenced by their collective
perceptions of what it means to be and sound like a
'hoosier.'  &ldquo;According to Don Crinklaw, whom Murray
quotes:

>[St. Louisans] do not, as many think, use [hoosier]
interchangably [*sic*] with hillbilly, which
suggests a cute old fellow with a fishin'...
pole, a jar of corn squeezin's and a corncob pipe
...[They] mean that displaced country man
who moves into a city neighborhood and tears it
up.  As in, &ldquo;First the hoosiers moved in, then the
blacks.&rdquo;  I guess you could say a hoosier is a hillbilly
who's threatening.

Murray polled 480 St. Louisans (in addition, I gather,
to his primary respondents) in order to ascertain precisely
the local usage of *hoosier*.  He finds it to be the
pejorative term of choice when referring to white
males.  He even observes that many white St. Louisans
use *hoosier* as a derogatory term when referring to
blacks.  (I can't corroborate this bit of evidence, since
never, in all my years in St. Louis, do I recall hearing a
black person referred to as a hoosier.  Not by anyone.)

Based on his research, Murray concludes that St.
Louisans consider &ldquo;northern&rdquo; pronunciation and
grammar more correct than &ldquo;southern,&rdquo; and they
speak the way they do because they don't want to be
thought of as &ldquo;hoosiers.&rdquo;  (On the subject of pronunciation,
it might be useful to point out that the natives
always say &ldquo;saint LOOiss&rdquo; not LOOee) and &ldquo;saint
LOOiss-un.&rdquo;  This notwithstanding &ldquo;Saint LOOee woman,&rdquo;
&ldquo;meet me in Saint LOOee, LOOee,&rdquo; and other
anomalies.)

Linguists might well find the book useful because
it brings together data from previous surveys of the
language of St. Louis, both Murray's own work and
that of Donald Lance, Rachel Faries, and Robert L.
Johnson, among others.  And Murray ambitiously attempts
to reach some conclusions as to how St.
Louisans have come to speak the way they do.

The inquisitive layman might find Murray's work
interesting for two reasons.  First, one's own commonsense
assumptions about linquistic field research are
borne out in Murray's work.  He had to switch his
method of collecting data before he even got started,
he states, because, &ldquo;not only were my informants extremely
uneasy when they became aware that I was
observing their pronunciation, they quite obviously
tried to effect certain changes in the formation of
many of their vowels and consonants.&rdquo;  Also, he observes,
people tend to speak in a manner they consider
to be &ldquo;more correct&rdquo; when they are in a situation they
regard as more &ldquo;formal.&rdquo;

Second, especially if the reader has ever spent
much time in St. Louis, he or she might recognize or
be amused by some of the distinctive constructions and
pronunciations favored by St. Louisans.  Murray notes
the predominance of the &ldquo;SUNduh&rdquo; pronunciation of
*sundae*, that *wash* and *Washington* become &ldquo;*warsh*&rdquo;
and &ldquo;*Warshington*,&rdquo; *forty* turns into &ldquo;farty&rdquo; and that
St. Louisans use *you guys* as a term of address for a
mixed group of people.  He also observes the preference
St. Louis natives have for *lightning bugs* over *fireflies,
icing* over *frosting, jelly* over *jam, skipping school* over
*playing hookey*, and a *grease job* over a *lube job*.  Finally,
it is refreshing that Murray's study lays to rest
some of the misconceptions outsiders have about the
speech of St. Louisans.  They do not, Murray asserts,
carry things around in *sacks*—they like *bags* better,
and *soda* is their (non-alcoholic) beverage of choice,
not *pop*.

The non-professional reader, however, might be
perplexed at the nature of linguistic studies in general,
judging from Murray's account.  I found myself debating
the merits of a study which excludes a significant
slice of the population of a city, while claiming to
derive conclusions from the data gathered.  Further, I
cannot quite reconcile Murray's use of past studies as
models for his own.  Some of the syntax and phonology
vocabulary he investigates seem archaic.  How significant
is it, for instance, that St. Louisans store their
potatoes in either a *root cellar* or a plain old *cellar*?  In
older, larger houses, a *root cellar* was often a separate
part of a cellar, containing bins for apples, potatoes,
etc.  I understand that by sticking to formats used in
the past by other researchers, Murray gives himself a
useful basis for comparison, but it seeems to me he
denies himself a great deal of information he could
have gathered if he had listened a little more and
predicted a little less.

It was disappointing to see that Murray failed to
witness St. Louisans' predilection for such phrases as
*same difference* (used in lieu of *same thing*).  And
had Murray allowed himself to interview black St.
Louisans, he more than likely would have been treated
to the construction *be's*, which is used in place of *is* or
*are*, as in, *Sometimes things just be's that way*.

*[Thomas Finkel, Providence]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The BBI Combinatory Dictionary of English: A Guide to Word Combinations*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780915027811/BBI-Combinatory-Dictionary-English-guide-091502781X/plp)
Morton Benson, Evelyn Benson, and Robert Ilson, (John Benjamins, 1986), xxxvi + 286 pp.

I have two complaints about this book: One is that
it is too brief: the language is vast, and the number of
collocations (which, out of sheer perversity, I prefer to
call *collocutions*) is enormous.  It is doubtful that all
could be covered, and it is sad that a combination of
the authors' efforts and the publisher's support could
not have produced a more comprehensive work.  My
second complaint—though one that is more readily
answerable—is that the bibliographical sources for this
book are listed in another book, *Lexicographic
Description of English*.  That book is not at hand while
I write this review; in fact, I am not certain that I
have it, and I think it unforgivable (I blame the publisher)
that a reader/user be referred to a different
work; I find the present work greatly diminished by
the shortcoming.

For those who have not needed to distinguish between
idioms and collocutions, an explanation is in order.
It is generally accepted that an idiom is a collection
of two or more words the meaning of which is different
from the sum of the literal meanings of the individual
elements.  Thus, while *red herring* may be, literally, a
herring that is red, it is more likely to mean 'false trail'
or, in financial circles particularly, an 'offer of new
shares in a corporation.'  Similarly, *kick the bucket, fly
off the handle, take in* 'deceive,' *comic book, green
thumb*, etc.  A detailed discussion of this complicated
genre must be left to another time.  At the other extreme
are the ordinary formations that reflect completely independent
grammatical and lexical uses of the language.
Thus, *on the house* in *The roof is on the house* is
such a usage, while in *The drink is on the house, on the
house* means 'free of charge.'  Somewhere in the middle,
between these extremes, are *collocutions*, that is, the
ordinary combinations that habitually recur in a language.
These may be more or less metaphoric (which
creates a genuine problem of selection) and, like idioms,
fall into the general category of clich&eacute;s.  The *BBI* (for
Benson, Benson, Ilson) *Dictionary* concerns itself with
such collocutions, their listing, and their classification
into several grammatical and lexical classes of some
refinement.  I get the impression because of the very
difficult work of classification that a number of common
collocutions have slipped through the net and that
some of those included have missed their proper categorization.
Before detailing these items, it would be just
to point out that when a native speaker deals with his
own language, the semantic elements being analyzed
frequently become like optical illusions: they appear
one way on a Friday afternoon and in a completely
different guise on Monday morning.  Here are some observations
and queries:

1\)  Why is *run over* in, showing *She ran over to
her friend's place*?  In my analysis, *run* in this context is
rarely literal, any more than it is in *I'll run out* (or
*down) and buy some more beer*.  If *run up to* is exemplified
by *She ran up to me*, then perhaps a better
example for *run over* would be *She ran over to where I
was standing*.  (Note that *run over* in the senses of
'overflow' and 'hit with a car or other vehicle' are not
in, nor should they be, for they are idiomatic, not
collocutional.)

2\) *Check in* seems to be missing, though it is the
intransitive form for *check into*: one says *I checked
into (or in at) the hotel this morning* (but not **I
checked into this morning*) and *I checked in this morning*
(but not **I checked in the hotel this morning*).

3\)  For American English (AE), *check off* (British
English: *tick off*) ought to be in: *They checked our
names off; Please check off the books you want*.  And
what about *check in* 'report,' as in *I'm just checking
in?*

4\)  Where is *rubber check?*  The modern colloquialism
*cut a check?*

5\)  Why is *to count one's chickens before they are
hatched in?*

6\)  Some of the definitions could be made more
precise.  For example, *it works like a charm* is defined
as 'it works perfectly,' while a more felicitous gloss
might be 'it works like magic.'  At *chemistry*, 'empathy'
might be better than 'personal feelings.'  What is the
difference between *charge* 4 ... *they charged ten dollars
for shipping (our books*) and 12... *she charged
fifty dollars for her services?*

Generally, the treatment of nouns is better than
that of verbs.  If one looks up *chin*, for instance, the
words *double*, *smooth*, and *glass* are shown as frequently
associated with it, but not *chin music* or *up
to the chin in*—.  *Nose* is missing *retrouss&eacute;*, but *cauliflower
ear* is in.  Other common combinations are not
covered, e.g., *battered child* (but *battered wife* is in),
*child labor, to get with child, buffalo chips, to let
the chips fall where they may, chip shot (golf), Father
Christmas, Christmas present, Christmas sale,
Christmas tree*, etc.  These are probably not oversights
but deliberate omissions made in order to have
the space to accommodate entries deemed more important,
and more's the pity that the book is not
several times its length and comprehensiveness.  A
scanning of *Idioms* and *Phrases Index*, Gale Research
Company, 1983, would have yielded a number of entries,
and recourse to private collections (I have some
50,000) would have been fruitful, too.  It is worth
mentioning that a work by Albrecht Reum, *A Dictionary
of English Style*, Leverkusen, 1955, attempted
a similar analysis, though employing a different
structure.  It is entirely possible that *BBI* had
access to these sources, but without a self-contained
bibliography, it is hard to tell.  [A subsequent check
revealed the Reum book in the Bibliography of *Lexicographic
Description of English*.—Ed.]

As it stands, the book reflects contemporary English.
One of its useful features is the system of usage
notes appearing here and there, for example: &ldquo;The
verb *grow* 'to become' often suggests a gradual process
rather than a sudden change.  Compare *to grow cold*
(gradually) and *to turn cold* (suddenly)&rdquo;;  &ldquo;The sentence
*she needn't have gone* implies that she did go
(though there was no need for her to go).  The sentence
*she didn't need to go* does not indicate if she went or
not.&rdquo;

The structure of the entry is a little confusing at
times, but any user, especially the learner of English as
a foreign language, will find valuable information
here once he breaks the code.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionaries of English: Prospects for the Record of Our Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Dictionaries-English-Prospects-Record-Language-Richard/1201390893/bd)
Richard W. Bailey, ed., foreword by Clarence L. Barnhart, (University of Michigan Press, 1987), viii + 161pp.

As Robert W. Burchfield recalls in &ldquo;The *Supplement
to the Oxford English Dictionary*: The End of
the Alphabet,&rdquo; his contribution to this collection of
papers on dictionaries:

>There were no courses, no conferences, no seminars,
no handbooks or manuals of lexicography.

The time referred to was 1957, when he began his
assignment &ldquo;to prepare a new *Supplement*.&rdquo;  I do not
know the attitude in England to lexicography at that
time, but as a practising lexicographer in America I
can attest to a similar situation there, with one or two
exceptions: Uriel Weinreich, who held the Atran chair
of linguistics at Columbia University, was sufficiently
interested in the subject to offer a course called Lexicology,
which, albeit rather vaguely, dealt with the
*principles of lexicography*.  (To this day, while I maintain
such a distinction, I find that the terms are somewhat
muddied.)  On the other hand, my other graduate
studies towards a doctorate in general and
comparative linguistics were conducted by professors
who clung so doggedly to the precepts of structuralism
in linguistics and to theoretical matters that anything
smacking of applied linguistics was at once stigmatized.
The prevailing philosophy of the day—at least at
Columbia—was the Bloomfieldian notion that one
could not—should not—treat semantics because &ldquo;we
know so little about the subject of meaning.&rdquo;  My rebellious
retort was that we were unlikely to learn more
about it by struthiously ignoring it; my protests carried
no weight at all, and work on meaning did not emerge
till many years later, save for some isolated pockets of
resistance.

Today, the situation has changed.  There is a Dictionary
Society of North America (DSNA), which conducts
annual meetings of considerable importance to
the field and publishes proceedings and a Newsletter;
and there is a European Association for Lexicography
(Euralex), which holds biennial conferences and other,
specialized meetings and also has an active publishing
program.  The volume of material on lexicography
published in the past decade—no, only five years or
so—is voluminous compared with everything published
before 1980.  Much of the useful material published
before then appeared in the early 1960s, most of
it the results of work done on mechanical translation
(an activity that became dormant, for lack of results,
in the mid 1960s).  Some of the best was contained in
the papers of the late Margaret Masterman, of Cambridge
University.

Lexicography has come into its own as a proper
discipline, though I daresay there are still some diehard
linguists who score it as being no better than
popular culture.

The dean of American lexicography is, without
doubt, the venerable Clarence L. Barnhart, a gentleman
who has been active in the making of dictionaries
for at least fifty years.  He was responsible for the
Thorndike-Barnhart series of school dictionaries published
for many years by Scott Foresman, for the
*American College Dictionary* (Random House), and
for the *World Book Dictionary*, which is an adjunct to
the *World Book Encyclopedia*.  Barnhart speaks mainly
through his dictionaries, which have always been characterized
by their innovation (his was the first to use
the schwa in a dictionary for the general public or
students); I have often been disappointed by his reticence
in imparting his wisdom in papers delivered at
professional meetings, for they are quite sparse.  His
Foreword in *Dictionaries of English* is no exception:
the reader is informed about the difficulties of amassing
lexicographic citations and other data (of which
lexicographers, who make up the majority of those
likely to read this book, are already aware) and of little
else.  As a Foreword, Barnhart's comments are sufficient:
it is a pity that he could not have been persuaded
to reveal more in an article.

All of the articles, Frederic G. Cassidy's on the
*OED* and *DARE* (*Dictionary of American Regional
English*), E.S.C. Weiner's on the *New OED*, T.F.
Hoad's on lexicographical sources in Old and Middle
English, J&uuml;rgen Sch&auml;fer's on Early Modern English in
the *OED*, the *New OED*, and the *Early Modern English
Dictionary*, and others by Richard Allsopp, A.J.
Aitken, R. R. K. Hartmann, and Richard W. Bailey
tend to treat matters that are largely of interest to
lexicographers, linguists, and (possibly) philosophers
and logicians.  But there are noteworthy exceptions,
depending on how specialized are the interests of nonspecialists.
Bailey, for instance, treats shortcomings of
existing dictionaries (in a general, not a technical
sense) and his writing is always lucid and eminently
readable.  Hartmann treats dictionaries from &ldquo;The
User's Perspective,&rdquo; which emphasizes the differences
among general, historical, and other kinds of dictionaries
prepared for different users, e.g., youngsters,
learners, etc.  Aitken's article on the treatment of Scotticisms
in English dictionaries and his general comments
on dictionary genealogy may be of interest to
non-lexicographers and non-dialecticians.

I find it incumbent on me to criticize adversely
any book of this kind that does not contain an index,
though I am too well aware that its absence is more
often attributable to a denial of adequate space by the
publisher rather than any failing on the part of the
editor.  But indexes are valuable: less so, perhaps, at
the first reading of a book than later on, for reference
to a topic or idea one needs to access.  Not all indexes
are as good as they should be, but the total absence of
an index is the worst of all choices.

My only (other) disappointment is the lack of coverage
of computational lexicography.  Although that
area is, admittedly, a special interest of mine, the application
of computers to lexicography has vastly simplified—even
removed—some of the more onerous
(and expensive) tasks from the lexicographer and, by
eliminating the necessity of maintaining staff to do
things like alphabetization, checking to make certain
that all words used in definitions are entries, and other
routine functions, has allowed the journeyman dictionary-maker
the freedom to focus on more important
matters.  But computational lexicography concerns itself
with far deeper matters than these routines, which
were already being done more than 25 years ago.
Computational lexicography may well enable us to
gain insight into the structure of meaning in language
(or tell us if there is one) and to integrate such disparate
elements as meaning and frequency, pronunciation
and distribution, &ldquo;root&rdquo; sense and metaphor, etc.

*Dictionaries of English*, though it does not consistently
live up to the promise of its subtitle, belongs
in the library of everyone concerned with or about
dictionaries and lexicography.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {John E. Driemen}

In his article *Who Is Rula Lenska* [XII,1], Don L.
F. Nilsen quotes a Ross V. Hersey story about &ldquo;a student
who raised his hand to go to the bathroom.  The
student returned a few minutes later saying he
couldn't find it.&rdquo;  Eventually, with the help of a second
boy, *it* was found.  Boy number one had his pants on
backwards.  This invites a brief inquiry into the origin
and chronology, as well as the gestation period for an
anecdote.

To my knowledge, the story had its genesis in the
autumn of 1963.  My wife was then a kindergarten
teacher.  One of the delightful fringe benefits of her
work was the treasure trove of anecdotes that came
out of her 35-plus years of teaching.  The episode of the
boy who couldn't find it because he had his pants on
backwards actually occurred on that day in 1963 in
room 104 of the Kenny School in Minneapolis.  With
some extended drama, I might add.  My wife told me
the story that same evening.

I first used it, built up and embellished, in March
of 1964 in a speech I gave to a convention of lumbermen
in Missoula, Montana.  It evoked a satisfactory
burst of laughter and a hearty round of applause.  No
one claimed to have heard it before.  Some two months
later the story came back to me through a friend, an
executive whose business frequently took him to Montana.
Then, the story seemed to drift into limbo,
although I used it in several speeches thereafter.

Twenty-one years later, it suddenly reappears:
first, in July on a radio show broadcast from station
WCCO-AM in Minneapolis; second, in your Summer
issue; and again on August 15 in the comic strip *The
Ryatts* by Elrod and Alley.  Where next?

I would not dispute the possibility of the exact
sequence of events happening more than once.  But it
did happen in my wife's kindergarten room some 22
years ago.  Now, two decades later, it blossoms ubiquitously.
Indeed, a lengthy gestation; but at least, a
legitimate lineage can be established.

*[John E. Driemen, Minneapolis]*

## Paring Pairs No. 27 by Howard M. Berger

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Destiny completed the job, but shed its ending.  
(b). Live backwards with lan.  
(c). Low-class bird takes potshot at eavestrough.  
(d). Contest queen holds sway in wetlands.  
(e). Regretful betrothal.  
(f). Fishy appendage in Scottish lake artfully captures king in bridge game.  
(g). Leer at Amerind athlete to found Georgia.  
(h). Washer and Mixmaster cycles make bachelor lady  
(i). Anti-bellum epergne for  
(o). Signal greeting from lofty trigonometric function.  
(p). Fruitful bracing contest.  
(q). Familiarity with the Almighty provides olfactory protection.  
(r). Rising seance sound provides closing summary.  
(s). Gardner and Chaney make for misty isle.  
(t). Headhunters lure intellectual talent into sinkhole.  
(u). Course assignment on bishopric seat leads to  
(u). Course assignment on bishopric seat leads to high religious office.  
(v). The key is to stay alert or get stung, Becky.  
(w). Minstrel performer to make isle extinet.  
(x). Missing veteran golfer discovered in deep.  
(y). Bob the dog's appendage.  
(z). A bit of a legal professional.

(1). Accompli.  
(2). Ava.  
(3). Beauty.  
(4). Bee.  
(5). Book.  
(6). Brain.  
(7). Caf&eacute;.  
(8). Cur.  
(9). Drain.  
(10). End.  
(11). Evil.  
(12). Fate.  
(13). Fin.  
(14). Found.  
(15). God.  
(16). Gutter.  
(17). Hi.  
(18). Knows.  
(19). Lock.  
(20). Lon.  
(21). Maker.  
(22). Man.  
(23). Mouth.  
(24). Ness.  
(25). Ogle.  
(26). Pairing.  
(27). Paper.  
(28). Peace.  
(29). Pears.  
(30). Piece.  
(31). Plight.  
(32). Pro.  
(33). Raining.  
(34). Rap.  
(35). Razed.  
(36). Reef.  
(37). Royal.  
(38). Said.  
(39). See.  
(40). Senta.  
(41). Sharpe.  
(42). Sine.  
(43). Snipe.  
(44). Sorry.  
(45). Source.  
(46). Spin.  
(47). Spirit.  
(48). Step.  
(49). Stir.  
(50). Tail.  
(51). Thorpe.  
(52). Up.  
(53). Worcestershire.  

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 26

(a). Concrete evidence of first Gael?  (17,1) Mac Adam.  
(b). Annie Laurie in Scotland. (17,26) Mac Truck.  
(c). Gaelic sailor stern first at airfield. (24,17) Tar Mac.  
(d). Whistler catches Gael at genuflection. (17,14) Mac Kneel.  
(e). If he hadn't bloomed, Gael would make history. (17,3) Mac Cauliflower.  
(f). Gaelic bird call. (17,4) Mac Caw.  
(g). A Gaelic scheme born after seven. (17,13,11) Mac In Eight.  
(h). Gael insensate at speed of sound. (17,19) Mac Number.  
(i). Gael amazed at Indian blanket—this is straight. (17,13,2) Mac In Awe.  
(j). Trim Gael. (17,13,25) Mac In Tosh.  
(k). Gael tells long country tale. (17,23) Mac Rural.  
(l). Gaelic bovine in Hong Kong harbor?  (17,7) Mac Cow.  
(m). Composer for woodwinds?  (17,10) Mac Dowel.  
(n). Gaelic-Indian mother.  (17,9) Mac Cree.  
(o). Noisy Gaelic lexicographer.  (17,16) Mac Loud.  
(p). Gaelic weatherman.  (17,5) Mac Cloud.   
(q). Gaelic actor never went up on his lines.  (17,21) Mac Ready.  
(r). Reagan's horizontal line of Gaelic descent.  (17,22) Mac Ron.  
(s). Poetic relative of Gaelic uncle?  (17,18) Mac Niece.  
(t). Attendance was spotty, Scotty, and you are tardy. (17,27,15) Mac You Late.  
(u). You win either way with Gaelic inventor. (17,20,17) Mac Or Mick.  
(v). Bashful Gael is the genuine article.  (17,8) Me Coy.  
(w). Gael given to insolent, elementary writing.  (17,12) Mc Guffey.

The correct answer is (6) Cloy.  The winner of No.
26 was Sarah Milburn Moore of Somerville, Massachusetts.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those received
in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, BOX
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A. *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please*.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Modern painter's wild destiny (13)  
9\. Icy dessert fixed including aromatic plant (7)  
10\. Cleared out of state (7)  
11\. Clounts up handbags (5)  
12\. Is offended at houses I had for tenants (9)  
13\. Enterprise, perhaps for struggling harpists (8)  
14\. Was taken with a party communist (6)  
17\. Ape clutching an awning (6)  
19\. Witnesses taking in cunning hunts (8)  
23\. Taunt about a cardinal being frightened away (6, 3)  
25\. Magnetism left in long speech (5)  
26\. Pull at leaflet (7)  
27\. Love poems and article from across the Atlantic (7)  
28\. Musclemen tattle endlessly, enthralling Prime Minister (7, 6)  

**Down**

1\. Typeset a story, netting some Spanish money (7)  
2\. Vision problem right on entering empty train (9)  
3\. Confederate employs symbolic writings (7)  
4\. A muscle builder from a small planet (8)  
5\. Skinnydipper stumbling in dust (6)  
6\. Wrote secretly when company stocks terminated (7)  
7\. Couple win at caroms (5)  
8\. Rented for the minium amount, say (6)  
15\. Gives auditions in legitimate theater tryout? (9)  
16\. Hairstyle featured in broadcast from shore area (8)  
17\. Foreign actors shares the billing (6)  
18\. Show nervousness getting official introduction (7)  
20\. News stores closed finally, getting small amount of money (3, 4)  
21\. Rescue 50 held by barbarian (7)  
22\. Hate to put ring into shop machine (6)  
24\. Opposed to crook's first caper (5)  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Pronounced dead in 1976 accident, boy, 12 leads healthy,
active life.&rdquo;  [Headline from an item in *The Hartford courant*,
November 10, 1983.  Submitted by Frank Abate, Old
Saybrook, Connecticut.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Two of my descendants came over on the Mayflower in
1620.&rdquo;  [From a correspondent to Percy Ross's column, *The
Columbus Dispatch*, 9 September 1984.  Submitted by Dorothy
Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. SOFTHEARTED (hidden).  
9\. CLOSE-UP (anag.).  
10\. INGENUE (anag.).  
11\. N(A-R.R.)ATIVE.  
12\. I-DEAL.  
13\. ST.-RIDES.  
16\. DI-ARIES (I'D rev.).  
17\. NIAGA-R-A (rev.).  
19\. FL-YTRAP (PARTY rev.).  
21\. TAPER (2 meanings).  
22\. PE-RIME-TER.  
25\. FLATTER (2 meanings).  
26\. S-EX-POTS.  
27\. CON-FERMENTS.  

**Down**

1\. SE-CO.-NDS.  
2\. F-LO-OR.  
3\. H-YEN-A.  
4\. APPL-I-ES.  
5\. T-AIL-END.  
6\. DIGNITARY (hidden rev.).  
7\. INFE-RIO-R  
8\. BE-LLES (SELL rev.).  
14\. REAP-PEAR.  
15\. DIA-CRITIC (AID rev.).  
17\. NOTIFY (anag.).  
18\. ASPIRIN (g).  
19\. F-ORES-EE.  
20\. PER-USES (REP rev.).  
23\. MA-X-IM.  
24\. T-HORN.


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v14n2_Autumn_1987)