--- 
title: "VOL XIV, No 3 [Winter, 1988]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Sherlock Holmes Adds A Word
*Walter P. Armstrong, Jr., Memphis, Tennessee*

This year marks the centenary of the publication
of the first Sherlock Holmes story, which appeared
in *Beeton's Christmas Annual* for 1887.  Since
then the stories have been translated into fifty-seven
languages and published in thirty-eight countries, in
which the name of the world's first consulting detective
has become a household word.  Less well known, however,
is the fact that Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, in relating
Holmes's exploits contributed a new word to the
English language: *grimpen*.

It all began with &ldquo;The Hound of the Basker-villes.&rdquo;
As Doctor Watson strolled across the moor in
the company of Henry Stapleton, the latter pointed
out to him some bright green spots which seemed more
fertile than the rest.

>That is the great Grimpen Mire.  A false step  
yonder means death to man or beast.  Only yesterday
I saw one of the moor ponies wander into
it.  He never came out.  I saw his head for quite a
long time craning out of the bog-hole, but it
sucked him down at last.  Even in dry seasons it
is a danger to cross it, but after these autumn
rains it is an awful place.

T.S. Eliot, an avid Sherlockian—he once wrote:
&ldquo;Every writer owes something to Holmes&rdquo;—picked up
the word and used it in &ldquo;East Coker,&rdquo; one of the &ldquo;Four
Quarters&rdquo;:

>We are only undeceived  
Of that which, deceiving, could no longer harm.  
In the middle, not only in the middle of the way  
But all the way, in a dark wood, in a bramble,  
On the edge of a grimpen, where is no secure  
foothold,

And menaced by monsters, fancy lights,
Risking enchantment.

This was first commented upon by James Johnson
Sweeney in an article entitled &ldquo;East Coker: A Reading&rdquo;
in *Southern Review*, Vol. VI, No. 4, (1941) (reprinted in
*T.S. Eliot: A Selected Critique*, 1948), where he says:

>&ldquo;Life has become&rdquo; for us, as it had for Dr. Watson
in A. Conan Doyle's *The Hound of The Baskervilles*,
&ldquo;like that great Grimpen Mire, with
little green patches everywhere into which one
may sink and with no guide to point the track.&rdquo;

The quotation from Dr. Watson occurs in a conversation,
which takes place only moments after his first
encounter with the Grimpen Mire, between him and
Beryl Stapleton, whom he believes to be the sister but is
actually the wife of Henry Stapleton.  She, under the
impression that he is Sir Henry Baskerville, has just
warned him to leave the moor and return to London
immediately.  These are some of the psychological
shadows which surround these four characters and
which prompt Dr. Watson's remark, using the Grimpen
Mire as a metaphor for life's pitfalls.  This is apparently
what attracted Eliot's attention; as one writer (Derek
Travers, &ldquo;T.S. Eliot: The Longer Poems&rdquo;) commenting
on the passage from &ldquo;East Coker,&rdquo; puts it:

>Such is the human situation, seen at a time of
personal and universal stress, and imposing — as
a condition of continuing to live in any real
sense—the renunciation of all the easy consolations
which offered themselves, in anticipation,
as desirable goals and which have now turned
out to be irrelevant in the face of an unknowable
and menacing future.

More than thirty years after Johnson first noted
Eliot's use of *grimpen*, Trevor Hall in his essay
&ldquo;Thomas Stearns Eliot and Sherlock Holmes&rdquo; wrote:

>What, we may reasonably ask, is a *grimpen*?
The word is not contained either in the *Concise
Oxford Dictionary*, nor in *Chamber's Twentieth
Century Dictionary*, nor is it even to be found
in the row of massive all-embracing volumes of
the *OED*....  It can be said, therefore, that as
a common noun *grimpen* does not exist in the
English language.

A footnote to the essay in which this appears
records that it is &ldquo;an adaptation of a talk delivered ...
on 10 April, 1972.&rdquo;  At that time the statement quoted
above was accurate; but it certainly was not so in
August, 1976, the date which Mr. Hall assigns to the
preface to his volume, *Sherlock Holmes and His Creator*,
in which the printed version appears, where he
writes:

>I am not the first student to point out the use
that the late T.S. Eliot made of the Baker Street
canon in some of his poems, but I hope that I
am the first writer to assemble all the facts in
permanent form.

Dame Helen Gardner in her excellent book, *The
Composition of Four Quartets* (1978), writes, quite
correctly:

>The supplement to the *Oxford English Dictionary,
A-G* (1972) gives &ldquo;*grimpen.*  (Etym. uncertain)?
A marshy area.&rdquo;  It cites as the first use
Conan Doyle, &ldquo;The Hound of the Baskervilles&rdquo;
(1902): &ldquo;Life has become like that great
Grimpen Mire, with little green patches everywhere
into which one may sink and with no
guide to point the track.&rdquo;  The second citation is
from &ldquo;East Coker.&rdquo;  The third from W.S. Baring-Gould,
Annotated Sherlock Holmes (1968): &ldquo;As is
well known, Watson's Great Grimpen Mire' is
Grimspound Bog, three miles to the north and
west of Widecombe in the Moor.&rdquo;

The publishers advise that Volume I (A-G) of *A
Supplement to the OED* was published in Britain on
October 12, 1972, six months after Mr. Hall's talk was
delivered but almost four years before it was reprinted
in the volume in which he hopes to &ldquo;assemble all of the
facts in permanent form.&rdquo;  Robert W. Burchfield, Chief
Editor of The Oxford Dictionaries (emeritus), in a letter
to this writer states: &ldquo;*Grimpen* was included because
we had satisfactory illustrative examples for the
word, including one from the works of T.S. Eliot.&rdquo;  It
should be noted, however, that of the three examples
given in the *OED*, two use *Grimpen* as a proper name;
it would therefore appear that Eliot's employment of it
as a word was a nonce usage.  Mr. Hall has fallen into a
grimpen of his own making by failing to review the
continued validity of his sources, and Sherlock
Holmes's creator, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, must be
credited with adding a word to our native vocabulary.

[The substance of this article first appeared in the
*Baker Street Gazette*, Issue #1, Summer 1987.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Last year, 4 million people who wanted to go someplace
else flew to Copenhagen.&rdquo;  [Full page ad for Scandinavian
Airlines in *Atlantic Business*January/February 1985.  Submitted
by Murray and Jean Kinloch, Fredericton, New
Brunswick, who think SAS should have a word with their
chief navigator.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;In South African politics the lunatic fringe is close to
the center.&rdquo;  [Anthony Heard, editor of the *Cape Times*
(Capetown, S.A.), in an interview with Alfred Balk, publisher,
*World Press Review*, from *World Press Review*, July,
1986, p. 23.  Submitted by Gordon B. Thompson, Etobicoke,
Ontario.]

## The Poem Recently Attributed to Shakespeare and the Misuse of Dictionaries
*David L. Gold, Haifa, Israel*

November 1985 saw the beginning of a controversy
over whether a poem which Gary Taylor and
Stanley Wells attributed to William Shakespeare was
really by the Bard of Avon (see, for example, the front
page of *The New York Times* of November 24, 1985,
the editorial page of *The New York Times* of December
8, 1985, and *The New York Times Book Review* of
December 15, 1985).  Both sides tried to buttress their
arguments by quoting from the *Oxford English Dictionary*
[*OED*] and at least one side misunderstood the
function of this dictionary.  In a letter to the editor of
the *Times*, published in the December 8, 1985 issue
(p. 26 E), John J. Soldo, who identified himself as the
author of *The Tempering of T. S. Eliot* and three
books of poetry, wrote, inter alia:

>The dating, given [by Taylor] as 1593-1595—
primarily because of echoes in *Romeo and Juliet*—cannot
be any earlier than 1591, when, according
to the *Oxford English Dictionary*, the
use of *die* to mean &ldquo;pining away for denied passion&rdquo;
came into the language.  That is a year before
Shakespeare is assumed to have arrived in
London at the age of 28, a period in which his
earliest comedies and histories display undigested
literary dross.  [Quoted verbatim except for slight
typographical changes.]

The earliest citation for this sense of *die* in the
*OED* is indeed from 1591; the *Supplement* adds no
citations.  This, however, does not mean that the compilers
of the *OED* were suggesting that the sense in
question arose in that year or that anyone is entitled to
infer as much.  All we can say is that the *OED's* readers
found no earlier citations.  That is because: (1) the
sense indeed arose in that year; or (2) it arose earlier
but was not used in writing until that year; or (3) it
was used in writing earlier than 1591 but these written
sources were not extant at the time the *OED* was being
compiled; or (4) it was used in writing earlier than
1591 but these written sources were missed by the
*OED's* readers.  Indeed, written works do not usually
contain the first instance of a usage and all that most
of the citations in the *OED* and other dictionaries
allow us to establish is a *terminus a quo*, that is, a time
at which we may be certain the usage already existed.

Therefore, if the author of the poem used *die* in
this sense and Taylor and Wells date the poem to
1593-95, this three-year period is after the *terminus a
quo* for the sense, hence its appearance in the poem is
in no way unusual.  However, even if the *OED* had no
citations for this sense of *die* from before 1596 (a hypothetical
case!), the dating to 1593-95 could still stand.
In such a case, the poem, if the dating is correct,
would be evidence that *die* in this sense was used earlier
than our hypothetical 1596 earliest citation in the
*OED* (the poem would thus constitute an antedating).
If so, we would be unable to tell whether this sense
was first used in the poem since it could have been used
earlier (elsewhere) but was missed by the *OED's* compilers
(and others) for reasons (2) or (3) above.  *Die* in
this sense is thus not relevant one way or the other to
the dating or attribution of this poem.

Soldo goes further.  If I interpret correctly his remarks
about Shakespeare's &ldquo;literary adolescence&rdquo; and
display of &ldquo;undigested literary dross,&rdquo; Soldo is saying
that in 1593-95 (and certainly earlier if anyone wants
to date the poem before that time) Shakespeare was
such a hack that he could not possibly have used *die* in
what was then a freshly minted sense.  As shown above,
however, we do not really know when this sense arose:
it could have been in 1591 or earlier.  If earlier, it could
have become quite common by the first half of the
1590s.  Also, there is nothing to prevent even a hack
from innovating once in a while or using a still unhackneyed
form.  It does not seem, therefore, that *die*
in this sense is relevant in any way to the date or
authorship of the poem.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;All around the room are an exotic variety of very real
pot plants. ... She [Chief Justice Rose Elizabeth Bird of
California] has never been married and until recent death
threats lived with her mother.&rdquo;  [From *The Sunday Times*
(London), October 5, 1986, p. 49.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It is not often that one tries to help his fellow
man/woman and is bitten by the hand that feeds him....&rdquo;
[From a letter in the *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, July 31, 1985.
Submitted by John S. Hogg, Hamilton, New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;In an essay answer on a Lit. exam, an Annapolis cadet
wrote, '... Sancho Panza always rode on a burrow.'  The
instructor deducted for this, with the explanation, 'A burro
is an ass.  A burrow is a hole in the ground.  As a future naval
officer, you are expected to know the difference.' &rdquo;  [From
a supposedly true story on an electronic bulletin board.  Submitted
by Dana Richards, Charlottesville, Virginia.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I came within a hare's breath of running for Congress.
... &rdquo; [From an interview in the *Beaumont Enterprise*,
March 25, 1985.  Submitted by Winfred S. Emmons, Beaumont,
Texas.]

## Poison Penmanship
*Richard Conniff, Deep River, Connecticut*

For untold generations, well-meaning mothers
have been passing on the idea that if you cannot
find something nice to say, you had better say nothing
at all.  Good advice, really, but it is a safe bet most of
those mothers were not travelers.  Consider, for example,
a daughter raised in this tradition who arrives at
her London hotel at 8 a.m., bleary-eyed from the
trans-Atlantic flight, only to be rudely informed that
no room will be available till three, and, anyway, they
cannot find her reservation.  She will turn blue in the
face and have veins pulsing pizzicato in the whites of
her eyes if she is then required to say something nice.
Much better for the blood pressure to cut one's sniveling
adversary down to size—if only to one's spouse,
and in muttered undertones.

It has, of course, been done before—and done
well.  Ogden Nash, an otherwise amiable soul, once
spent 60 lines of verse venting his spleen on a sneering
clerk at &ldquo;an inn so vile, an inn so shameless,/For very
disgust I leave it nameless.&rdquo;  Indeed, the occasional misfortunes
of travel have inspired some of the great writers
of the ages.  Thus after an unhappy stop at a place
called The Three Crosses, Jonathan Swift suggested
that the innkeeper pin his wife to the sign out front
and make it four.  Swift, the great master of savage
indignation, also neatly squashed the entire populace
of historic Chester in a poem of six concise lines:

>The Walls of this Town  
Are full of renown,  
And strangers delight to walk round 'em:  
But as for the dwellers,  
Both buyers and sellers,  
For me, you may hang 'em, or drown 'em.

While it has never precisely been celebrated, this
sort of vituperative travel writing constitues a literary
sub-genre.  I began collecting instances of it when I
was living for several months in Swift's old neighborhood
in Dublin.  The result was an anthology of poison
penmanship, on travel and other vexing subjects,
called *The Devil's Book of Verse*.  (The Dodd, Mead
hardcover is available from The Deep River Book Co.,
P.O. Box 64, Deep River, CT 06417, $17.30 postpaid.)
The genre, I found, has ancient roots.  The Greek poet
Demodocus, for example, did not much like natives of
the Cappadocia district of Turkey.  In 537 B.C., he
wrote:

>A viper bit a Cappadocian's hide  
And poisoned by his blood that instant died.

And in the thirteenth century A.D., Robert de Brunne
declared:

>Frenchmen sin in lechery,  
Englishmen in ennui.

The authors of these unpleasantries were by no means
all predictable misanthropic sorts.  Rupert Brooke, the
World War I poet best known for writing that his
soldier's grave in a foreign field would be &ldquo;forever England,&rdquo;
also once wrote:

>Cambridge people rarely smile,  
Being urban, squat, and packed with guile.

And Coleridge, celebrated for his imaginary travels
in Xanadu, also evidently visited more earthly
destinations:

>In Cologne, a town of monks and bones,  
And pavements fanged with murderous stones  
And rags, and hags, and hideous wenches;  
I counted two and seventy stenches,  
All well defined, and several stinks!

Travelers have unleashed their anger even (or maybe I
should say especially) on the world's grandest cities.
Thus, in a small way, Anthony Brode brought *la ville
lumi&eacute;re* into perspective when he wrote:

>Paris is simply disgusting;  
Nobody's said it before,  
But the Metro is rusting,  
The Louvre needs dusting,  
The women are plain and  
I'm sick of the Seine and  
It smells like a drain and  
In fact I find Paris a bore.

The poetic batterings occasionally administered to
London's image have also been of a corrective variety.
Almost everyone is by now sick to death of Samuel
Johnson's endlessly repeated declaration, &ldquo;When a
man is tired of London, he is tired of life.&rdquo;  Isn't it
pleasant then to reflect that, 40 years before he uttered
that remark, Johnson himself described London in
these terms?

>Here malice, rapine, accident, conspire,  
And now a rabble rages, now a fire;  
Their ambush here relentless ruffians lay,  
And here the fell attorney prowls for prey;  
Here falling houses thunder on your head,  
And here a female atheist talks you dead.

It would be gratifying to think that in the 40-year
interval London had taken note of Johnson's poem and
amended its ways.

But in truth, I know of only one case where a
traveler's malediction has actually produced something
like the desired result.  An Irish eccentric named Patrick
O'Kelly once lost his watch and chain in the town
of Doneraile.  In a prolonged fury, he wrote:

>May fire and Brimstone never fail,  
To fall in showers on Doneraile.  
May all the leading fiends assail,  
The thieving town of Doneraile,  
As lightnings flash across the vale,  
So down to Hell with Doneraile.

O'Kelly's curse ran to 84 lines, and in one form or
another it evidently made the rounds.  When one of the
local gentry kindly replaced the lost watch, perhaps
with a view to restoring Doneraile's good name,
O'Kelly promptly recanted, announcing his blessings
on the poor community at equal length.  The reader
who wades through all this verbiage will certainly
agree that malediction is more fun than benediction.
But there is a more timely lesson to be learned from
O'Kelly's case: It is possible to dispatch your adversaries
with strong language rather than, for instance,
with plastic explosives.  A deftly-phrased malediction
can make its target squirm in his castle or cower behind
the hotel reservations desk.

Now I do not seriously expect our leading terrorists
to take this hint, but think of the possibilities.
Iambic tetrameter by the scalding reamful would be
cheaper than an Uzi submachine gun, and not nearly
as messy.  Nor would it be suicidal, except perhaps in
rare instances.  And it might even work.

After all, didn't O'Kelly get his watch back?

## Ici On Parle Anglais?
*Johanna Garfield, New York City*

When is a vest an undershirt?  Or a rug a bedspread?
These are not childish riddles to be
cast aside as infantile nonsense.  In coping with the
arcane lexicon of a British girls' school clothing list,
one finds they are questions that, while limited in
scope, may have wider political implications.  How
have Americans been communicating with their English
cousins all these years when such a minor document
as a two-page list of required clothing turns out
to be as loaded with potential misunderstandings as a
mine field?

A few years ago our daughter, Clare, then twelve,
was admitted to a school in Gloucestershire.  An
innocent-looking clothing list soon followed, and I
promptly filed it away for late summer attention,
imagining that I could breeze through it with the same
ease with which previous camp lists for three had been
dispatched.  Not so.  The first hint of trouble came
when, late in August, I decided to try to fill the list
here in the U.S.  I soon discovered that even Blooming-dale's
and Macy's have their limits.  Aside from such
standard articles as tights and gloves, the more esoteric
items (&ldquo;1 dark red cloak with hood lined in house
colour&rdquo;—in our case, that &ldquo;colour&rdquo; being green) were
nowhere to be found.

But the real problem was the language barrier.
What exactly was a *games sweater*: a cardigan or a
pullover?  And in the second half of the twentieth century,
were girls really still wearing *knickers?*  Bemused
and increasingly anxious (time was running out), I
decided to accomplish the whole job when we took
Clare to England, and in early September, still groggy
with jet lag, we hastened to Peter Jones, the school's
&ldquo;official outfitters.&rdquo;  There, under the patient tutelage
of Miss O'Halloran in &ldquo;Girls' Uniforms,&rdquo; who addressed
me as &ldquo;Madam&rdquo; and made me feel like a character
in a P. G. Wodehouse novel, I began my reeducation
in words I thought I'd known for years.

The *games sweater*, which I'd secretly fantasized
as something my daughter and her friends might wear
as they played checkers—or, more likely, whist or
cribbage—turned out to be a heavy, loose-knit garment,
something like a ski sweater, for use in athletics.
*3 Aertex shirts in plain colours with sleeves* were nothing
but glorified, open-weave T-shirts.  Temporarily
elated (this wasn't going to be so hard after all), I
moved on to the next requirement: *2 overalls with
loops (one plain coloured, not white, coat-style)*, and
quickly came down to earth.  That had me thoroughly
confused in the States, and merely being in England
did not prove revealing.  Indeed, had the curriculum
included a bit of farming or weeding—though a rereading
of the prospectus revealed nothing about such
earthy activities—how did *coat-style* fit into the picture
of denim suspenders and pants I had firmly fixed
in my mind?  The answer, I learned from the omniscient
Miss O'Halloran, was: it didn't.  Their *overalls*
are our *smocks* (or *coveralls*), the kind in which children
happily mess about during art period or in which
one imagines the great masters executing their masterpieces.

That conundrum solved, we proceeded to three
puzzlers in a row: *4 vests; 3 grey knickers; 4 liners or
more*.  My original recollection of a vest as the somewhat
antiquated part of the business suit across which
my father's gold watch chain had extended years ago
had been replaced in recent years by the vest as a
trendy, unisex item.  In England, it turned out to be
neither.  There, I soon found, *vests* are cotton undershirts.
The mysterious *knickers* are their mates, cotton
underpants, and *liners* their heavier counterparts,
with sleeves to ward off the rigors of English winters.

In a mistaken assumption that the worst was over,
I was brought up short by *1 pair canvas laced gym
shoes*, and on the very next line, *1 pair white canvas
laced games shoes*.  Either of these alone would have
been no problem, since both sounded comfortably
close to what I assumed was some English style of
sneaker.  But then why did she need two pairs?
Because, it developed, only the *games shoes* were actually
sneakers (*plimsolls* in England): the *gym shoes*
turned out to be quaint, black, rubber-soled affairs,
closely resembling the thin, pull-on slippers we were
made to wear as children when walking into a pebbly
lake or ocean.

We plunged on, attacking the final column now,
and I soon found that a *bathing dress* (I had visualized
some newer version of an 1890s' model) was simply
our standard tank suit.  The *rug* was not, as I had foolishly
imagined, something for the floor, but in fact a
warm coverlet for the bed.  The *fully equipped work
basket* (Were they to learn plumbing and mechanics?)
was a sewing box, and with its purchase, the last mystery
was solved.

Since the job was now nearly done, I had time to
relish the charm of some of the more comprehensible
requirements.  Summer dresses were referred to as
*frocks*, a term I hadn't heard since girlhood, and the
directive that stated &ldquo;All girls should bring back needlework,
knitting, or other suitable handicraft for evenings
in their House Drawing rooms&rdquo; conjured up
beautiful Victorian pictures of happy young ladies
clustered around their house mistress, singing and
chatting as they perfected the arts of needlecraft.
Though my daughter could hardly baste, we were
optimistic and sent along a small cross-stitch sampler
of an English cottage and garden which, to our surprise,
she actually completed before Christmas.  Wellingtons—those
heavy, reliable, waterproof boots that
stirred childhood memories of Christopher Robin
trudging through the rain—were the only item we
were forced to look for beyond the now-familiar confines
of Peter Jones, and without Miss O'Halloran's
tactful assistance.  But our search for them provided
me with a reminder of the superficiality of those verbal
distinctions with which I had had such a struggle.
En route from the ladies' room at Harrod's, as I passed
the open telephones, I overheard a starched and vested
(*waistcoated*, I knew now, was the right term in London)
gentleman exclaiming triumphantly to his wife in
the purest Mayfair accents, &ldquo;Darling, I've found the
Wellingtons—and in Cynthia's exact size, too!&rdquo;  I was
warmed by this evidence of fatherly-husbandly concern,
and immediately felt a renewed sense of comradeship
with our so linguistically remote allies.

But what about all those treaties and pacts we've
signed?  Perhaps next time we'd better have a bilingual
translator—just in case.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Diet of Primitive People Found Beneficial in Rats.&rdquo;
[Heading in an article in *The Chronicle of Higher Education-Scholarship*,
13 February 1985.  Submitted by Randy
Alfred, San Francisco, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Another of the [robins] was seen Thursday by Margaret
Leffel eating crabapples in the backyard of her home on
County Farm Road.&rdquo;  [From *The Daily News*, Greenville,
Michigan.  Submitted by Lloyd E. Walker, Greenville.]

## The Serendipity of Cotyledon
*Gene Gramm, New York City*

>... The night was opening like a cotyledon.  
—Donald Junkins, The New Yorker

&ldquo;Eugene,&rdquo; Edith said, in the manner of a classic
advertising campaign, &ldquo;as long as you're
up—will you look up the definition of the word *cotyledon?*&rdquo;

*The Webster's New International Dictionary (Second
Edition Unabridged*) yielded the following:

>*cot' y. le' don*..., n. (L., navelwort, fr. Gr.
*kotyledon* a cup-shaped hollow, navelwort, fr.
*kotyle* Cf. Cotula)
>
>*1*.  *Embryol*. a patch or circumscribed area of
villi on the placenta of a mammal; —applied
esp. to the isolated tufts of villi on the chorion
of the typical ruminants.
>
>*2*.  *Bot*.  The first leaf, or one of the first pair or
whorl of leaves, developed by the embryo sporophyte
in seed plants; —also called *seed leaf*.  The
number of cotyledons is so constant that they afford
a character for the primary division of angiospermous
plants.  Thus, the grasses, lilies,
palms, etc. having only one cotyledon, form the
class Monocotyledones; while the bean, rose,
oak, etc., with two cotyledons, form the class
Dicotyledones.  Cotyledons sometimes perform
the function of foliage leaves, but more frequently
they serve as a storehouse of nourishment
for the embryo.
>
>*3*.  *(cap.) Bot*.  *a.*  A large genus of herbaceous or
woody-stemmed, succulent South African plants
of the orpine family (Crassulaceae).  *b.*  Any
plant of this genus.

I had now compiled, on a yellow scratch pad, the
following list: *navelwort*, (I was certain that I had
possessed one from birth), *cotula, villi*, (as in the
phrase, &ldquo;villi on the chorion&rdquo;), *chorion, ruminants*, (I
half-heartedly believed that this would refer to cud-chewing
animals, but the qualifying word in the
phrase, *typical ruminants* was like a red flag, waved in
the face of a ruminant bull), *sporophyte, angiospermous*,
and *orpine*.

*Navelwort* turned out to be &ldquo;a European herb having
round, peltate leaves with a central depression.&rdquo;

*Peltate* was defined as a &ldquo;shield-shaped, *scutiform*.&rdquo;

*Scutiform*, of course, was defined as &ldquo;shield-shaped.&rdquo;

*Cotula* derives from Gr. and Rom. antiq. as &ldquo;a cup
or vase of medium size&rdquo; and is also *cotyla*.  It sometimes
has slightly curved sides with horizontal handles
near the brim and a flat base.  In modern Greece,
however, it is a *deciliter*—in pharmaceutical terms: the
*Mayweed*—and under *Anat*. it is heartlessly described
as &ldquo;*acetabulum*.&rdquo;

*Deciliter* is the equivalent of .1 liter in the metric
measure of volume, or 6.1025 cubic inches.  In the
United States it is .211 liquid pints and among the
British, .176.

*Mayweed* is something I should have let grow, as
it does, &ldquo;along roadsides in the U.S.&rdquo; without further
attention.  For, on further reading it developed that
this strong-scented, &ldquo;naturalized&rdquo; European weed has
been used as an &ldquo;*emmenagogue*,&rdquo; which the wavering
type on page 838 revealed as a medicinal substance
aiding the menstrual process.

*Acetabulum* had various *Antiq., Anat.*, and *Zool*.
definitions ranging respectively from &ldquo;a little cup to
hold vinegar&rdquo; to the &ldquo;cup-shaped socket in the hipbone,
which receives the head of the thigh-bone.&rdquo;
Other definitions: &ldquo;The cavity into which the leg of an
insect is inserted at its articulation with the body ...
one of the suckers of the cuttlefish ... the large posterior
sucker of the leeches.&rdquo;  And then my etymological
heart quickened in the presence of the Grand Design,
for there was one more definition: &ldquo;One of the *cotyle-dons*
or lobes of the placenta in *ruminating* animals.&rdquo;

Wildly circumventing the &ldquo;villi on the chorion,&rdquo;
which was next on my list, I proceeded almost directly
to *ruminants*.  I say &ldquo;almost&rdquo; because immediately
above the target word were: *rumgumption* (which in
Scotland and in the north of England means 'keeness
or shrewdness') and *rumfustian* ('a hot drink composed
of strong beer, white wine or sherry, gin, egg yolks,
sugar and spices').  And then on to *ruminant*, which
verified my initial rumgumption about the cud-chewing,
but included, also, a reference to the &ldquo;ruminantia,&rdquo;
which are &ldquo;a division of even-toed, hoofed mammals&rdquo;
including some which do *not* chew the cud!  The
cud-chewing variety, in addition to the familiar oxen,
sheep, goats, deer, camels, etc., also included &ldquo;chevrotains&rdquo;
(which are, as you might have guessed, &ldquo;ruminant
mammals&rdquo; and are residents of tropical Asia, the
Malay Islands, and West Africa).  The chevrotains, of
course, are not *true* ruminants, as are the Pecora.  They
are of the group known as Tragulina.  There is also the
Tylopoda, which includes llamas and the aforementioned
camels.

*Villi (see villus)* are tufts of hair and are velvety or
not velvety, depending on whether you gravitate toward
*Anat*. and *Embryol., Bot.*, or *Zool*.  I left them
hastily somewhere in the area of the mucous membrane
of the small intestine (&ldquo;including that of the
plicae circulares&rdquo;) and reverting to my rapidly proliferating
list, journeyed back more than 1,360 tempting
pages to *chorion*, only to find myself and it deeply
involved with the fetus of mammals.  This chorion on
which those villi are situated is a membrane &ldquo;always
embryonic&rdquo; and &ldquo;not maternal in origin.&rdquo;  There was
also a passing allusion to the fact that &ldquo;in higher mammals
the allantois becomes intimately united with it,&rdquo;
which something within me decided to accept as a
compliment not to be questioned.

*Sporophyte* delivered the following definitive dissertation,
which I quote, blindly: &ldquo;In plants exhibiting
alternation of generations, the individual or generation
which bears asexual spores;—opposed to *gametophyte*.
It is not clearly differentiated in the life cycle of
the lower plants.  In *bryophytes* it first becomes distinct,
being known as the *sporogonium*.  In *pteridophytes*
it becomes the conspicuous part of the plant,
the gametophyte being reduced to a small *thalloid*
body (*prothallium*); in seed plants it is the only stage
visible to ordinary observation, the whole visible tree,
shrub or herb being the sporophyte.&rdquo;

Yes.  But there were still *angiospermous* and *orpine*
on my original list; and the night was, indeed, &ldquo;opening
like a cotyledon.&rdquo;  I decided to issue an interim
report to Edith, but when I returned to the bedroom I
discovered that her eyes were closed and the magazine,
face down, was softly rising and falling with her
breathing.


#### EPISTOLA {Adrian Room}

I fear that Stephen M. Edson is being over-ingenious
in inferring a reference to the rocky islands
called *The Mumbles* when he considers the origin of
the Cockney equation *Bristol cities = titties* [XIV,1].

The three factors that produced Bristol as the appropriate
city for this piece of rhyming slang are in
effect as follows:

1\.  *Bristol* (as Mr. Edson notes) suggests *breast*;

2\.  *Bristol City* is well known as the name of a
popular football club;

3\.  *Bristol* is a familiar place-name in other
phrases denoting this city, such as *Bristol board* 'a
heavy type of cardboard,' *Bristol fashion*, as in the
phrase 'all shipshape and Bristol fashion,' referring to
Bristol's former reputation as a port for sailing ships,
and, perhaps more aptly here, if subconsciously so,
*Bristol Cream* and *Bristol milk*, as types of sherry, the
former being a proprietary name.

Incidently, *Mumbles* is not a 'small nearby fishing
village,' but a busy district of Swansea, now popular as
a seaside resort.

*[Adrian Room, Petersfield, England]*

## Playing the Numbers Game
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

From time to time, I hear people say, &ldquo;That didn't
work.  I guess we'll have to go back to ground
zero.&rdquo;  *Ground zero* is a relatively new compound in
the English language that refers to the surface area
directly below or above the point of detonation of a
nuclear bomb.  Thus, one can't really go back to
*ground zero*.  The more common and more logical
phrase is &ldquo;I guess we'll have to go back to square one.&rdquo;
Here the analogy is to a board game or a street game
like hopscotch, where a player has to return to the
square where he started.  A number of common English
words and expressions contain cardinal, ordinal,
and embeddded forms of the numbers zero through
ten.  Doing a number on the origins of these words and
phrases reveals some of the most intriguing and controversial
etymologies in our language.

Something that is *A-1* is absolutely first class.  *A-1*
was first used by Lloyd's of London in 1756 as the
highest possible rating for purposes of maritime insurance.
The letter pertained to the condition of the hull
and the number to the ship's rigging and gear.  Hidden
in the rigging of the word *atonement* is the number
one.  That's because *atonement*, in its original religious
sense, meant 'at-one-ment' with God.  The verb *atone*
came later and means 'at one.'

Noting that lambs flick their tails so briskly that
the action is scarcely visible, early nineteenth century
farmers began using the expression *two shakes of a
lamb's tail* to mean 'quickly, in the twinkling of an
eye.'  A similar idiom, *I'll be done in two shakes*, referring
to shakes of dice in a cup or dice box, developed in
gambling parlance.  When we talk about people born
with *two strikes against them*, we are, of course, invoking
a baseball metaphor and comparing the disadvantaged
or handicapped subject to a batter who is
very close to being struck out.

More hidden forms of *two* occur in *twilight, zwieback,
between*, and *betwixt*, in which *twi, zwie,
tween*, and *twixt* all mean 'two.'  Thus, *twilight* is literally
the 'time of two lights: the fading sunset and the
emerging light of the moon and stars' while the root
sense of *zwieback* is 'twice baked.'

In *three sheets in* (or *to*) *the wind*, a common
expression for an unsteady state of drunkenness, *sheets*
refers to the lines attached to the two lower corners of
a square sail for control.  When both sheets of an old
sailing vessel came loose or were allowed to run free,
they were said to be &ldquo;to the wind,&rdquo; and the sail would
flap wildly, out of control, like a person inebriated.
Since, technically, there are only two sheets, *three
sheets to the wind* is a hyperbole.

Just as a third degree burn is the most severe and
damaging type, so giving somebody *the third degree* is
the most extreme method of questioning.  Another explanation
of the phrase is that in Freemasonry the
third degree, that of master mason, requires of the
initiate an extremely elaborate and severe test of his
craftsmanship.  *Third world nations* are those underdeveloped
countries of Africa, Asia, and Latin America
who have not officially allied themselves with the first
and second worlds, that is, the Communist and nonCommunist
groupings.

Have you ever wondered if the *tri* in *trivial* is the
same as the *tri* in words such as *triple, tripod*, and
*trinity*?  In fact, *trivial* does come from the Latin *tri*
'three' and *via* 'way' and means literally 'like something
found at a place where three roads meet.'  In
ancient times, travelers and shoppers returning from
the market place often stopped at intersections where a
side road joined a main road in order to gossip.  Hence
the definition of *trivial*: 'common, insignificant.'

Which brings us to the word *quarantine*.  Is the
*quar* in *quarantine* related to the *quar* in *quarter* and
*quartet*?  Again the answer is yes, and again we must
look back in time.  In thirteenth and fourteenth century
Venice and other ports along the Adriatic, to prevent
the importation of the dread bubonic plague,
ships' passengers and cargoes were customarily isolated
for forty days (from the Latin *quadraginta* and Italian
*quaranta*), held to be the incubation period for the
disease.  Since then, the meaning of *quarantine* has
been extended and generalized.

More obvious occurrences of the number four are
found in *four-flusher* and *Fourth Estate*.  A *four-flusher*
is a phony or a bluffer.  The term arose from the game
of poker, in which a player may pretend to have a
winning flush of five cards when in fact he or she holds
a worthless hand of four same-suit cards and one that
doesn't match.  *Fourth Estate* as a designation for the
press originated in a speech of Sir Edmund Burke in
Parliament.  He noted the various estates of the
realm—the Lords Spiritual, the Lord Temporal, and
the Commons—then pointed to the press gallery and
added: &ldquo;And yonder sits the Fourth Estate, more important
than them all.&rdquo;

A *fifth wheel* on a vehicle is usually useless and
burdensome, and a person so regarded is analogous to
an extra, superfluous wheel.  Far less apparent is the
*quin* in *quintessence*, which turns out to be the same
word part that appears in *quintet* and *quintuplets* and
means 'five.'  The ancient Greeks held that everything
in the universe was composed of four elements—earth,
air, fire, and water.  To these Aristotle added a 'fifth
essence,' the purest and most concentrated of all the
elements because it made up the heavenly bodies and
man's God-seeking soul.  Thus, the quintessence (Greek
through Latin: *quinta essentia*) is its purest form.

Like *A-1* and *three sheets to the wind*, to *deep six*
is a seafaring metaphor.  It is an old naval term meaning
to 'throw overboard,' the six meaning 'six fathoms
down.'  By extension, the phrase has come to mean to
'kill a person or get rid of something.'

Like the expressions *two shakes* and *four-flusher,
at sixes and sevens* might have originated in the world
of gambling, in this case a dice game old enough to
have been reported by Chaucer in the *Canterbury
Tales*.  Apparently the dice used by the Canterbury
pilgrims had numbers higher than those in use today,
but rolling a six and a seven was attempted only by
stubborn or careless players.  The present-day meaning
of *at sixes and sevens*—'all disorder and confusion'—appears
to come from the fact that only a disordered
and confused player would roll for such a
combination.

Now that we've reached the number seven, your
sixth sense (the one beyond sight, hearing, touch,
taste, and smell) may be leading you to the origin of
the compound *seventh heaven*, the very height of happiness.
In Islamic religion, as set forth in the Koran,
the seventh ring of stars is the highest, &ldquo;the heaven of
heavens,&rdquo; and hence represents the supreme bliss.

To be *behind the eight ball* is yet another gaming
term.  In one version of Kelly pool the balls must be
pocketed in numerical order except for the eight,
which must be saved for last.  If another ball touches
the eight, the player is penalized.  Thus, any player
whose cue ball or target is behind the eight ball is in
the difficult position of having to sink another ball
without touching the eight.  By extension, *behind the
eight ball* has come to denote any difficult situation.

With your new knowledge of numerical expressions,
you may be *on cloud nine*, which is akin to
being *in seventh heaven*.  One theory proposes that,
just as *seventh heaven* is based on the Islamic conception
of a seven-tiered universe, *on cloud nine* derives
from the Ptolemaic conception of the universe as nine
concentric spheres, the highest of which is Heaven.
Other theories explain the idiom as a reference to the
International Classification of Clouds, in which a
&ldquo;cloud nine&rdquo; is a cumulonimbus cloud that may reach
30,000 to 40,000 feet.

Etymologists continue to search for the origins of
two other popular expressions involving the number
nine.  *The whole nine yards*, meaning roughly the
same as *whole hog* and *whole ball of wax*, has inspired
three theories, none of which can be absolutely proven
at this time.  Some contend that bolts of cloth used to
consist of nine yards and that only the fanciest of
dresses would require the whole bolt.  Others postulate
that a three-masted square-rigger carried nine yards of
sail, three on each mast, so *the whole nine yards*
would mean 'the sails were fully set.'  A third explanation,
and one supported by my interviews with local
workers, is that the trucks on whose backs repose
large, revolving cement mixers hold nine cubic yards
of cement.  Hence, any job that requires all that the
truck holds will take *the whole nine yards*.

*Dressed to the nines* 'wearing one's best from head
to toe,' may be a corruption of the Middle English
*dressed to then eynes* 'to the eyes.'  Or the phrase may
spring from the Scottish game of ninepins, in which
nine is the maximum score possible on any one throw.
Or the nines may simply represent numerological perfection,
the number nine referring to the nine Muses,
the loftiest of Ptolemaic strata, or a trinity of trinities.

A cowpoke *dressed to the nines* might well be
wearing a *ten-gallon hat*.  The traditional theory is
that the high-crowned, broad-brimmed western hat
was worn in part because of its water-carrying capacity,
even though no such hat could literally hold ten
gallons.  Others assert that the *gallon* is borrowed from
Mexican Spanish *sombrero gal&oacute;n* 'ribboned hat,' an
item still in the costume of Mexican vaqueros.  The
larger the sombrero, the more *galones* are possible.  A
sombrero of *diez galones* is some hat indeed.

More hidden uses of the number ten occur in the
words *decibel* and *decimate*.  A *decibel* is so called
because it expresses the ratio of two amounts of acoustic
power equal to ten times the common logarithm of
that ratio.  *Decimate* arises from the nasty practice of
the Roman legions of maiming or slaying one out of
every ten captive soldiers.  Some purists insist that *decimate*
should continue to apply only to situations in
which exactly ten percent of something is destroyed,
but in common usage the word has come to mean
'destroy a large part of,' as in &ldquo;the caterpillars decimated
the neighbourhood maple trees.&rdquo;

The earlies record of the *ten-foot pole* with
which you wouldn't touch something appears in a 1738
history by William Byrd: &ldquo;We found the ground moist,
insomuch that it was an easy matter to run a ten-foot
pole up to the head of it.&rdquo;  For more than a century the
*ten-foot pole* remained essentially a literal object denoting
someone or something more than ten feet deep
or distant.  Midway through the nineteenth century the
expression began evolving into *I wouldn't touch it with
a ten-foot pole* and came to refer to someone or something
repugnant or distasteful.  May you be less at sixes
and sevens and behind the eight ball and more in
seventh heaven and on cloud nine, now that I have
touched these zero-through-ten expressions with a ten-foot
pole.


#### EPISTOLA {Bob Marvin}

I wish Mr. Lederer could read his article on
&ldquo;American Slurvian&rdquo; [XIV,2] aloud to us.  How rare to
hear a speaker avoid the common slurving of *ngs* by
nasalizing them!  How delicious to hear speech spittingly
peppered with full-value *ts* and *ds* that are commonly
elided to bland stops!  I'd love to hear him avoid
the elision of the *ss* in *nonsense stops* to give the *a* in
*glossary* its full sound.  I'm sure he'd never wither the
roof of *mumblings* with a medial syncope, nor slight
the vulgarly consonantal *i* in *millionaire*, but give it
the same dieretic value it enjoys in *idiom*.  (And he'd be
no equivocator in pronouncing the *i* in *easier*.)  His
*dictionary* would likewise trumpet its full five syllables.
Such speech would indeed set him apart from the
throng.

We could expect such a fastidious foe of provection
to need no *napron* to eat *an ewt*.  But I won't accept
&ldquo;*numpire* of language&rdquo; as his *ekename* and hope his
protests are only for *then once*.

The cartoon switchboard operator who answers
the telephone &ldquo;Boarda ejicashun speakin' &rdquo; is ridiculously
incongruous more for suggested intonation
(slowly gliding), body posture (neither relaxed nor
toned) and facial expression (vapid) than for her &ldquo;pronounciation&rdquo;
*per se*.  In the proper context (and with
proper social support) syncopes, elisions (and resultant
provections), synaereses and the like are respectable,
and almost any speech written phonetically can look
silly.  There's a rich mine of social linguistics here, but
it has a far broader vein that Mr. Lederer has sunk his
pick into.  Incidentally, the proper complement of &ldquo;mayan&rdquo;
is not &ldquo;yours,&rdquo; but &ldquo;urine&rdquo; (often syncopated to
&ldquo;yearn&rdquo;).  Slurvian shouldn't be a focus of calumny, but
a reveling in the interplay between the fluid nuances of
our speech and its stolid orthography.

*[Bob Marvin, Eustis, Maine]*



### ADDENDA: *More English Adjective-Nouns Ending in -ine and Relating to Animals*
*David L. Gold, Haifa, Israel*

To the list of -*ine* adjective-nouns in VERBATIM III,
3, 8-9, and IV, 1, 14-15 may be added *bibovine, cathartine,
crotaline, gruine, panorpine, pierine, scolopacine,
struthionine, sylvicoline* (all in *Webster's
Third*), *pulicine* (in the *OED*), *furciferine* 'animal
having a forked appendage,' *pieridine* 'kind of butterfly,'
and *talpicidine* (used by Allen Walker Read in one
of his articles; synonymous with *talpine*).  The suffix is
used with the names of other organisms too: *coraline*
and *hyacinthine* are in *Webster's Third; monadine* is in
the *OED*; and there are *clathrine* 'kind of ascon
sponge' and *fistuline* 'kind of basidiomycetous fungi.'


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York City*

In a New York Times obituary recently, the name
of the city of Cincinnati was misspelled several times.  I
suppose that name is spelled wrong more often than
that of any other U. S. city.  As we know, *Cincinnati*
got its name from *Cincinnatus*, the Roman hero who,
in the fifth century B.C. was called from his farm to
defend his country, and having done so, promptly returned
to his ploughing.  The name was adopted by the
Society of the Cincinnati, a group of Revolutionary
War officers, and so into Ohio and the city.

But *cincinnatus* with a lower-case *c* meant 'curlyheaded.'
And that's not the end of the story, since it
came from *cincinnus*, 'curly,' and before that from
Greek *kikinnos* which meant both a 'curl,' and a 'fop'
(who had his hair artificially curled in ringlets).  In
Latin the word acquired an *n* before *k* for euphony.
The noble family of Cincinnatus had curly hair, but
they wanted no part of the foppish implication.  So
they added *natus* to explain that they were 'born' that
way, without hairdressers.

Here another word raises its curly head: *kink* or
*kinky*.  This has been attributed to Dutch or Low German.
OK, but it's very close in sound and meaning to
the Latin and the Greek.

## 'Nam, Gook, Gung-ho: Nonsense
*Henry Henn, Pacifica, California*

Military slang is itinerant and erroneous.  The
term itself is misleading.  There are more veterans than
soldiers.  The veteran more than the soldier spouts the
nonsense picked up in military service.  We should call
it veteran's slang.

Bergen Evans, learned, respected professor of
English at Northwestern University, holds most slang to
be mindless and infantile.  Military—veteran's—slang
bears him out.

Those who call Vietnam *'Nam* miss the point of
the war, the communist wish to consolidate its borders.
The Chin Dynasty (255 B.C.) gave China its
name, the Great Wall, and an empire.  For two millennia
before the Chin Dynasty, the Khmer, Lao, and
other tribes of the area now known as Vietnam lived at
peace with their Chinese neighbors to the north.  The
Chins and the Hans who followed them subdued the
unorganized tribes and brought the area into the empire.
China called the newly conquered area *Vietnam;
Viet* 'extreme' + *nam* 'south': the southernmost reach
of the Chinese empire.

Vietnam remained Chinese until 907 A.D., when
the Chinese began fighting amongst themselves.  Five
Chinese clans seated thirteen emperors in forty-four
years.  The tribes of Vietnam took the challenge and
declared themselves independent.  In Vietnam's stead
came Tonkin, Annam, and Cochin.

France, on a colonial bent in 1867, took Cochin,
Tonkin, Laos, and Annam and renamed the acquisition
*French Indochina*.  After WWII, France announced
plans for federation of Indochina into the
French Union.  Vietnamese nationalists under Ho Chi
Minh—with communist China's support—fought the
French for complete independence of Cochin, Annam,
and Tonkin.  The later North-South confrontation notwithstanding,
the name, *Vietnam*, tattled a common
alliance with China.  To call it *'Nam* ignores thousands
of years of history and millions of hardships, ours included.
*Vietnam* tells a story.  *'Nam* merely points
south.

American sailors, merchant marine and U.S.
Navy, who used the ports of Hong Kong and Korea's
Inchon before WWII, heard the natives shout &ldquo;Mee
Gook, Mee Gook&rdquo; upon their arrival.  George W.
Woods, ship's surgeon of the *USS Juniata*, in 1884,
mentions *gook* in his log of travels in Korea.  He mentions
another new word, *chow*, in reference to shipboard
meals.  In this one instance, the listener didn't
err.  *Chow* is a Chinese word meaning 'to chew, to
bite, to masticae.'  Still novel to officer Woods in 1884,
it became part of our language circa 1877.

Origins of slang are hard to pinpoint, but it seems
probable that sailors thought the Asians were saying,
&ldquo;Me Gook&rdquo; to identify themselves.  *Mee*, by whatever
Chinese phonetic spelling, means 'beautiful.'  *Gook*
means 'country or nation.'  America, the beautiful
country.  Americans were then and are now, *Mee
Gook*, not the other way around.  We are the *gooks*, not
the Asians.

American troops serving in China in WWII heard
their Asian allies calling *Gung-ho* when charging the
enemy, heaving a heavy load, or towing enormous
weights: *Gung-ho* 'all together; a joint effort for the
common good.'  How misleading to refer to a standout,
a go-getter as being *gung-ho*.  At work, some people
call the boss &ldquo;a real gung-ho type.&rdquo;  I certainly hope so.
Let him lend a hand and help us get the job done—in
true *Mee Gook* style.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Sir, Some time ago displayed outside St. Paul's Church,
Summer Place, London, SW7 was a large poster announcing
'Christ is coming,' and on the railings a notice saying: 'Please
do not obstruct these gates.' &rdquo;  [From *The Times*,
October 26, 1983: a letter to the editor from Mr. Robert Buhler, RA,
Chelsea, London.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;After a special screening of the movie, it encouraged an
anti-abortion campaign to distribute hundreds of copies of
the film to every senator, representative, and Supreme
Court justice.&rdquo;  [From *Newsweek*, 25 February 1985.  Submitted
by Steve Short, Los Angeles, California.]

## Antipodean English: *Give a Dog a Bad Name ...*
*George W. Turner*

&ldquo;What puzzles me,&rdquo; said a German peasant
who had been to a lecture on astronomy,
&ldquo;is not how they found out the size of the stars so much
as how they found out their names.&rdquo;  This problem of
finding names was one that faced the first Europeans
meeting the strange animals of Australia.  To some of
them they gave European names, which were reasonably
appropriate for magpies or even swans, though
these swans contradicted the traditional logician's
proposition &ldquo;all swans are white&rdquo; by being black.  European
names were less appropriate when a small arboreal
marsupial was called a *native bear,* and there
was a considerable leap of the imagination in using
*jackass* to name a bird.  The native bear and the laughing
jackass now have the more Australian names, *koala*
and *kookaburra.*  The kangaroo, which an early poet
thought combined qualities of a hart and a squirrel,
defied attempts to provide an English name.  The native
name recorded by Banks in 1770 was used from his
time on.

There was, however, one animal that was quite
familiar.  The Aboriginal people were accompanied by
domestic dogs, and some of the same dogs ran wild.
Early settlers sometimes talked of *native dogs* or *wild
dogs*, but the name *dingo* was established from early
settlement.  Oddly enough, the word *dingo* seems to
have meant 'tame dog' in the contributing language,
and another word, *warrigal,* referred to the wild dog.
This word was also adopted into English and could
refer to other wild animals or plants as well as dogs,
but it has never been so widely used as *dingo.*

I think it might have been bad luck that gave the
dingo a name of its own.  Dogs on the whole are favorably
regarded; the associations developed around the
word *dingo* are uniformly pejorative.

The dog is man's best friend.  We talk of doglike
devotion.  A boy and his dog become a symbol of togetherness
(Aboriginal dogs appear to be more communally
owned).  The dog is doggedly loyal to his master,
however much a scoundrel that master might
appear to his fellow man.  Even Muslims, who use *dog*
as a pejorative, admit a dog to heaven for his loyalty in
guarding the legendary seven sleepers.

The English language is somewhat ambivalent in
its treatment of dogs.  A black dog is a symbol of the
devil, one can be *dogged by misfortune* and *go to the
dogs* and *lead a dog's life.*  Some *dirty dog* could be
behind that.  There is a hint of canine ferocity in the
Roman *cave canem* (which does not mean 'look out,
I'm going to sing'), and even *hair of the dog* relates to
biting, as does, presumably, *let sleeping dogs lie.*  Yet
the pet form *doggie* (will my doggie go to heaven?) is
full of trust and friendship.  *Dingo* has no pet form like
that, nor any saying comparable with *Love me, love
my dog,* at least not in the language of the conquerors.

The idioms of Australian English have added to
the associations of *dog*.  The ambivalence of attitude
seen in the general language is equally evident in the
Australian additions.  The Footscray Australian Rules
football team does not mind being nicknamed *The
Dogs;* the man who dizzily rides on the load of a crane
is honorably called the *dogman* (or has been, since
the term is now condemned by Equal Opportunities
legislation; a form *dogperson,* or, for that matter,
*bitchman,* appears never to have been used).  A political
group based on &ldquo;Defence of Government Schools&rdquo;
accepted the abbreviation DOGS.  Against these uses,
there is to *turn dog,* or *dog on* (your mates), meaning
'to betray.'  To call someone a *dog* in this sense is, in the
words of a recent writer, &ldquo;the worst insult you can
throw at a crim.&rdquo;

Many of the Australian elaborations on the word
*dog* are neutral in tone.  A *dogleg* might be a boomerang-shaped
piece of ground, a *dogleg fence* a zigzag of
interlaced horizontal logs.  The *dogbox* is a compartment
in a train; in New Zealand *in the dogbox* means
'in disfavor,' general English 'in the doghouse.'  To *have
a dog tied up* is to have an unpaid account.  *Dog's
disease* is influenza or malaria, and a horse or sheep
difficult to manage is a *dog.  The night's a pup* is a way
of saying 'It's early yet.'  In some set expressions *dog*
may refer to dingoes, as in *the dog fence* (to keep
dingoes out), or *dogger,* a hunter of dingoes.

On two occasions dogs have figured in Australian
parliamentary discussion.  In 1983 when the return of a
Labor government reduced Malcolm Fraser to the status
of an eminent person, Labor's Deputy Leader, Bill
Hayden, made the remark that a *drover's dog* could
have led Labour to victory in that election.  On another
occasion a Member of Parliament complained that the
food in the canteen would *kill a brown dog.*  A *brown
dog* is a red kelpie, said to be able to digest everything
except poison bait.  The *kelpie* is a working sheepdog, a
participator in *dog trials,* public displays of skill in
marshaling sheep into pens.  More merely ornamental
is the *Sydney silkie,* officially the *Australian silky terrier,*
a toy dog for the amusement of dog-lovers.

There seems to be no corresponding term &ldquo;dingolover.&rdquo;
While (other) dogs have various associations,
partly depending on whether you are a burglar or a
householder, dingoes have nothing but a bad press.
The worst meanings of *dog* are echoed.  To *dingo on*
one's mates is to betray them.  Similar meaning attaches
to *turn dingo* or *act the dingo.*  A recent dictionary
defines *dingo* as a term of extreme contempt when
applied to a man because of the animal's reputation for
cowardice and treachery.  As early as 1855 a poet wrote
of &ldquo;the coward dingo of the bush,&rdquo; and numerous literary
uses of the term have reinforced similar associations.
To *dingo out* is to 'let the side down.'  There is at
least one record of a form *dingoism* to describe the
activities of undercover police officers tempting citizens
to breaches of the law in order to arrest them.
The dingo is, in the words of a more recent poet,
&ldquo;nobody's good bloke.&rdquo;

Much prejudice and preconception is hidden in
language.  We think of dogs as faithful guardians of
property, loyal friends to those who befriend them.
They are playfellows and protectors of children.  We
think of dingoes as cowardly marauders, attacking innocent
and defenseless sheep and (who knows?) perhaps
a baby.  Feral animals naturally hunt for food but
to this natural behavior our language adds numerous
overtones of hatred and contempt.  No child ever asked
&ldquo;Will my dingo go to heaven?&rdquo;

## Alpha Privative = A-Negative
*Edward C. Echols, Waynesboro, Virginia*

Of all the bits and pieces, odds and ends, flotsam
and jetsam that go to make up the contemporary
vocabulary of the English language, few have
made less impact, in terms of totality, than the negating
alpha of Classical Greek.  Since it was a major
negator for the Greeks, the alpha privative, so called
because it &ldquo;deprives&rdquo; the word to which it is prefixed of
its original meaning by reversing it, is highly productive
of words in Greek.  In English, however, the Latin
negator *in-* became the preferred negating prefix, appearing
extensively also as *un-,* reflecting Old English
and Middle English *un*-. E.g., the common English
adjective describing the absence of a material body is
*incorporeal,* L. *in-* 'not' and *corpor-* 'body.'  To describe
this condition, yet a third choice is offered from Old
English, *bodiless,* OE *bodig* 'body' and *ileas* 'less.'
Given the caliber of the competition from two major
languages contributing to the expansion of English vocabulary,
it is not surprising that Greek *a-* 'not,' occurring
as *an-* before words beginning with a vowel or *h,*
runs a distant third in the important area of English
negation.

Yet, in spite of its numerical inferiority to Latin
*in-,* the Greek negating *a-* manages to appear in a
number of English words in common use, in a far
larger number of words with specialized application,
especially modern coinages.  In such coinages, a semantic
distinction between Greek *a-* and Latin *in-* is to
be seen, especially in abstract words: e.g., *amoral*
means 'neither moral nor immoral,' whereas *immoral*
means 'not moral.'  On the other hand, such pairings as
*asocial/unsocial, asymmetrical/unsymmetrical* in both
cases reflect the true negating alpha privative.

Several special alpha privative words may be
noted.  *Amazon* is a part of the general vocabulary, but
with the study of Greek in continuing decline, the
perhaps false etymology of *Amazon* is less likely to be
known than are its several meanings.  More likely by
folk etymology than by true, it has been analyzed as an
*a-* word, combining *a-* and *mazos* 'breast,' Greek legend,
at least as old as Homer, having it that this remote
tribe of warrior women regularly excised the right
breast to facilitate the path of the bow string.

Less familiar, perhaps, is *Atropos,* the third of the
three sister Fates, she who makes the final cut of the
Thread of Life.  Atropos is *a-* and *tropos* 'turn,' so that
she is the Inflexible One, whom not even Zeus himself
could turn from her appointed snip.

*Avernus,* the Infernal Regions, Hell, Hades, is an
a-negative word, combining *a-* and *ornis* 'bird,' so that
Avernus is a place without birds.  (The presence of the
&ldquo;v&rdquo; reflects the loss of the original digamma from
*ornis;* the Greek letter digamma represented the *w*
sound, as in Gk *oinos;* L *vinum,* E *wine*.)  While Hades
might seem logically a place where the damned inhabitants
are deservedly deprived of the pleasures of
birdwatching, such a punishment, in view of the many
other direr unpleasantries associated with the region,
would not seem worthy of giving the place its bad
name.  *Avernus,* as the Infernal Regions, has reference
to the famous lake near Naples, whose poisonous vapors
were reputed to kill all birds flying over it.  Lake
Avernus was for that reason designated as one of the
several entrances to the ancient underworld and by
synecdoche, the underworld itself.

The negating Gk *a*- appears as prefix in a number
of English (1) Words in Common Use; (2) Medical
Terms; and (3) Descriptive Terms in Biology.

(1)  Words in Common Use

| PRIVATIVE | STEM                 | STEM MEANING       | ENGLISH WORD     | WORD MEANING                        |
| --------- | -------------------- | ------------------ | ---------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| *a-*      | *(gi)gn&omacr;skein* | 'know'             | *agnostic*       | 'unknowing'                         |
| *a-*      | *mnasthai*           | 'remember'         | *amnesia*        | 'loss of memory'                    |
| *a-*      | 'remember'           | *amnesty*          | 'general pardon' | (Forget it!)                        |
| *a-*      | *archein*            | 'rule'             | *anarchy*        | 'absence of government'             |
| *an*-     | *hamia*              | 'blood'            | *anemia*         | 'lacking red corpuscles'            |
| *an-*     | *ergon*              | 'work'             | *anergy*         | 'lack of energy'                    |
| *an-*     | *aisthesis*          | 'feeling'          | *anesthesia*     | 'insensibility'                     |
| *a-*      | *nomalia*            | 'equality'         | *anomaly*        | 'abnormality'                       |
| *a*-      | *nomos*              | 'law'              | *anomie*         | 'lack of values'; 'disorganization' |
| *an*-     | *onoma*              | 'name'             | *anonymous*      | 'nameless'                          |
| *a*-      | *pathos*             | 'feeling'          | *apathy*         | 'indifference'                      |
| *a*-      | *sul&emacr;*         | 'right of seisure' | *asylum*         | 'sanctuary'                         |
| *a*-      | *theos*              | 'god'              | *athesim*        | 'belief in no God'                  |
| *a*-      | *tomos*              | 'cut'              | *atom*           | 'indivisible (particle)'            |
                                                                                                

(2)  Medical Terms

| PRIVATIVE | STEM                     | STEM MEANING               | ENGLISH WORD      | WORD MEANING           |
| --------- | ------------------------ | -------------------------- | ----------------- | ---------------------- |
| *a*-      | *kritos;* *chr&omacr;ma* | 'distinguishable'; 'color' | *acritochromancy* | 'color-blindness'      |
| *a*-      | *dipsos*                 | 'thirst'                   | *adipsia*         | 'absence of thirst'    |
| *a*-      | *geustia*                | 'tasting'                  | *ageustia*        | 'no sense of taste'    |
| *a*-      | *L. glutire*             | 'swallow'                  | *aglutition*      | 'inability to swallow' |
| *a*-      | *graphein*               | 'write'                    | *agraphia*        | 'inability to write'   |
| *a*-      | *hupnos*                 | 'sleep'                    | *ahypnia*         | 'inability to sleep'   |
| *a*-      | *legein*                 | 'read'                     | *alexia*          | 'inability to read'    |
| *an*-     | *osm&emacr;*             | 'smell'                    | *anosmic*         | 'deodorant'            |

(3)  Descriptive Terms in Biology

| PRIVATIVE | STEM                 | STEM MEANING        | ENGLISH WORD   | WORD MEANING                    |
| --------- | -------------------- | ------------------- | -------------- | ------------------------------- |
| *a*-      | *branchia*           | 'gills'             | *abranchia*    | 'lacking organs of respiration' |
| *a*-      | *kardia*             | 'heart'             | *acardiac*     | 'heartless'                     |
| *a*-      | *L. cauda*           | 'tail'              | *acaudal*      | 'tailless'                      |
| *a*-      | *kephal&emacr;*      | 'head'              | *acephalic*    | 'headless'                      |
| *a*-      | *cheilos*            | 'lip'               | *achilous*     | 'lipless'                       |
| *a*-      | *koilos*             | 'hollow'            | *acoela*       | 'without a digestive tract'     |
| *a*-      | *kom&emacr;*         | 'hair'              | *acomia*       | 'hairless'                      |
| *a*-      | *daktulos*           | 'digit'             | *adactylous*   | 'fingerless'                    |
| *a*-      | *d&emacr;los; pod-*  | 'evident';  'foot'  | *adelopod*     | 'without evident feet'          |
| *a*-      | *odont-*             | 'tooth'             | *adonta*       | 'toothless'                     |
| *a*-      | *gast&emacr;r*       | 'stomach'           | *agastria*     | 'stomachless'                   |
| *a*-      | *gli&omacr;ssa*      | 'tongue'            | *aglossa*      | 'tongueless'                    |
| *a*-      | *gnathos*            | 'jaw'               | *agnathous*    | 'jawless'                       |
| *a*-      | *gun&emacr;*         | 'woman'             | *agynary*      | 'lacking female organs'         |
| *a*-      | *L. manus*           | 'hand'              | *amanous*      | 'handless'                      |
| *an*-     | *enteron*            | 'intestine'         | *anenterous*   | 'without intestines'            |
| *an*-     | *oura*               | 'tail'              | *anura*        | 'tailless'                      |
| *an*-     | *&omacr;ps*          | 'eye'               | *anopsy*       | 'eyeless'                       |
| *a*-      | *pod-*               | 'foot'              | *apod*         | 'footless'                      |
| *a*-      | *proktos*            | 'anus'              | *aprocta*      | 'without intestinal outlet'     |
| *a*-      | *proteros;* *odont*- | 'in front'; 'tooth' | *aproterodont* | 'no front teeth'                |
| *a*-      | *splanchna*          | 'bowels'            | *asplanchnic*  | 'bowelless'                     |
| *a*-      | *stoma*              | 'mouth'             | *astomata*     | 'mouthless'                     |

In thus running the vocabulary gamut from *abyss*
(*bussos* 'bottom') to *Azymite* ('leaven'), a member of a
sect that makes use of unleavened bread in the Eucharist,
the Greek alpha privative has played an essential,
if statistically modest, part in the expansion of the
vocabulary of English.  As the vocabulary of science
and technology continue to grow, it will continue to do
so, perhaps leaving those of us observing such matters
in an admiring state of *apnea* (*pn&eacute;in* 'breathe')!

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Classical Wizard/Magus Mirabilis in Oz (The Wizard of Oz)*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780859677233/Classical-Wizard-Magus-Mirabilis-Latin-0859677230/plp)
Translated into Latin by C. J. Hinke and George Van Buren, (Scolar Press, 1987), 264pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

On occasion there appears in the popular press a
story on the waxing or waning interest in Latin.  In
America, despite general indifference to foreign languages,
there remains a certain reverence for the language,
with nearly everyone having some notions
(however inexact) about it—language of the Romans
and of the Roman Catholic Church, a key to a richer
vocabulary, the source of many common expressions
and legal terms, and, of course, everyone's readiest
example of a &ldquo;dead language.&rdquo;  Whatever vague or
misty knowledge people may have of Latin, however
much they may hold it in esteem, nearly all assert that
it is dead.

In one sense, at least, this common opinion is
correct—no living person can claim Latin as a native
tongue.  There are those few who can and do use Latin
as a medium of communication, mainly classical
scholars in moments of playfulness and those studying
for advanced theological degrees at certain Roman
Catholic seminaries—quite a select group.

There are signs of life for Latin, however, if
enrollments in secondary-school Latin courses can be
used as a measure.  The American Council of Teachers
of Foreign Languages reports that, since the low point
of 150,470 secondary-level students of Latin in 1976,
enrollments have increased steadily, if not dramatically,
to 169,580 in 1982 and 176,841 in 1985, the latest
year for which figures are available.  Prof. Gilbert
Lawall of the Department of Classics at the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst, one of the nation's leading
authorities in the field of Latin education, ascribes
this steady growth to the &ldquo;back-to-basics&rdquo; trend in education
and to the related phenomenon of the general
conservative swing in the American social scene.  Prof.
Lawall notes that in the upheaval of the Vietnam War
era, many traditional courses &ldquo;fell out&rdquo; of curricula,
including, very often, Latin.

The recent comeback owes much to the recognition
of Latin's pedagogical value, especially as a vocabulary
builder, something both intuitively and statistically
known to be true.  Students who have taken some
Latin tend to score better than others on standardized
tests, such as the almost universally administered Scholastic
Aptitude Tests (the &ldquo;SATs&rdquo; or &ldquo;College Boards&rdquo;).
The vocabulary-building argument is a potent one for
proponents of Latin education, since it hits home to
both students and parents, anxious about the SAT and
its role in getting into a college of one's choice and
securing financial aid.  In certain pockets of the country
there is even a *shortage* of Latin teachers, a turnaround
seemingly incredible to those who witnessed
the doldrums of the '60s and '70s.

Arising from moribundity to steady growth, Latin
is now taught in a growing number of schools and
colleges with the aid of a host of newly developed
materials that incorporate fresh approaches to learning.
The emphasis is now put on the acquisition of
reading skills and cultural knowledge.  The sort of
brutal, rote lessons so long associated with learning
Latin—the Mr. Chips approach—is now de-emphasized.
Students of Latin are now taught reading proficiency
without a painful gantlet of declensional and
conjugational paradigms.

*Magus Mirabilis in Oz* is the child of two unlikely
parents: the rise of interest in Latin education and the
perennial popularity of the Wizard of Oz story, both in
book and movie form.  The jacket copy of this attractive
little book notes that L. Frank Baum's children's
classic has sold more than ten million copies and has
been translated into thirty languages; &ldquo;it now can be
read in the most classic of all languages.  *The Classical
Wizard/Magus Mirabilis in Oz* is the first Latin translation.
When classic meets classic, the result, well ...
*classicissimus est.&rdquo;*  (The copywriter's penchant for
cuteness comes through, even in Latin.)

But to the book.  The translation is absolutely
thorough, including title page, Baum's original introduction
and dedication, and the 24 chapters of the
text.  In addition, this Latin version also includes
W. W. Denslow's illustrations of the original edition of
1900, which appear somewhat bizarre, especially if
one's images of the story are (and whose aren't?) under
the influence of Judy Garland and the M.G.M. film.
But for real Oz buffs, no doubt the original illustrations
will add significantly to the potential value as a
collector's item.

The translation itself was done with great diligence
by people well versed in classical rules of composition,
with a style that is true to the folksiness of
Baum's English without doing violence to Latin syntax
or word selection.  As examples, here are the renderings
of some of the most familiar names in the Oz
story:

>Dorothy: *Dorothea*  
Toto: *Toto* (3rd declension; genitive *Totonis*)  
Kansas: *Kansa* (1st declension)  
Auntie Em: *Amita Em*  
Wicked Witch of the West: *Maga Mala  
Occidentis*
Munchkins: *Munchkini,* accusative *Munchkinos*
(?)  
the Emerald City: *Urbs Smaragdorum*  
the road of yellow brick (Baum's phrase):
*via laterum flavorum*  
the Scarecrow: *Terriculum*  
the Tin Woodman: *Lignator Stanneus*  
the Cowardly Lion: *Leo Ignavus*  
Oz: Oz (indeclinable)
the balloon: *follis a&euml;rius*  
Winkies: *Winkies* (3rd declension)

Detailed examination shows that the translation is
generally quite sound and readable.  Two quibbles:

(1)  Rendering the Wizard's words, &ldquo;You see, when I
came to this country it was in a balloon.&rdquo;  (Chapter 17)
as *Ut scis, ad hanc terram folle a&euml;rio perveni* is not
precise.  *Ut scis* is 'As you know,' not quite the same
sense as the introductory English element *You see.*  Better
would have been: *Scias me ad hanc terram folle
a&euml;rio pervenire.*

(2)  When the Queen of the Field Mice (in Chapter 3)
refers to the Tin Woodman as &ldquo;This funny tinman,&rdquo; the
translation gives *ridiculus* for *funny,* when surely this
is *funny* 'peculiar' (not *funny* 'ha-ha,') and would have
been better rendered as *singularis* or *mirus.*

Overall, however, the story comes through very
faithfully, and with economy of language.  We are
spared torturous circumlocutions or recastings into sonorous
Ciceronian periods.  The original narrative is
presented plainly in Hinke and Van Buren's Latin
prose:

>The little old woman took the slate from her
nose, and, having read the words on it, asked,
>
>&ldquo;Is your name Dorothy, my dear?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; answered the child, drying her tears.
>
>&ldquo;Then you must go to the City of Emeralds.
>
>Perhaps Oz will help you.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Where is this City?&rdquo; asked Dorothy.
>
>&ldquo;It is exactly in the center of the country, and
is ruled by Oz, the Great Wizard I told you of.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Is he a good man?&rdquo; inquired the girl anxiously.
>
>&ldquo;He is a good Wizard.  Whether he is a man
or not I cannot tell, for I have never seen him.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;How can I get there?&rdquo; asked Dorothy.
>
>&ldquo;You must walk.  It is a long journey, through
a country that is sometimes pleasant and sometimes
dark and terrible.  However, I will use all
the magic arts I know of to keep you from
harm.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Won't you go with me?&rdquo; pleaded the girl,
who had begun to look upon the little old
woman as her only friend.
>
>&ldquo;No, I cannot do that,&rdquo; she replied; &ldquo;but I will
give you my kiss, and no one will dare injure a
person who has been kissed by the Witch of the
North.&rdquo;
>
>She came close to Dorothy and kissed her
gently on the forehead.  Where her lips touched
the girl they left a round, shining mark, as Dorothy
found out soon after.
>
>&ldquo;The road to the City of Emeralds is paved
with yellow brick,&rdquo; said the Witch, &ldquo;so you cannot
miss it.  When you get to Oz do not be
afraid of him, but tell your story and ask him to
help you.  Good-bye, my dear.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Estne tibi nomen Dorothea, cara mea?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Est,&rdquo; respondit puella, suspiciens et lacrimas
abstergens.
>
>&ldquo;Progrediendum est ergo tibi ad Urbem
Smaragdorum.  Fortasse Oz te iuvabit.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Ubi est haec Urbs?&rdquo; rogavit Dorothea.
>
>&ldquo;Est in ipsa media terra, et regnatur ab Oz,
Mago Magno quem tibi memoravi.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Estne homo bonus?&rdquo; puella anxie rogavit.
>
>&ldquo;Est Magus bonus.  Non possum iudicare
utrum sit homo an non, nam numquam eum
vidi.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Quomodo illuc ire possum?&rdquo;  Dorothea
rogavit.
>
>&ldquo;Pedibus tibi eundum est.  Iter longum est, per
regiones modo amoenas modo tenebricosas et
terribiles.  Artibus autem magicis omnibus mihi
notis utar ut te ab iniuria defendam.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Nonne me comitaberis?&rdquo; imploravit puella,
quae aniculam pro sola amica habere coeperat.
>
>&ldquo;Id facere non possum,&rdquo; respondit ea; &ldquo;sed tibi
basium meum dabo, et nemo ei quem Maga
Septentrionis basiavit nocere audebit.&rdquo;
>
>Ad Dorotheam appropinquavit et ei molliter
frontem basiavit.  Ubi labra puellam tetigerunt
nota rotunda splendidaque relicta est, ut Dorothea
mox cognovit.
>
>&ldquo;Via quae ad Urbem Smaragdorum ducit
lateribus flavis strata est,&rdquo; dixit Maga; &ldquo;falli ergo
non potes.  Cum ad Oz perveneris ne eum
timeas, sed rem tuam ei narra et auxilium ab eo
pete.  Vale, cara mea.&rdquo;

Altogether a solid effort on the Latin, and, indeed,
a reflection of the high quality of the entire
package.  *The Classical Wizard* is likely to appeal to
avid fans of Oz memorabilia.  Its value to students of
Latin is less certain, despite the good offices of the
translators.  Some Latin instructors may find it a pleasing
diversion for an afternoon or two, but most are
already hard pressed to meet current currricular goals
and lead their students to the ultimate prize, mastery
of &ldquo;real&rdquo; Latin.  A thorough reading of *Magus Mirabilis
in Oz* will likely be undertaken only by the leisured,
Latined few.

The publisher was encouraged to complete the
project, no doubt, by the long-in-print *Winnie Ille Pu
(Winnie the Pooh)* and the recently issued *Tela
Charlottae (Charlotte's Web),* two other English children's
classics in Latin.  There is even a series of Disney
cartoon character books with the stories given in
Latin.  But the success of the Latin *Oz* is likely to
depend on the interest of the curious and of collectors,
though its mere existence may bode well for the continued
vitality of *lingua Latina* in America.

*Frank R. Abate*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Plain English: a User's Guide*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780140084078/Plain-English-Users-Guide-Penguin-014008407X/plp)
Philip Davies Roberts, (Penguin, 1987), 191pp.

This is a short, breezy, superficial look at some of
the usual problems facing those who would speak and
write standard English.  But the book has a few
problems of its own.  In the brief section on Grammar,
at the beginning, is the information, &ldquo;Let me (him,
her, it, us, them) hammer.&rdquo;  That is the imperative of
*let,* but I get the distinct feeling that the author has
picked up *let* + *pronoun* + *verb infinitive* as an imperative
construction in English because that is the
customary way in which Latin, French, and other
foreign-language (&ldquo;true&rdquo;) imperatives are normally
rendered in English.  English has only one true imperative,
which is the same form as the infinitive and, as
Roberts states, would be just *Hammer!* (often spelt
with the exclamation mark).  The &ldquo;let us&rdquo; forms, in
strict analysis, are the imperative of *let* and only paraphrases
of the infinitive following.  Further on, we find
that descriptive adjectives form their comparatives and
superlatives either by adding *-er* and *-est* or by prefixing
*more* and *most.*  But the latter is so only (and
mainly) for adjectives of more than three syllables (in
the positive), and the examples, *more happy, most
happy* are not entirely idiomatic, *happier, happiest*
being preferred.  Perhaps, because of *The Most Happy
Fellow,* song and musical, *happy* is a modern exception,
but most people would consider *more silly, most
silly* or *more dingy, most dingy* to be less idiomatic
than *sillier, silliest* or *dingier, dingiest.*

On into the alphabetic section, where we find,
under the entry for *adverse, averse,* the example, &ldquo;She
is adverse to your suggestion that the money should be
borrowed.&rdquo;  But is *adverse* idiomatically used of people?
Sounds awkward to me.  *Adverse winds* or *adverse
circumstances* sounds natural.  The entry for *affect,
effect* ignores the noun *affect:* granted, it is somewhat
specialized, but these days people encounter words in
the strangest places, and terms from psychology (in
particular) tend to be bandied about indiscriminately.
At *affinity* we are told it is used with *between* or *with:*
what happened to *for?*  At *amend, emend* we learn that
the former means 'improve,' the latter 'revise, correct':
the latter is right, the former wrong, as any American
dealing with *amendments* to the Constitution—merely
addenda or modifications in many cases—will testify;
also, who would say, &ldquo;You had better try to amend
your manners, my boy,&rdquo; which is the example given?

By this point, we have reached only page 4 of the
alphabetic entries, and it seems pointless to continue.
A quick browse through other pages reveals, generally,
that the examples are more idiomatically appropriate
to the level of the author of the book than to that of its
user, whom we might reasonably assume to be less
sophisticated as well as less knowledgeable: &ldquo;The unflappable
hostess quietly apprised him of the state of
his trousers.&rdquo;  &ldquo;In contrast to his brother's altruistic
bent, Perry's instinct for self-preservation shows true
egoism.&rdquo;  &ldquo;She eked out her diet of oats with apples and
new-laid eggs.&rdquo;  &ldquo;What does the posting offer in terms
of living accommodation?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Most illiterates know only
a marginal standard of living.&rdquo;  Et cetera.

These idiomatic infelicities of American English
may pass muster in the region of Quebec (where the
author grew up) or in Nova Scotia (where he spent his
formative years), but they do not do so in this part of
New England.  In no event do we consider *preventive*
(formed from *prevent* + -*ive*) to be interchangeable
with *preventative* (formed, presumably, from *preventate* + -*ive*).

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady}

Please forgive my irresistible urge to pick on mistaken
French in your columns.  If it were just another
kind of periodical, I wouldn't bother you with it, but
VERBATIM is so fascinating and wittily specialized in
languages that I am somewhat obsessed with putting
things right.  &ldquo;Right&rdquo; is precisely the word this is all
about.  In the comparative table of the article &ldquo;Sinister
Dexterity&rdquo; [XIV,2,2], the French word *droit* is wrong
for 'correct.'  It should be *exact*.  *Droit* is of course the
opposite of *gauche*; but in the sense &ldquo;That's correct,&rdquo; as
an emphatic affirmative or agreement, we say *&ldquo;(C'est)
exact.&rdquo;*  Canadians do use *&ldquo;C'est correct,&rdquo;* though; it is
one of their numerous Americanisms.  *Droit* does mean
&ldquo;right&rdquo; in *les droits du citoyen,* for example, meaning
'the citizen's rights.'  But it can also mean 'law' as in
*&eacute;tudiant en droit* 'law student.'  Otherwise it means
'straight.'

And while we are at it, may I pick another error:
this one in Japanese.  *Tadachii* does not mean 'correct,'
it stands for 'at once, immediate(ly).'  'Correct' is
*tadashii,* transliterated with an *s,* not a *c* (difference in
pronunciation, as between *sheik* and *cheek*).

*[Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric O'Brady, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Algeo}

David Crystal [XIII,3] has cited a supposed diametrically
opposed difference in British and American
meanings for the expression *to be full of it* ('wildly
enthusiastic' versus 'wildly unenthusiastic, had it up to
here' respectively), which caused an American to misunderstand
his use of the form.  Crystal notes that he
has not found the difference in the usual sources.  The
reason for his failure to discover a record of this difference
in meaning may be that the semantics is more
complicated than that of simple antonyms.

The expression *to be full of it* occurs in several
senses: in General English, for example, 'to have one's
attention fixed primarily on, be preoccupied or engrossed
with something, think and talk of nothing
else.'  An American might also understand it as 'to be
mischievous' or as a euphemism for *to be full of shit* 'to
be decisively wrong, untrustworthy, misleading.'  However,
none of those senses is quite relevant to the conversation
Crystal found himself in, namely:

>Am.: So how did he like the place?  
Br.: Oh, he was full of it.  
Am.: Too bad.

In Crystal's British use, the expression seems to
have ameliorated from 'to have one's attention fixed on'
(without evaluating the quality of the attention) to the
sense he cites, 'to be wildly enthusiastic'—a sense not
recorded in seven British dictionaries.  Since the question
called for an evaluation, Crystal's American interlocutor
may have identified the answer with a different
General English idiom, *to have/get one's fill of.*  Because
none of the available American senses of the
answer fit the context, the American apparently responded
to it as though it were that other, though
formally similar, idiom.

What Crystal has identified may not be an unrecorded
British-American antonymic idiom, but rather
an instance of a speaker's striving to make sense out of
the apparently senseless, and succeeding to his own
satisfaction, although not to that of the original
speaker.  If that was the situation, it is quite as remarkable
as the putative British-American antonym, for it
demonstrates two things: (1) the passion for making
sense that leads us to remodel what we hear into what
we think should have been said and (2) the process of
dialect clash, one of whose effects is to force speakers
to reevaluate their options and thus to keep language
variation within acceptable limits.

*[John Algeo, University of Georgia]*


#### EPISTOLA {B.G. Kayfetz}

Yes, Mr. Arthur J. Morgan of New York City, the
thesis you expound in your letter in VERBATIM [XIV,1]
is indeed correct, i.e., that many Yiddish female
names stem from Romance/Latin origins whose meanings
have deteriorated over the years.  But of the two
examples you have, one is incorrect.

*Yenta* is not from *Jeannette* (which, as the female
counterpart of *Jean* goes back ultimately to the Hebrew
*Yochanan,* and is, therefore, also &ldquo;Jewish&rdquo; historically
speaking).  *Yenta* is from the early Judeo-Italian
*gentil* 'well-born, noble, gentle,' the very opposite, as
Mr. Morgan points out, of the meaning it later acquired.
The *-il* ending was erroneously perceived in
Yiddish as a diminutive and the formation *Yenta* or
*Yente* is a retro-formation or de-diminutive.  The late
Max Weinreich deals with its evolution in his *History
of the Yiddish Language* (English ed., pp. 416-17).
Weinreich also deals with the phonetic change in the
initial consonant from *d&zcaron;*- or *&zcaron;*- to *y*-.

If there is any distinction between the two words,
*yente* is the more often used common noun meaning a
'gossipy woman of limited intelligence,' and *Yentel* or
*Yentl* is the given name (regrettably much avoided now
because of its connotation, not even the Barbra
Streisand movie having succeeded in raising its status).

*[B.G. Kayfetz, Toronto]*


#### EPISTOLA {Steve Kucharik}

I would like to add some information to that
presented in &ldquo;Iron Language&rdquo; by Maxey Brooke
[XIII,3].  First, the 2&#92;?&#92;P brand is not a tall tale or a
practical joke.  The *Kansas Brand Book* of 1920, for
instance, lists two ranchers who have registered this
brand.  The only difference, however, is that the Kansas
versions are written differently in that the &ldquo;lazy
two&rdquo; would appear as &#92;?&#92; on the animal; the pronunciation
would remain unchanged.  I find it hard to believe
that this particular brand is registered in Kansas
but not in Texas.  I suggest that Maxey consult the
*Texas Brand Book* for documentation.  A copy should
be available at most sale barns, verterinarians' offices,
or the animal health department.  Finally, if any reader
expresses an interest in brands, I would be glad to send
them my copy of the *Kansas Brand Book,* given to me
as a curiosity.  Although it is out of date, it does list
24,000 registered brands.

*[Steve Kucharik, Scott City, Kansas]*


#### EPISTOLA {G. Gelato}

As an Italian who takes great pride in the knowledge
and correct usage of his own language, I was
astonished to read [XIV,2] the sarcastic comments of
Arthur J. Morgan about a previous EPISTOLA of David
Miles [XII,4].

I disagree with A. J. Morgan on the following
points:

(1)  As an adjective, in Italian, *bravo* is not a low-key
descriptive (Where on earth did he get this notion?)
but a wide-ranging adjective that could be
translated into English as 'good,' 'clever,' 'competent,'
'efficient,' 'skilled,' 'excellent,' etc., depending on the
context.

(2)  I find it hard to believe that &ldquo;Sii bravi mentre
la mamma &eacute; fuori&rdquo; has been taken from an Italian
dictionary (Which one?) because it contains a grammatical
mistake so unnatural to Italian ears that it is
very unlikely to occur, even amongst illiterate persons.
&ldquo;Sii&rdquo; is the form of the imperative, second person singular,
of the verb *essere* 'to be,' while *bravi* is plural;
the correct version is therefore &ldquo;Sii bravo&rdquo; (a boy), &ldquo;Sii
brava&rdquo; (a girl), &ldquo;Siate bravi&rdquo; (boys, or children), or
&ldquo;Siate brave&rdquo; (girls).

(3)  As an &ldquo;esclamazione&rdquo; (not the same as &ldquo;interiezione&rdquo;),
&ldquo;Bravo!&rdquo; is a compliment directly addressed to
the performer(s): a tenor is acclaimed with a &ldquo;Bravo!,&rdquo;
a soprano with a &ldquo;Brava!,&rdquo; and a trio by shouts of
&ldquo;Bravi!&rdquo;  If, in an Italian theater or concert hall, you
hear a female performer or a group of performers being
addressed as &ldquo;Bravo!&rdquo; you can safely take bets:
there are foreigners in the audience.

The expression *Accogliere dei &ldquo;Bravo&rdquo; che non
finivano pi&ugrave;* is certainly correct in Italian, provided
that quotes are used around *bravo,* which is then perceived
as a literal quotation (in the spoken version, the
quotes would be rendered by an audible pause before
the word *bravo*).  It is likely, however, that an Italian
speaker would replace *bravo* with the appropriate
form *brava* or *bravi* if he knew that the phrase was
about a woman or a group.  (He would then be quoting
literally what he would automatically assume that the
audience had been shouting.)

A final question: what makes A.J. Morgan put
animals, children, and workingmen in a separate class
from, I suppose, ordinary people, so that a &ldquo;wet-rag&rdquo;
adjective (which *bravo* is not, anyhow) can be applied
to them?

*[G. Gelato, Geneva]*


#### EPISTOLA {David M. Glixon}

Concerning &ldquo;I Before E, Except ...&rdquo; [XIV,1],
Richard Lederer errs doubly in arriving at 143 exceptions
to the rule:

1.  If he insists on counting every word as an exception,
he could, with a little effort, score *more* than 143.

2.  On the other hand, his count would be far
*lower* if he had reduced all his examples of *e* before *i* to
*categories* of exceptions:

>I.  (as in the rhyme he quotes): words in
which the digraph is pronounced as in *weigh.*
>
>II.  words in which *ei* is pronounced as in
*height,* including all German words (*zeitgeist,
Rheingold*).
>
>III.  words in which *ei* is pronounced as in
*caffeine* (*weird, seize*).
>
>IV.  words in which the *e* and *i* are pronounced
separately (*inter alia*):
>
>a.  When an *i* follows a prefix ending in *e,*
such as *re*- or *pre*- (*reify, preinform*).
>
>b.  When an *e* precedes a suffix beginning
with *i,* such as *-ing, -ity, -ian, -ism,* and *-ist* (*being,
deity, plebeian, atheism, atheist*).
>
>V.  plurals formed from words ending in *-y*
(*agencies*).
>
>VI.  words ending in *-scient* or *-science* (*ancient,
conscience*), in which the *sci* is pronounced *sh.*

The figure for the number of exceptions to the
rule would thus be a mere 6 plus the relatively few
examples that don't fall into the above categories.  I
fear that in order to fashion a case, Lederer succumbed
to galloping inflation.

In the same issue, John Brunner refers to an earlier
letter on the double trochee in place names such as
*Pensacola.*  But he is wrong about the trochaic form
being familiar in France, where the example he
gives—Clermont-Ferrand—is actually (if *any* syllables
are to be stressed) a double iamb.  However, his error is
pardonable on the ground of Britons' general indifference
to French pronunciation.

*[David M. Glixon, West Hartford, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Morrie K. Blumberg}

My English teacher's &ldquo;i before e&rdquo; jingle eliminated
most of the exceptions cited by Richard Lederer
[XIV,1]:

>*I* before *e,*  
Except after *c*,  
When it sounds like *e,*  
Except when it doesn't.

And this jingle works positively, even with a bit of
faulty grammar.

*[Morrie K. Blumberg, Albuquerque, New Mexico]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Random House Dictionary of the English Language - Second Edition - Unabridged*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780394500508/Random-House-Dictionary-English-Language-0394500504/plp)
Stuart Berg Flexner, Editor in Chief, Leonore Crary Hauck, Managing Editor, (Random House, 1987), xlii + 2478pp.
 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

As regular readers of VERBATIM are aware, many
dictionaries and other reference books are reviewed in
these pages, in addition to other books dealing with
the myriad aspects of language.  In most cases, books
are reviewed quite soon after their publication—bearing
in mind that this is a quarterly—in fact,
far sooner than in scholarly journals.  In general, unless
a review of some scholarly depth is required—the kind
in which the reviewer devotes more space to showing
off his erudition or, more commonly, his propensity for
nitpicking and for accumulating as many footnotes
and bibliographic references as he can, while trying to
persuade the readers (of which there are pitifully few)
that it was he who should have written the book under
review—reviewing a book of any kind should not require
more than a few hours.  In the case of ordinary
fiction and nonfiction, one expects the reviewer to have
read the book in its entirety; that is clearly not possible
or even feasible in the case of a dictionary or other
reference work, and Letters to the Editor appearing in
every kind of publication, from scholarly journals to
the *Times Literary Supplement* to the *Book Review* of
*The New York Times* (to cite at least one gamut) continually
point out the real or fancied shortcomings of
the reviewers.  With few exceptions, those are written
by the authors of the reviewed books; in some instances,
they correctly point out genuine errors—misquotations,
misinterpretations, and the like—in the
review; in others, they protest against misunderstandings,
which may be either weaknesses of the reviewers
or, often, reflexes of the authors' failure to have presented
their theses with unambiguous clarity.

Too many reviewers take their role to be to discover
all the reasons why the subject book should not
have been published.  It is unfortunate, but there is no
eluding the fact that the designations *critic, criticism,*
and their congeners have acquired the accompanying
connotation &ldquo;adverse&rdquo;; as a consequence, many reviews
tend to carp.  &ldquo;Kind&rdquo; reviewers, those who are
not, in principle, ill-disposed to almost any book they
review, use language like, &ldquo;I was disappointed not to
find word *X* (or sense *Y*) in the dictionary.&rdquo;  It is not
easy to write a book—any book, but especially a reference
book—and the least an author can expect is some
respect for his effort.  Sad to say, there are many books
that should never have been published, either because
they are trivial and a complete waste of time or because
they are poorly done.  However small the percentage
of books published may fall into this last category,
it must be borne in mind that, taken together,
there are about 50,000 books put out every year in the
United States alone.  (Only slightly fewer than
that—more than 40,000—are published in Britain.)
Although this includes every kind of publication that
can be considered a book, the number is staggering.
Moreover, it does not include new press runs of books
published in previous years.  Most newspapers that
print reviews publish one a day, six days a week, or,
say, little more than 300 a year; weekly reviews might
cover between thirty and forty titles (many of which
were reviewed in the dailies, as well).  It is small wonder
that most books receive scant attention and that
the more responsible review publications have taken to
listing bibliographic information regularly in a section
called &ldquo;Books Received&rdquo; (though seldom reviewed).  According
to H.W. Wilson, publishers of *Book Review
Digest,* approximately XXXXX reviews appear in all
kinds of periodicals in the United States in the course
of a year, but these are of only YYYYY titles, or ZZ
percent of the books published: the rest are not reviewed
at all.

To some extent, the foregoing is pertinent to this
review of *The Random House Unabridged - Second
Edition* [*RHD-II*].  The &ldquo;reviews&rdquo; already published
have been of the &ldquo;quickie&rdquo; variety, in which the reviewers
check to find some of the new words and senses
that have been added and issue comments of a more or
less virulent nature (depending on their dispositions)
lamenting the omission of such-and-such a word.  In
general, such pap suffices for much of the reading
public—or, at least, has sufficed in the past.  It is patently
ridiculous to write a review of a book like the
*RHD-II* &ldquo;off the cuff,&rdquo; as it were; a dictionary is something
like a new mattress: you do your best to select
what you think is going to be the most comfortable
one in the store, but it is not till you have slept on it for
a while that you can be sure you have made the proper
choice.  Sleeping on a dictionary can prove a backwrenching
exercise, but living with it is the only way
you can tell whether it fits your needs comfortably.

As Managing Editor of the First Edition of the
*RHD,* I spent about seven years with it before its publication;
since 1966, I have lived with it at my side,
referring to it so often that I have worn out several
copies.  Having been responsible for much of its content
as well as its organization, I am intimate with the
information it contains.  To be sure, it does not contain
all the information about the language that I am likely
to need, and I am often interested in what other dictionaries
offer concerning the treatment of a particular
word; but, on the whole, I have found it to be the best
dictionary I have ever used.  [Note to cynics: I have
never received a royalty on the sales of *RHD-I* and
have never had any financial interest in its success.]  I
have almost invariably found it sensible and sensitive,
though as time has passed, I, too, have been increasingly
aware that it was falling out of date.  Now and
then, an entry that I should have expected to find was
missing; but the omission has never been outrageous,
and the dictionary has always been easy to use.

Although I have a couple of reservations about
*RHD-II,* my opinion of the new edition, which I have
been using for about four months, is favorable: the
principles of inclusion and treatment followed in the
first edition have been maintained in the new.  There is
little point in wasting space in this review to comment
at length on the huge (*ginormous, humongous*) expansion
that the lexicon of English has undergone during
the past two decades (except to needle the editors
about the absence of *ginormous,* a trivial matter): according
to the advertising of the new edition, about
75,000 words and senses have been added.  As far as I
know, nothing has been taken away from the main (A-Z)
section of the book.

The back matter retains the four small bilingual
dictionaries (French, Spanish, Italian, German) that
appeared in the first edition, as well as a Basic Manual
of Style and a section on Signs and Symbols.  For some
reason, the (boring) section on Colleges and Universities,
occupying twenty valuable pages that could better
have been devoted to more useful information, has
been retained.  The (more) useful section on geographical
data—biggest lakes, longest rivers, highest mountains,
etc.—(which I used occasionally) has been deleted,
and the attractive and useful set of maps, with a
detailed index/gazetteer, has also been sacrificed: the
present atlas of 28 pages with a skimpy, two-thirds-of-a-page
index, is quite awful and resembles the quality
of those found in vest-pocket dictionaries and diaries.

I am somewhat put off by two major elements in
the redesign of the main body of the book: the decision
to use sans-serif type for the headwords and other
boldface text reflects poor judgment, for, in trying to
find an entry quickly, I have always felt that the redundancy
offered by serif type makes it faster and easier to
read.  Particularly, sans-serif type often makes it difficult
to distinguish readily among a lower-case *l*, a capital
*I*, and (in some fonts) the number *1*.  To differentiate
them in *RHD-II* a serified &ldquo;1&rdquo; has been used, and
the capital &ldquo;I&rdquo; has been thickened.  This results in an
ugly setting of *Illinois,* for example, as well as other
words in which those letters occur, cheek by jowl.  The
decision to change to sans-serif type is probably attributable
to the publisher's art department, which, like
most art departments, can seldom let well enough
alone.

The other decision regarding design involves the
illustrations.  In the first edition, these were set with
run-arounds—that is, the type of the contiguous entry
or entries was set in narrower measure to allow for the
width of those illustrations of less than a full column in
width.  When I first saw the illustrations a full column
wide, I assumed that the decision had been taken to
avoid the complexities of run-arounds when setting a
book by computer.  (It is not that it cannot be done,
only that it makes life more complicated.)  I have been
assured by Stuart Flexner, however, that the decision
was not affected by considerations of typesetting.  I
have no fundamental objection to the principle of full-column-width
illustrations (with captions alongside
rather than underneath), but not all the illustrations
(especially the maps) lend themselves well to that
treatment.  Sad to relate, the art department also decided
to place a fine screen over all illustrations (except
maps), a very poor decision, indeed, for the screen
frequently obscures the fineness of detail in many of
the drawings.  All the drawings in the first edition were
commissioned by me, and I was very pleased with
their appearance, believing that they added measurably
to the look of the book's pages; the toning and
shading of the original illustrations has been all but
obliterated by the screening.  While I am at it, I might
as well say that I can see no valid reason whatsoever
for changing the design of the front cover: after twenty
years spent in establishing the fine design of the original
edition, it has been abandoned in favor of a pleasant,
if undistinctive design.  It is a pity that art departments
do not seem to feel that they are doing their job
if they do not make changes and would, undoubtedly
redesign the Sistine Chapel if given the chance.

As for the content, only a few changes are immediately
apparent, the chief one being the addition of a
span of dates for the development of identified senses
in the etymologies of given words.  In some entries
(e.g., *quark*), it is possible to pinpoint the date of
coining of a term; in other cases, the editors have
chosen to give either very general information (e.g.,
for *shade,* &ldquo;bef. 900&rdquo;) or rather specific information
regarding a particular definition (e.g., *shade,*
&ldquo;1960-65 for def. 17&rdquo;).  As this kind of information can
be provided neither consistently nor with complete accuracy,
it is ill-advised to include it at all.  Parallel data
for entries like *run* and *set* with 178 and 116 definitions,
respectively, is absent (quite sensibly).  Besides, that
kind of information is the most likely to be misconstrued
by the average user: How often have we heard
someone say that a certain word &ldquo;came into the language&rdquo;
in a certain year (usually after looking up the
first citation in the *OED*)?  Even if a range is given, it is
likely to be wrong.  Admittedly, it is pretty safe to give
&ldquo;bef. 900&rdquo; as a date if the word appeared in *Beowulf*;
but def. 17 of *shade, cast* or *put someone in* or *into the
shade*, although it might not be attested in written
form prior to 1960 could certainly have existed earlier,
especially when one considers that, with variants, it
appears in four different forms.  I feat that in a misguided
attempt at being competitive with the latest
edition of the *Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary,*
the editors of the *RHD-II* have fastened on the most
volatile (and probably most likely to be misunderstood)
information available to lexicographers.

An area that should have been researched a bit
more assiduously is the pronunciation of British
English.  Scattered here and there are transcriptions
showing the way words are pronounced in (southern)
British, usually called &ldquo;RP&rdquo; (for &ldquo;Received Pronunciation&rdquo;).
Thus, we find at *controversy,* after the normal
U.S. pronunciation with the stress on the first syllable,
the pronunciation [k&#92;?&#92;n trov'&#92;?&#92;r s&emacr;] labeled &ldquo;*Brit*. *also*&rdquo;],
which would be correct if the [r] in the third syllable
had been omitted.  But no &ldquo;*Brit*. *also*&rdquo; pronunciations
are given for *disciplinary* and a host of other words in
which there is a variant pronunciation with a change
of stress; nor, indeed, are such pronunciations as
[m&auml;sk] (for *mask*) labeled &ldquo;*Brit*. *also*.&rdquo;  The basic question
is Why show British pronunciations?, the secondary
question is Why not show them consistently?, and
the ancillary question is Why show British variant
pronunciations when standard British pronunciation is
not shown?

The length at which I have carried on about these
two anomalous curiosities is more in proportion to the
need to explain them, not as a reflection of their being
of great moment: in a work of such considerable consequence,
they are punctilious peccadilloes.  (I also noted
the absence of an entry for E. Nesbit, the author of
*The Bastable Children* and other important books for
children, but that could well be laid at my door, for
she is missing from the first edition, as well.)

In sum, the *RHD-II* deserves praise for what it
contains, the most complete and up-to-date description
of the English language of the United States available.
It is hoped that, unlike the earlier edition, it will
be subjected to continual updating, if not annually
then at least quinquennially.

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald E. Schmiedel}

Dan Soyka's article on the second person singular
[XIV,1] was timely.  I note increasing confusion among
writers, speakers, and young actors who are unfamiliar
with the archaic cases and verb forms.  (Never mind
those whose confusion is non-archaic: &ldquo;I saw he and
his wife.&rdquo;)  Mr. Soyka's reference to Spanish calls for
some comment even though it was not his intent to
analyze it in detail.  Spanish indeed retains the second
person pronouns *t&uacute;* (he cites the objective *te*) and *vosotros*
for familiar address.  But the statement that *usted*
and *ustedes* are for &ldquo;general use&rdquo; is puzzling.  They are
for formal use and though they are, I suppose, second
person in function, they are third person in form, descendants
of the honorific *Vuestra Merced* 'Your
Grace.'  This is complicated by the fact that *vosotros,*
though thriving in Spain, is almost completely abandoned
in the New World.  For most Spanish speakers
the plural of *t&uacute;* is, in effect, *ustedes.*

*[Donald E. Schmiedel, Las Vegas, Nevada]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Marvin}

In setting us straight about the German connotation
of *quark,* [XIV,1], Nicholas Demy suggests more
of a connection between *Dichtung* 'poem' and *Dichtung*
'condensation' than my German dictionaries admit.
The former comes from Latin *dict&amacr;re*, while the
latter has a long Germanic lineage.  But perhaps Mr.
Demy has some yet anterior knowledge unexpressed by
*Duden* and *Kluge.  Caveat corrector*.

Harry Cohen only hinted at the interesting *-ella*
diminutives of Latin *-inas,* such as *patella* (*patina* was
a 'little bronze bowl') and *female* (from *femina,* no
relation to *male*).  The most fascinating pair is *vagina-vanilla,*
both sheaths.  (The *-els* in *Brussels* is no diminutive,
but from *sella* or *sala* 'habitation.')  An extra
vanillin fillip is that the plant is an orchid (as in *orchidectomy,*
the operation that makes *castrati*).

I offer a word perhaps worthy of circulation—*anthroponesia,*
the concept that we are all little islands of
existence.  John Donne was an *anthroponesiast*.

*[Robert Marvin, Eustis, Maine]*


#### EPISTOLA {Richard Libby}

Dennis Baron's essay, &ldquo;Public Cutespeak,&rdquo; [XIII,4]
suggested that *The Kangaroo Court* and *Too Good to
Be Threw* were San Antonio's only local &ldquo;pun stores.&rdquo;
He neglects, though, (perhaps through no fault of his
own), a more recent San Antonio establishment with
the ultimate ironic moniker: a nightclub called *Sunova
Beach*!

*[Richard Libby, San Antonio, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {A. Ross Eckler}

Sydney Abbey's diliterals [XIII,4] have appeared
in *Word Ways* at various times, usually embedded in
plausible sentences (see Wolpow's &ldquo;Ealalalalala ...
lala,&rdquo; February 1982, p. 13) and colloquy examples in
May 1980, August 1981, May 1982, August 1982, February
1983.  Much earlier, Borgmann and others developed
charade sentences, such as

>Flamingo pale, scenting a latent shark.  
Flaming, opalescent in gala tents—hark!

J.A. Lindon called the phonetic equivalent of diliterals
&ldquo;stutterances&rdquo; (*Word Ways,* August 1972) such as:

>Al, be no albino.  
Auntie, this is antithesis.  
Agreed a greedy man, &ldquo;Demand Patty's patties.&rdquo;

In connection with Norman Shapiro's letter
[XIV,1], he may be interested to know that there exist
at least two articles in *Nauka i Zhizh* on Russian palindromic
poems; both articles have been translated by
Haim Kilov and S. El'Man and appear in the February
1984 and August 1987 issues of *Word Ways.*  Herbert
Pfeiffer published in *Neue Texte* (an Austrian poetry
journal) a German palindrome about one page long; a
copy of it appears in the May 1985 *Word Ways,* together
with a partial translation.

However, he (and other readers) will be most interested
to hear that Se&ntilde;or Jos&eacute; Mar&iacute;a Albaig&eacute;s Y
Olivart, Numanc&iacute;a 87, Esc. B., 12.3, 3.a, Barcelona
29, Spain, has formed an International Palindromists'
Club with the object of exchanging ideas and publishing
discoveries in this field.  In June 1987 the club issued
a 38-page newsletter to its members, detailing
what had up to then been learned.  It is written in
Spanish, but there are English translations for many of
the items.  Anyone writing to them would, I am sure,
be welcomed with open arms.

*[A. Ross Eckler, Morristown, New Jersey]*


#### EPISTOLA {Nancy Birkrem}

With regard to SIC! SIC! SIC! [XIV,1] which said
&ldquo;trucks and tools required but not mandatory,&rdquo; I work
in one of the libraries that subscribe to the online
bibliographic database known as OCLC.  When entering
an item into the system, any given element of the
description, e.g., the title, the collation, is either mandatory,
required, or optional.  OCLC defines the difference
between &ldquo;mandatory&rdquo; and &ldquo;required&rdquo; as follows:

>Mandatory: The library must enter data in order
for the record to meet the designated standard.
>
>Required: The Library must enter data when the
data is readily available and applicable to the
item being catalogued.  (Source: Bibliographic
input standards. 3rd ed. Dublin, OH: OCLC,
c1985. p.22).

*[Nancy Birkrem, South Hadley, Massachusetts]*

## Paring Pairs No. 28

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only acceptable one.  The solution will be published
in the next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Salary for Siamese becomes capital in Taiwan?  
(b). Def.: (of a Chinese) to get drunk.  
(c). Frowning, morbid fighter-plane pilot.  
(d). Bury the fresco between the institutions.  
(e). Caviar vessel.  
(f). Iraqi street woman's father?  
(g). Polluted, wealthy people.  
(h). Fat farm.  
(i). Computer connection for grain shipments.  
(j). Nude film-goer.  
(k). That's a no-no.  
(l). Animated shorts.  
(m). Cry stinking fish about the legacy.  
(n). Little devil to wander about and get better.  
(o). Policy of Doc's memo.  
(p). Productive distribution of hereditary character.  
(q). Benedict Arnold in the Big Apple?  
(r). Plastic surgeon is the expert.  
(s). Tainted caviar in Hyde Park.  
(t). *Tbe Naughty Sombrero,* a German spa?  
(u). Makes the stool move smoothly.  
(v). Patchy sidemen.  
(w). Appealing fruit of your labors.  
(x). Post partum for a man.  
(y). Pitcher ends his career.  
(z). Lachrymatory.  

(1). Ace.  
(2). Aids.  
(3). Air.  
(4). Bad.  
(5). Bag.  
(6). Band.  
(7). Boat.  
(8). Buff.  
(9). Caster.  
(10). Caul.  
(11). Cereal.  
(12). Commune.  
(13). Dad.  
(14). Double.  
(15). Effluent.  
(16). Gene.  
(17). Grim.  
(18). Hippie.  
(19). Homburg.  
(20). Hot.  
(21). Imp.  
(22). Inter.  
(23). Job.  
(24). Knows.  
(25). Male.  
(26). Movie.  
(27). Mural.  
(28). Negative.  
(29). Northern.  
(30). Note.  
(31). Offal.  
(32). Oil.  
(33). On.  
(34). Paring.  
(35). Pants.  
(36). Pay.  
(37). Pears.  
(38). Port.  
(39). Quay.  
(40). Ration.  
(41). Roe.  
(42). Rotten.  
(43). Rove.  
(44). Society.  
(45). Sole.  
(46). Spy.  
(47). Thai.  
(48). Up.  
(49). Wail.  
(50). Winds.  
(51). Won.

Winners receive a credit of $25.00 or the equivalent in
sterling towards the purchase of any title or titles offered in
the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Two winners will be
drawn from among the correct answers, one from those received
in Aylesbury, the other from those received in Old
Lyme.  Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, Box
199, Aylesbury, Bucks., HP20 ITQ, England; all others
should send their answers to VERBATIM, 4 Laurel Heights,
Old Lyme, CT 06371, U.S.A.  *You need send only the one-word
solution, on a postcard, please.*

## Answers to Paring Pairs No. 27

(a). Destiny completed the job, but shed its ending. (12,1) Fate Accompli.  
(b). Live backwards with &eacute;lan.  (11, 47) Evil Spirit.  
(c). Low-class bird takes potshot at eavestrough. (16, 43) Gutter Snipe.  
(d). Contest queen holds sway in wetlands.  (33,3) Raining Beauty.  
(e). Regretful betrothal.  (44,31) Sorry Plight.  
(f). Fishy appendage in Scottish lake artfully captures king in bridge game.  (13,24) Fin Ness.  
(g). Leer at Amerind athlete to found Georgia. (25,51) Ogle Thorpe.  
(h). Washer and Mixmaster cycles make bachelor lady. (46,49) Spin Stir.  
(i). Anti-bellum epergne for actress Berger.  (40,28) Senta Peace.  
(j). French drink regally in West End.  (7,37) Caf&eacute; Royal.  
(k). Arrest Creator for betting in bindery.  (5,21) Book Maker.  
(l). Flavorful additive has British County origin. (53,45) Worcestershire Source.  
(m). &ldquo;Avoid this Suez port's stairway part,&rdquo; he uttered. (38,48) Said Step.  
(n). In other words, the sandy ridge destroyed.  (36,35) Reef Razed.  
(o). Signal greeting from lofty trigonometric function. (17,42) Hi Sine.  
(p). Fruitful bracing contest.  (26,29) Pairing Pears.   
(q). Familiarity with the Almighty provides olfactory protection.  (18,15) Knows God.  
(r). Rising seance sound provides closing summary. (34,52) Rap Up.  
(s). Gardner and Chaney make for misty isle.  (2,20) Ava Lon.  
(t). Headhunters lure intellectual talent into sinkhole. (6,9) Brain Drain.  
(u). Course assignment on bishopric seat leads to high religious office.  (27,39) Paper See.  
(v). The key is to stay alert or get stung, Becky.  (4,41) Bee Sharpe.  
(w). Ministrel performer to make isle extinct.  (10,22) End Man.  
(x). Missing veteran golfer discovered in deep.  (32,14) Pro Found.  
(y). Bob the dog's appendage.  (8,50) Cur Tail.  
(z). A bit of a legal professional.  (23,30) Mouth Piece.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;These are not the habits of a president who would wield
the line-item veto pen mercilously.&rdquo;  [From *The San Bernardino
Sun*, 1 February 1985.  Submitted by J.B. Lawrence, San Bernardino, California.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Display of maturity in storage room (9)  
6\. Wheelbarrow contains a bit of jewelry (5)  
9\. He holds policeman back for a time (5)  
10\. Telegram about damaged mail is ready to be picked up (9)  
11\. Unimportant court case involves six (7)  
12\. Not quite unnecessary syringes (7)  
13\. Bit of holly among gifts exchanged in boxes (6)  
14\. Left to cheer about learned bullfighter (8)  
17\. Brat pretended to be struck (8)  
19\. Took a break from exercise in apartment (6)  
22\. Stuck tag on, wrapping present (7)  
24\. Opponents with net, holding me back (7)  
26\. Coastline is rough in parts (9)  
27\. True weight lifting? (5)  
28\. Result in green suede (5)  
29\. Helpful person hurt by one possessed by the Devil (9)

**Down**

1\. Petition *Time* to fold (5)  
2\. Getting old airplane part in collection (7, 2)  
3\. Skeptic at holdup (7)  
4\. Football player raising deer and lion (6)  
5\. Desire traveling on a ferry (5, 3)  
6\. Arrive to protect darling from struggle (7)  
7\. Stagger around front of barricade in riot (5)  
8\. Tramp clutching certain valuable (9)  
13\. *Out of Africa's* seen with cook (9)  
15\. I had to be in disagreement! (9)  
16\. Necklaces wind up in drawers (8)  
18\. Red auto owned by me (7)  
20\. A gambler's assistant (7)  
21\. Plot to flee from asylum (6)  
23\. Chops up workhorses (5)  
25\. Protest—trespass holding it (3-2)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. PREORDAINMENT (anag.).  
9\. S(HERB)ET.  
10\. DECLARE (anag.).  
11\. TOTES (two meanings).  
12\. RES(I'D)ENTS.  
13\. STARSHIP (anag.).  
14\. A-DO-RED.  
17\. C(AN)OPY.  
19\. SE(ARCH)ES.  
23\. SC(A-RED) OFF.  
25\. DRAW-L.  
26\. AT-TRACT.    
27\. O-VERSE-A.  
28\. CLEMENT ATTLEE (hidden).  

**Down**

1\. PESETA (hidden).  
2\. E(YES)-TRAIN.  
3\. REB-USES.  
4\. A-STEROID.  
5\. NUDIST (anag.)  
6\. EN(CO.)DED.  
7\. TWAIN (anag.)  
8\. LEASED (homophone).  
15\. RE-HEARS-AL.  
16\. SE-AFRO-NT.  
17\. COSTAR (anag.)  
18\. P(REF)ACE.  
20\. RE(D) CENT.  
21\. SA(L)VAGE.  
22\. L(O)ATHE.  
24\. ANTI-C.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Now his golf balls are displayed on placks along the walls
of his basement.&rdquo;  [From an Ohio AP wire, January 1984.
Submitted by Randy Alfred, San Francisco, California.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v14n3_Winter_1988)