---
title: "Vol I, No 1"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Dictionaries of Hard Words Come Easy

Ramona R. Michaelis Supervising Editor
_Funk &amp; Wagnalls Standard College Dictionary_

One of the major problems that faces the lexicographer
at the start of a new dictionary is, quite
simply, the selection of entries for definition. Of the
total English word stock of some million words, the
modern American &ldquo;desk&rdquo; or &ldquo;college&rdquo; dictionary includes
approximately 100,000 to 150,000. Although
many rare, obsolete, and archaic words are cited, the
selection of entries begins with the commonest words
of the language. In contrast, it is of interest to note
that the earliest British dictionaries, published in the
17th and early 18th centuries, were primarily glossaries
of hard words. How did this change in policy come
about?

Robert Cawdrey's _Table Alphabeticall_ (1604),
generally considered to have been the first English
dictionary, claimed to teach &ldquo;the true writing, and
understanding of hard usuall English words, borrowed
from the Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, or French, etc...
with the interpretation thereof by plain English
words.&rdquo; This unassuming little book, containing
scarcely 3000 entries, was patterned on the bilingual
and multilingual dictionaries that had been appearing
in Europe for more than a hundred years before
Cawdrey's time. What distinguished the _Table Alphabeticall_
from its interlingual predecessors was that it
&ldquo;translated&rdquo; from English to English--that is, from
hard English to plain English. Nineteen years after the
publication of Cawdrey's book, an enterprising fellow
named Henry Cockeram published his _English Dictionarie,_
a three-volume work of which the second
volume converted &ldquo;vulgar words&rdquo; into &ldquo;more refined
and elegant speech,&rdquo; thereby completing the pattern
set by the earlier dictionaries that had translated from
Latin to English and from English to Latin.

Other prominent dictionaries of this period that
followed the tradition of defining only the hard words
were John Bullokar's _English Expositor_ (1616),
Thomas Blount's _Glossographia_ (1656), Edward
Phillips' _New World of English Words_ (1658), and
John Kersey's _New World of Words_ (1706), a revision
of Phillips, later abridged by Kersey and republished
as the _Dictionarium Anglo-Brittanicum_ (1708). Each
of these books enlarged the scope of the English dictionary.
Bullokar, with his inclusion of &ldquo;olde words
now growne out of use, and divers termes of art,
proper to the learned in Logicke, Philosophy, Law,
Physicke, Astronomie, etc.,&rdquo; was the first to list obsolete
words and to indicate the field in which a technical
term had application. Phillips expanded the treatment
of technical terms by availing himself of the services
of a large number of specialists (&ldquo;Antiquities, Elias
Ashmole, Esq.; Law Terms, Mr. Hern; Magick, Mr.
Turner; Physick, Dr. Sparks...). Kersey revised
Phillips, enlarged the vocabulary by 20,000 additional
entries, and added &ldquo;a whole new scientific and technical
vocabulary.&rdquo;

In 1721 there appeared the first dictionary that
attempted to treat the entire range of English vocabulary--the
common as well as the difficult words. This
was Nathan Bailey's _Universal Etymological Dictionary,_
whose stated purpose was to give &ldquo;the Derivations
of the Generality of Words in the English Tongue,&rdquo;
in addition to &ldquo;a brief and clear explication of all
difficult Words.&rdquo; As Bailey's interest in etymology
applied to simple as well as learned words, he became
the first English lexicographer to enter and define the
common words of the language. The policy set by him
in this matter is followed in most modern dictionaries,
and the &ldquo;dictionary of hard words&rdquo; is no longer the
usual kind.

The impossible inkhorn terms of Anglicized Latin
(_e.g., adolescenturate_ to play the fool; _basiate_ to kiss;
_obequitate_ to ride about) continued to clutter English
dictionaries until Samuel Johnson, declaring that these
had not &ldquo;been seen in any book but the works of lexicographers,&rdquo;
wisely chose to eliminate most of them
from his masterwork, _A Dictionary of the English
Language_ (London, 1755). Building on the work of
Bailey as Bailey had built on that of Phillips, Dr.
Johnson brought to lexicography a more realistic approach
to English vocabulary, and a new thoroughness
and precision of definition. &ldquo;The rigour of interpretative
lexicography requires,&rdquo; he states in his preface,
&ldquo;that the explanation and the word explained, should
be always reciprocal.&rdquo; In this, and in all major respects,
lexicography truly came of age with Samuel Johnson.
On his early work was built the _Oxford English Dictionary,_
and through his influence on Noah Webster
in this country he set the pattern for the modern
American dictionary.

### INTER ALIA I.1.a

Recently, a member of the House Committee investigating
the impeachability of President Nixon was interviewed
on radio and television on his reaction to the
transcripts of the taped exchanges between the President
and his aides and associates, which had just been
released. &ldquo;In my opinion,&rdquo; said the law-giver who is
also a lawyer, &ldquo;they amount to criminal conversation.&rdquo;
According to the dictionaries that list the entry, _criminal
conversation_ is a term in civil law meaning 'adultery.'

## Darn, Durn, Down, Doon, Damn

Dwight Bolinger
_Professor of Linguistics Emeritus Harvard University_

Minced oaths are etymological landmines, and if I were a better guesstymologist I probably would not tread on this one; but if it is a coincidence it is too
good to be true, so here goes.

Dictionaries list _darn_ and _durn_ as euphemisms
for _damn(ed)_, and most of us take the words this way,
as playful substitutions on the order of _cripes_ for
_Christ_ or _jeez_ for _Jesus. Damn_ has had other substitutes
in its day, for instance _dem(n)_, and there is nothing
strange about the slightly thicker disguise in _darn_.

The question is whether _darn_ and _durn_ actually
started life as euphemisms. If we are willing to accept
a dash of dialect mixture, there was another way for
them to make the acquaintance of _damn_, not at first
with the stronger meaning of that imprecation but
with its use as a watered-down intensifier.

Eugen Borst in his study of adverbs of degree (Eugen Borst, _Die Gradadverbien im Englischen_ (= Anglistische
Forschungen 10) (Heidelberg, 1902), page 52)
cites examples from Wright's _English Dialect Dictionary_
of the word _down_ used as an intensifier, giving the
forms _dahn_ and _doon: dahn weel seure, an even doon
good shot;_ and of course with the normal spelling
_down: He's a down bad'un_. He adds an American
example with _right down: You're right down splendid
at explaining most things_. In reverse order this is
standard: _downright foolish. Right_ of course is an intensifier
that has had its day, but persists in a few set
phrases: _right reverend, right sharp, right smart_.

Given the parallel between _darn-durn_ on the one
hand and _down-doon_ on the other, plus the uncertain
status of English _r_ when it comes at the end of a
syllable, we see what may well have happened. We
start with an intensifier in _I'm down well sure of it,_
give it an _r_-ful spelling, pass the hybrid on to a dialect
where _r_ is pronounced, and end up with two spelling
pronunciations, _darn_ and _durn: I'm darn well sure
of it_.

So what we have is an intensifier, _down_, which
encounters an oath used as an intensifier, _damn_, the
two coincidentally resembling each other. A kind of
secondary synonymy grows up whereby _darn_ = _down_
acquires an occasional _-ed_ so that _darned_ matches
_damned_ as _darn_ matches _damn_. A twin star can
develop by fission or by capture. The latter seems to
have been the process here.

If correct, this at least bestows an initial innocence
on _darn_, however shady the later company it kept.

## Review: _WORD PLAY: What Happens When People Talk_

Peter Farb (Knopf, 1974)

_Word Play_ contains a great deal more than the
author's entertaining comments on and analysis of the
Marx Brothers. Divided into 16 chapters, which are
grouped into five major sections, each dealing with a
different aspect of language, this readable book could
serve as a useful preliminary to the study of linguistics
--possibly as an introductory text or as supplementary
reading in secondary-school English classes. Even
without such pretensions, it offers a mature point of
view about many sides of linguistic theory, touching
on such interesting matters as &ldquo;Linguistic Chauvinism,&rdquo;
nonverbal communication, and the language of children.
This reviewer recommends it as required reading
for any who persist in pursuing unscientific prejudices
about language.

## Word Chains in English

Roger W. Wescott
_Professor of Linguistics, Drew University_

One of the few types of sound-effect forms that I
have never seen discussed or even referred to by
analysts of the English language is the type that I call
word chains. Those who like Latin may call them concatenants,
and those who like Greek may call them
phonopedes. But, by any name, word chains are
phrases or phraselike forms that follow a &ldquo;rule of
threes,&rdquo; as follows:

> 1. They contain three words or wordlike forms each
    (never less or more).
> 2. They contain one, two, or three syllables per word
    (never more).
> 3. Their words are linked, sound-wise, by any two of
    the three common types of sound-repetition as
    rhyme, alliteration, and word-repetition. (They
    seem not to be linked by the three rarer types of
    sound-repetition known as assonance, preliteration,
    and consonance--as in _tid-bit, sad sack,_ or _big lug_.
    The reason for this may be either that these three
    devices really are alien to word chains or merely
    that too few examples of word chains have as yet
    been collected.)


Although word chains are phonically quite uniform,
grammatically and semantically they are less so.
A minority of word chains consist of meaningful common
words linked, between the second and third word
in each chain, by the article _and_. In each such chain,
the three linked words are roughly synonymous. But
a majority of them consist either of nonsense words
or of fictional proper names. In the case of the nonsense
words, there may be a form spelled _-a-_ (pronounced
like the final _a_ in _sofa_) which is difficult, if
not impossible, to classify in terms of familiar affixes
or parts of speech.

A number of examples of word chains are shown
in the table below. Many undoubtedly remain to be
collected. Readers of VERBATIM may wish to report
examples of their own.

| syllable phrase                  | semantic source        | type                   | count | phonic devices                   | category    |
| -------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ---------------------- | ----- | -------------------------------- | ----------- |
| _healthy, wealthy, and wise_     | rhyming proverb        | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | meaningful  |
| _slender, tender, and tall_      | popular phraseology    | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | meaningful  |
| _stumble, fumble, and fall_      | political slogan       | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | meaningful  |
| _shiver, quiver, and quake_      | horror-film ad         | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | meaningful  |
| _slip, slide, or glide_          | Latin-English glossary | common                 | 111   | alliteration and rhyme           | meaningful  |
| _inka, dinka, doo_               | comic refrain          | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _abba, dabba, doo_               | comic war-whoop        | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _oobie, doobie, doo_             | song refrain           | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _cheery, beery, bee_             | song refrain           | common                 | 221   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _hickory, dickory, dock_         | nursery rhyme          | common                 | 331   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _rickety, tickety, tin_          | song refrain           | common                 | 331   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _sow, hoe, and harvest_          | agricultural text      | rare                   | 112   | rhyme and alliteration           | nonsensical |
| _Rum Tum Tiger_                  | light verse            | rare                   | 112   | rhyme and alliteration           | mixed       |
| _Ralph Roister Doister_          | drama title            | rare                   | 122   | alliteration and rhyme           | mixed       |
| _Rin-Tin-Tin_                    | animal drama           | dubious                | 111   | rhyme and word-repetition        | onomastic   |
| _rub-a-dub-dub_                  | nursery rhyme          | dubious                | 111   | rhyme and word-repetition        | nonsensical |
| _high, wide, and handsome_       | popular clich&eacute;  | dubious                | 112   | assonance and alliteration       | meaningful  |
| _hot diggety dog_                | obsolescent slang      | dubious                | 131   | assonance and alliteration       | mixed       |
| _snap, crackle, and pop_         | commercial slogan      | dubious                | 121   | assonance and consonance         | meaningful  |
| _Pinks, Punks, and Knuckleheads_ | editorial headline     | dubious                | 113   | circumsonance and assonance      | meaningful  |
| _Hodge Podge Lodge_              | show title             | extraneous but related | 111   | rhyme and rhyme                  | mixed       |
| _bippity, boppity, boo_          | film refrain           | extraneous but related | 331   | alliteration and alliteration    | nonsensical |
| _kitchy, kitchy, coo_            | baby talk              | extraneous but related | 221   | word-repetition and alliteration | nonsensical |

#### Letters {Eric Hamp}

Dear Sir:

People often wonder where words come from. I hope I
won't be interfering with the smooth flow of linguistic
history by writing this note.

Back in the dim mists of ages past when my wife and I
were young and reckless we were walking along the sandy
shores of Lake Michigan, just enjoying the early summer
day and picking up pebbles and stones. We felt their
smooth roundness and admired their varied subdued
colours. Feeling the smooth odd-shaped ones we mused
on the Chinese habit of holding nice jade lumps just for
the fun of feeling them; _hand jades_ they called them,
didn't they? So we discovered you could also feel and
stroke yourself with an _eye jade_, just right for the eye
socket, or a _nose jade_, cool along the nostril, or a funny
horseshoe _wrist jade_. We ended up the day taking home
a nice longish waisted _foot jade_.

Splendid for resting your arch on the floor of the shower;
we've had one in our shower almost ever since. When I
sit and write or type I like to set my foot or both feet on
a _foot jade_. This past autumn, arriving in Aberystwyth for
a year of writing and research, my daughter Julijana soon
appeared from a walk along the sea front and the beach
with a fine grey _foot jade_ which she presented me with;
I'm comfortably propped on it right now.

And just the other day it happened again, for about the
fourth time. My 7 year old son Alexander and his friend
Chris were playing here near my table. &ldquo;What's that?!&rdquo;
said Chris in his fine clear Welsh-English tone. &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; said
I, &ldquo;It's a sort of stone that you can keep, a nice clean one
you know, that you can put under the table, or anywhere,
that you can put your...&rdquo; Alexander, who often gets
impatient with the deficiencies and ignorance of Chris who
is after all more than 6 months his junior, interrupted me
with crisp finality: &ldquo;Why Chris, that's just a foot jade.&rdquo;

Nothing more was said until the next subject shifted the
conversation.

—Eric P. Hamp, University of Chicago, Aberystwyth, Wales

## _sexual intercourse_ in American College Dictionaries

Sidney I. Landau, _Editor in Chief, The Doubleday Dictionary_

_The American Heritage Dictionary_ (AHD) published
in 1969 became the first general American
dictionary to include _fuck_. _Webster's New World_,
Second College Edition (WNW), published in 1970,
stubbornly omitted it, and while one may sympathize
with the practical argument that its inclusion might
hurt sales to schools ([it would be] &ldquo;unwise&rdquo; [to
suffer] &ldquo;the risk [of] keeping this dictionary out of
the hands of some students&rdquo;), the editor also argues
that words of this sort are &ldquo;so well known as to require
no explanation.&rdquo; This is disingenuous, since on
those grounds thousands of other words could also be
omitted, and more importantly, it is quite at variance
with confident assertions about the scientific detachment
of the &ldquo;trained lexicographer,&rdquo; who disregards
&ldquo;the crotchets and prejudices of individuals&rdquo;--everyone's,
that is, except his own. In 1973, the _Merriam-Webster
New Collegiate_, 8th edition (MW8), was
published; the editors, having observed that the
heavens had not fallen, included _fuck_.

As the ensuing discussion will show, the tabooness
of _fuck_ exists not so much in the supposedly coarse
contexts in which it is used--_pace_ D.H. Lawrence and
other liberated lovers--as in the essential meaning
which every modern man and woman professes to
find entirely wholesome: sexual intercourse.

AHD defines _fuck_ as: &ldquo;_Vulgar_ To have sexual
intercourse with,&rdquo; _sexual intercourse_ as: &ldquo;Coitus, especially
between humans,&rdquo; and _coitus_ as: &ldquo;Sexual intercourse
between two human beings.&rdquo; This is a circular
definition, which is no definition at all. It is also
illogical, for if coitus by definition includes two
humans, how can it be &ldquo;especially&rdquo; between humans?
It is obvious that even though AHD enters _sexual intercourse,_
its decision--let us be charitable--not to define
it suggests that it is regarded as self-defining. But there
is no question that the phrase is a lexical unit worthy
of definition: it is the only widely accepted, nonvulgar
way to refer to the act essential to many forms of life,
and it is fair to say that among humans there is more
interest in it, more is written about it and still more
imagined about it than any other subject.

AHD has four definitions of _sexual:_ &ldquo;1. Pertaining
to, affecting, or characteristic of sex, the sexes, or the
sex organs and their functions. 2. Having a sex or
sexual organs. 3. Implying or symbolizing erotic desires
or activity. 4. Pertaining to or designating reproduction
involving the union of male and female
gametes.&rdquo; _Intercourse_ is defined as: &ldquo;1. Interchange
between persons or groups. 2. Coitus&rdquo;; _copulate_ as:
&ldquo;to engage in coitus&rdquo;; which is defined, you'll recall,
as &ldquo;sexual intercourse...,&rdquo; which is defined as coitus.
It is odd to find a dictionary that is fearless about _fuck_
but squeamish about _sexual intercourse_. It is by now
obvious that such blatant circularity can hardly be an
oversight, and the wistful hope that _sexual intercourse_
is self-explanatory simply won't do: it could refer to a
discussion about sex or to any close physical embrace,
neither of which conforms to the widely understood
meaning of the term.

MW8's treatment is not much better. It defines
_sexual intercourse_ as: &ldquo;sexual connection esp. between
humans: coitus: copulation,&rdquo; but there is no entry for
_sexual connection,_ and the presumption of self-explanation
is no more valid for this phrase than for _sexual
intercourse_. The only sense of _connection_ in MW8 that
applies to the sense in which it is used in &ldquo;sexual connection&rdquo;
is &ldquo;the state of being connected.&rdquo; Thus _sexual
connection_ means &ldquo;the state of being sexually connected,&rdquo;
and could apply to any sexual contact, such
as fellatio, cunnilingus, or anal intercourse. MW8 defines
_intercourse_ as: &ldquo;coitus; copulation,&rdquo; and _coitus_
as: &ldquo;the natural conveying of semen to the female reproductive
tract, _broadly:_ sexual intercourse.&rdquo; Although
this definition avoids the outright circularity of
AHD's treatment, it still does not define _sexual intercourse_.
_Copulate_ is defined as: &ldquo;to engage in sexual
intercourse,&rdquo; which is defined as &ldquo;sexual connection,&rdquo;
which is not defined; _coitus_ and _copulate_ lead right
back to _sexual intercourse_. One does get the impression
that the editors are not saying all they know about this
subject. And this in the much-publicized climate of
sexual liberation that is supposed to characterize the
'70s.

WNW pretends that the whole subject of sexual
contact did not exist. It has no entry in place for _sexual
intercourse_, though it defines _coitus_ with nervous
succinctness as: &ldquo;sexual intercourse.&rdquo; _Copulate_ is &ldquo;to
have sexual intercourse.&rdquo; At _intercourse_ we are witness
to the fullest flowering of WNW's recognition of the
act of creation: &ldquo;the sexual joining of two individuals;
coitus; copulation: in full, sexual intercourse.&rdquo;

One could more easily excuse such inadequate
treatment of a term of immense importance and broad
currency if it were in accord with the treatment given
other terms. Here is AHD on _transformer:_ &ldquo;A device
used to transfer electric energy, usually that of an
alternating current, from one circuit to another; especially,
a pair of multiply wound, inductively coupled
wire coils that effect such a transfer with a change in
voltage, current, phase, or other electric characteristic.
See step-down transformer, step-up transformer.&rdquo; (The
same dictionary needed but four words to define _sexual
intercourse!_) Here is WNW on _triangulation:_ &ldquo;_Surveying,
Navigation_ the process of determining the distance
between points on the earth's surface, or the
relative positions of points, by dividing up a large
area into a series of connected triangles, measuring a
base line between two points, and then locating a third
point by computing both the size of the angles made
by lines from this point to each end of the base line
and the lengths of these lines.&rdquo; Here is MW8 on _toxin:_
&ldquo;a colloidal proteinaceous poisonous substance that
is a specific product of the metabolic activities of a
living organism and is usu. very unstable, notably toxic
when introduced into the tissues, and typically capable
of inducing the formation of antibodies on injection.&rdquo;
We should all learn things we'd never dreamt of if
we were told half so much about _sexual intercourse_.

A word about the pre-AHD books. The _Funk &amp;
Wagnalls Standard/College_ (1st edition, 1963) has no
entry for _sexual intercourse_ and defines _intercourse_ as:
&ldquo;sexual connection; coitus.&rdquo; It has no entry for _sexual
connection_, and _coitus_ is listed as a variant of _coition_,
which is defined as: &ldquo;sexual intercourse.&rdquo; _Copulation_
is defined as: &ldquo;sexual intercourse; coition.&rdquo; The _Random
House Dictionary, College Edition_ (1968)
(RHD) is the only college dictionary that actually
defines _sexual intercourse:_ &ldquo;genital contact, esp. the
insertion of the penis into the vagina followed by
ejaculation; coitus; copulation.&rdquo; RHD defines _coitus_
as: &ldquo;the act of sexual intercourse, esp. between human
beings,&rdquo; and _copulation_ as: &ldquo;sexual union or intercourse.&rdquo;
_Intercourse_ is: &ldquo;sexual relations or a sexual
coupling, esp. coitus.&rdquo; RHD's treatment of sexual terms
is almost as slight as that of the other books, but at
least circularity has been avoided.

There are clearly certain advantages to avoiding
the whole issue. One doesn't have to worry about
whether homosexual contact, for example, is &ldquo;sexual
intercourse,&rdquo; and if it is, how to arrange the definition
to allow for the possibility of this and other variations
while still specifying the heterosexual act as the usual
meaning of the term. And one may be permitted to
speculate whether pleasure (not to mention appetite)
ought to be included as a powerful incentive associated
with the sexual act, certainly among humans and
plausibly among other animals as well. Precision can
indeed be dangerous, but dictionaries have not been
reluctant to be precise about other subjects, and perhaps
the time has come for them to make the attempt
about this one.

</article>

### INTER ALIA I.1.b

Steve Emmons, _L.A. Times_ staff reporter, writes
in a front-page article on March 15, 1974, _passim:_

&ldquo;...Safety First lives in Leisure World, Sea
Beach.... 'Every time I get a traffic ticket, I get a
column in the newspaper.... I've been in Ripley's
(_Believe It Or Not_) three times. My sister [June] has
been in only once.'...A Mr. Belcher changed his
name to Belshay...Mr. Peachy [to] Peche....
Judith Bosworth sent to the Dept. of Motor Vehicles
for personalized license plates. They came back 'JUDY
13' because 13 Judys had filed before her. [Whereupon
she changed her name, legally, to Judy Thirteen.]
...Jean Sippy... was recently divorced but still
calls herself Mrs. Sippy.... Paul Butcher is a veterinarian
in Orange County... Howard Bonebrake, a
dentist...Dr. Skinner, a surgeon... Dr. Lantz, a
general practitioner...Drs. Gumm and Root, dentists...Judge
Law and Judge Judge dispense justice
in Santa Ana.... Lt. Lynch is a Long Beach
police officer.... Lt. Justus has the law well in hand
in Anaheim.... Fire Chief Sam Sparks settles burning
issues in Garden Grove.... Did Kathleen Sagely
and Karen Toogood get straight A's at Dana Hills
High School because it sounded right?&rdquo;

### Letters {William Card}

Dear Sir:

Hinchingbrooke was the family seat of the first Earl of
Sandwich, and when his eldest son came of an age to be
awarded a title, the title chosen was Lord Hinchingbrooke.
Samuel Pepys, the diarist, was adviser to Lord Sandwich
in the early 1660's and became a friend of the family. On
4 August 1666 he writes, &ldquo;Up and to the office, where all
the morning; and at noon to dinner, and Mr. Cooke dined
with us, who is lately come from Hinchingbrooke, who is
also come to town.&rdquo; (_The Diary of Samuel Pepys,_ ed.
Robert Latham and William Matthew, University of California
Press, VII, 234.)

This is the only sentence I know of in English where a
single proper noun designates at once a place and a person.
Lest the reader boggle, the editors put a superscript
number after _who_ and footnotes &ldquo;I.e. Lord Hinchingbrooke:
see below, p. 236.&rdquo; On that page we find Pepys
putting it more felicitously: &ldquo;And then by water to my
Lady Montagu's at Westminster and there visited my Lord
Hinchingbrooke, newly come from Hinchingbrooke; and
find him a mighty sober gentleman--to my great content.&rdquo;

—William Card, Professor of English Emeritus Chicago State University

### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: Pygmalion

Eric P. Hamp, The University of Chicago, Aberystwyth, Wales

This word--the well-known name--can be used in
a special and separate sense in British English, as an
equivalent for the British expletive _bloody_. Professor
T.F. Mitchell has recently cited _he has kicked the-Pygmalion-bucket_
and _abso-Pygmalion-lutely_.

The history of _Pygmalion_ 'bloody' would certainly
be opaque to us and unyielding to the formal apparatus
of linguistic analysis if we did not have contemporary
eye-witness testimony. It happens that I understand
the word myself only because Professor Frank Palmer,
of Reading, mentioned its origin to me in conversation.
Those millions who have seen the film of Shaw's
_Pygmalion_ will remember that Liza uses the phrase
_not bloody likely_. At the time of the original production
(1938), hearing this taboo word in public on the
screen transfixed and electrified most of the British
public; many, apparently, went to see the film just for
the thrill of hearing the word aloud in this startling
fashion. Times have changed, but after that it was
sufficient to use the name of the play in order to suggest
euphemistically the forbidden (and now broadly
and publicly current) expletive.

The expression _bloody_ is now common coin on the
telly. Perhaps it might be said that the circumstances
that brought _Pygmalion_ into being have rapidly moved
it into obsolescence as the motivation for euphemism
vanished.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v1n1_1974)
