---
title: "Vol I, No 2"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Women, Wife-men, and Sexist Bias
_Roger W. Wescott, Professor of Linguistics, Drew University_

The professional meetings I attend no longer
have chairmen.  They now have chairpersons,
because the term chair_men_ is held to be discriminatory
against women.

But I wonder how many female persons realize
that the form wo_men_ is equally invidious, at least in
etymological terms.  For Modern English _woman_
comes, by way of Middle English _wimman_, from Old
English _w&imacr;fman_, which literally meant &ldquo;wife-man.&rdquo;
And most feminists insist not only that one need not
be a man to be a person but also that one need not be
a wife to be feminine.

So, for those female persons who do not care to
be referred to either as wives or as men, a new designation
is needed.  Any suggestions?

While pondering this terminological lacuna, those
of either sex who are interested in word origins may
be intrigued to know that the pre-Germanic sources
of both the two words _wife_ and _man_ remain etymological
puzzles.

There are, however, several reconstructed Proto-Indo-European
roots from which English _wife_ and
_man_ can be derived without patent violation of known
phonological, morphological, or semantic laws of probability.
For _wife_, there are seven such roots, which,
though homonymous, were presumably distinct in
meaning and in usage.  They are:

| *root* | *meaning of root* | *meaning of derived noun* | *related English derivative*| 
| -------|-------------------| --------------------------| ----------------------------|
| *_wey_- 1 | 'turn', 'twist'    | (a) 'weaver', 'spinner' <br> (b) 'hip-swiveler' <br> (c) 'flickle person'| (a,b) wire (G), </br> (c) vibrate (I)| 
| *_wey_- 2 |  'drip', 'flow'| 'menstruator'| ooze (G) <br>, virus (I)|
| *_wey_- 3  |'grow,' 'sprout' | 'gestator' |(only _wife_ itself: G)|
| *_wey_- 4 | 'magic,' 'sorcery' | 'witch' | witch (G)|
| *_wey_- 5  |'fault,' 'defect' |'weaker sex'| vice (I)|
| *_wey_- 6  |'strong,' 'vigorous'|'person of stamina' | vim (I)|
| *_wey_- 7  |'wither,' 'wrinkle'| 'one who (both blooms and) ages rapidly'|wizen (G)|
                                                           
For _man_, there are three plausible root sources, as follows:

| *root* | *meaning of root* | *meaning of derived noun* | *related English derivative*| 
| --------|------------------------| -------------| ---------|
| *_men_-  | 'think' | 'reasoner' | mind (G),  mental (I)|
| *_man_-  | 'hand' | 'manipulator'| manual (I)|
| *_mon_-  | 'man' | 'human being' |man (G)|

*G* means &ldquo;coming into English by way of Germanic (Anglo-Saxon or Old Norse).&rdquo;  
*I* means &ldquo;coming into English by way of Italic (Latin or French).&rdquo;


## Binomials and Trinomials
_Paul M. Lloyd, Professor of Romance Languages, University of Pennsylvania_

Roger Wescott's note on what he calls &ldquo;word
chains&rdquo; in English recalls two earlier studies:
Richard D. Abraham, &ldquo;Fixed Order of Coordinates.  A
Study in Comparative Lexicography,&rdquo; _Modern Language
Journal_, 34 (1950), 276-87, and Yakov Malkiel,
&ldquo;Studies in Irreversible Binomials,&rdquo; _Lingua_, 8 (1959),
113-60.  Wescott's note concerns itself only with idiomatic
groups of three words or wordlike elements, but
I believe such chains are an extension of what Malkiel
calls binomials, or two-word groups.

Some of these groups involve a repetition of the
same initial consonant (s):

|<!-- -->    | <!-- --> | <!-- -->    |  
|------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| _bag and baggage_     | _from rags to riches_ | _sixes and sevens_ |
| _bed and board_ | _hale and hearty_  | _spic and span_ |
| _betwixt and between_ | _house and home_   | _stem to stern_ |
| _birds and bees_  | _kit and caboodle_ | _sticks and stones_ |
| _black and blue_  | _kith and kin_ | _stress and strain_ |
| _born and bred_    | _life and limb_ | _tattered and torn_ |
| _brain and brawn_  | _live and learn_ | _thick and thin_ |
| _dribs and drabs_   | _might and main_ | _tit for tat_ |
| _facts and figures_ | _now or never_   | _to have and hold_ |
| _fair and/or foul_  | _part and parcel_  | _to hem and haw_  |
| _few and far between_ | _pen and pencil_     | _to rant and rave_ |
| _first and foremost_ | _pots and pans_ | _to toss and turn_ |
| _fish or fowl_     | _rack and ruin_  | _tried and true_ |
| _forgive and forget_ | _rhyme or reason_ | _vim and vigor_ |
| _friend or foe_ | _safe and sound_ | _wild and woolly_ |
| _from pillar to post_ | _shot and shell_ | _zip and zest_ |


Other groups involve no phonetic elements linking
them but rather some kind of semantic link:

|<!-- -->    | <!-- --> | <!-- -->    |  
|------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| _back and forth_ |  _fuss and bother_ |  _needle and thread_ |               
| _beck and call_ |  _give and take_ |  _nip and tuck_ |               
| _bits and pieces_ |  _hail and farewell_ |  _nook and cranny_ |                   
| _cat and mouse_ |  _hammer and tongs_ |  _on land and (on) sea_ |               
| _cock and bull_ |  _hard and fast_ |  _open and shut_ |               
| _cut and dried_ |  _head and shoulders_ |  _p's and q's_ |                   
| _cuts and bruises_ |  _hither and yon_ |  _pins and needles_ |                  
| _each and every_ |  _if and when_ |  _rack and pinion_ |               
| _fast and loose_ |  _ins and outs_ |  _skin and bones_ |               
| _fathers and sons_ |  _jot and tittle_ |  _spit and polish_ |                 
| _fine and dandy_ |  _ladies and gentlemen_ |  _straight and narrow_ |                    
| _fits and starts_ |  _leaps and bounds_ |  _stuff and nonsense_ |                 
| _flesh and blood_ |  _lock and key_ |  _to and fro_ |               
| _for better or (for) worse_ | _man and wife_ |  _true and false_ |                       
| _free and easy_ |  _men and women_ |  _up (s) and down (s)_ |               
| _from hand to mouth_ |  _mortar and pestle_ |  _ways and means_ |                     


Some groups involve rhyming:

|<!-- -->    | <!-- --> | <!-- -->    |  
|------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| _fair and square_   | _highways and byways_ |   _hither and thither_ | 
| _high and dry_      |     _wheel and deal_    |  |         

Some involve rhyming and no conjunction:

|<!-- -->    | <!-- --> | <!-- -->    |  
|------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| _boogie-woogie_ |   _niminy-piminy_ |   _razzle-dazzle_ | 
| _namby-pamby_   |   _pell-mell_      |  _willy-nilly_ | 


Probably many more binomials can be presented by
others.  I just wish to add a few trinomials:

|<!-- -->    | <!-- -->  |  
|------------------|-----------------------|
| _bell, book, and candle_   |    _rag, tag and bobtail_ | 
| _calm, cool, and collected_ |   _red, white, and blue_ | 
| _fair, fat, and forty_     |    _signed, sealed, and delivered_ | 
| _high, wide, and handsome_  |   _tall, dark, and handsome_ | 
| _lock, stock, and barrel_  |    _vim, vigor, and vitality_ | 
| _man, woman, and child_    |    _way, shape, or manner_ | 


#### Letters {Louis T. Milic}
I was happy to see your elegantly printed publication.
...I think the kind of popularizing intention you have
badly needs some development since the layman can
scarcely read the table of contents of any current journal
devoted to language, and language happens to be an enthusiasm
of many people.

—Professor Louis T. Milic, The Cleveland State University


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: GOETZ VON BERLICHINGEN!

Robert A. Fowkes, New York University

Eric P. Hamp's interesting remarks on _Pygmalion_ in
the admirable first number of VERBATIM (to which long,
successful, and non-pedantic life!) provoke many reactions
in several directions.

The euphemistic suggestion of the once &ldquo;indecent&rdquo;
_bloody_ by means of the title of the work (on which the film
was based, in which the deliciously forbidden _not bloody
likely_ occurred) brings to mind the classic example in German
literature, _Goetz von Berlichingen_.  The mere utterance
of the title of that play of Goethe's has long been the
equivalent of a rhetorical invitation to commit an unsavory
act.  In Act III, the protagonist, finding himself in a situation
reminiscent of the famous incident in the Battle of the
Bulge, is ordered to surrender.  In the printed versions of
the play, Goetz replies, _Er_ [a certain captain] _kann mich_--.
We must assume that the actor filled in the blanks with the
proper number of improper words.  Readers have sometimes
wondered why the accusative _mich_ is used, and not _mir_,
since modern versions of the invitation begin with _du
kannst mir_, utilizing a sort of ethical dative with unethical
intent.  But Goethe made use of the autobiography of the
crusty old hero, and in that work Goetz himself writes, in
nonstandard German, _er solte mich hinden lecken_.  Little
did the doughty warrior realize that his name would one
day, via a title, come to mean, &ldquo;Kiss my--.&rdquo;

Once I was buying a few copies of the play for a class,
and the New York bookseller, obviously amused, shouted
to his assistant in the rear of the store, &ldquo;Goetz von Berlichingen
!&rdquo;  The reaction was one of feigned indignation
mingled with high hilarity.  But when I added, &ldquo;Six copies,&rdquo;
and the message was relayed, &ldquo;Sechsmal!,&rdquo; the merriment
reached such proportions that it looked as if business would
cease for the day.

It is likely that Gen. MacAuliffe's reply, &ldquo;Nuts!,&rdquo; in the
Battle of the Bulge, is entirely apocryphal.  If so, the alleged
translation by a perplexed interpreter, &ldquo;Nuesse!&rdquo; is doubly
so.  And a &ldquo;corrected&rdquo; version, &ldquo;Quatsch, Mensch!,&rdquo; while
closer, would still be fictitious.  But what a marvelous opportunity
it would have been for &ldquo;Goetz von Berlichingen&rdquo;!

Eric Hamp writes from Aberystwyth, Wales, which reminds
me of several related circumstances involving the
quondam tabu.  (I am permitted to say _quondam_, I imagine,
in view of all the Latin headings in the periodical--plus a
modicum of Greek--with its Latin title).  A pleasantly
shocking use of the word in its &ldquo;Welsh&rdquo; guise _blydi_ occurred
in the widely read novel _William Jones_ by the late
T. Rowland Hughes (Gwasg Aberystwyth--Aberystwyth
Press--1944).  William Jones tired of his wife's vituperation
and cold chips, utters the daring line, &ldquo;Cadw dy blydi
chips!&rdquo; ('Keep your bloody chips!') and shortly thereafter
leaves home forever.  Perhaps the lax state of &ldquo;morals&rdquo; in
wartime made it possible to print such a word as _blydi_.
When, however, a few years later the Welsh BBC began to
present a radio series based on the novel and the word
_blydi_ came over the (hitherto unsullied?) air waves, puritanical
protests succeeded in banning any further episodes
of the story.

The quasi-infixal usage in _abso-Pygmalion-lutely_
quoted by Eric Hamp reminds us of _Portrait of the Artist
as a Young Dog_ by Dylan Thomas, where we read, &ldquo; 'The
chap I know says you can always tell a cuckoo from
Bridgend, it goes: &ldquo;Cuckbloodyoo! cuckbloodyoo!&rdquo;' 'Cuckbloodyoo
!' echoed the arch,&rdquo; with, of course, overtones and
undertones that one would expect in Dylan Thomas.

I recall childish games in which children perpetrated
similar formations, with, however, no euphemistic or tabu
implications for the most part.  I heard in those remote days
such monstrosities as _Pennsyl-now-vania, Phila-now-delphia,
inter-now-national_ but the possibilities were limited.  A
similar device is exploited in some comic strips and cartoons
where I have seen, &ldquo;You're too inde-blank-pendent.&rdquo;
And I have heard utterances like _inde-fornicating-pendent_,
or unbowdlerized equivalents.

Not quite the same, but still bearing a certain resemblance
to the _abso-Pygmalion-lutely_ type, is the expression
_number-hucking-one_ which came into use in Korea during
the Korean War, with the approximate meaning, 'Tops;
A-One.'  This, however, reflects several things irrelevant to
the present discussion, including the structure of the Korean
numeral system, an idiomatic superlative, a special
phonetic situation, possibly a Japanese adstratum, plus mild
treachery on the part of G.I.'s.

The word _bloody_ itself seems eminently qualified to be
included under the heading _ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA_,
for I do not believe that it has been explained.  It was tabu
in our house, and when we asked our parents why, we were
given no explanation.  Since _blasted_ was another tabu word,
we thought there must be something especially bad about
words beginning with B (like _bad_ itself?), and it is possible
to compile quite a list (_bastard, bugger_, etc.).  But
then we thought of _Bible, Baptist, better, best_ and realized
we were on a false track.

Certainly the &ldquo;By Our Lady&rdquo; explanation is unlikely
as the origin of _bloody_.  And claims that _God's blood_ is the
source seem equally wide of the mark.  If _bloody hot, bloody
sick, bloody good_ remind us of compounds in German with
_blut_--(_blutjung, blutsauer, blutwenig_, etc.), an investigation
of these German words shows that some have a word
_blutt_ (Low German equivalent of _bloss_ 'mere'), others contain
_Blut_; and none involve \?\_blutig_ 'bloody' by itself in any
sense resembling the &ldquo;expletive.&rdquo;  It is even conceivable
that the _bloody_ in _bloody warm_ is different in origin from
that in _bloody fool_.  Possibly the word belongs to that group
never to be explained because the &ldquo;special circumstances&rdquo;
mentioned by Hamp have been forgotten.  If they prove to
be retrievable by some as yet unforeseen method, the word
will obviously shed its obscurity.  It is, at any rate, tantalizing.

#### Letters {Martin Fincun}
Judging from the quality of Sidney I.  Landau's review
[&ldquo;_sexual intercourse_ in American College Dictionaries,&rdquo;
VERBATIM I, 1], this letter should be addressed to Mr.
Urdung and the address should be Peyton Place.

I contracted to get a publication for word lovers.  Instead,
we get a shocking, sophisticated, non-functional
complaint about unsatisfactory definitions of &ldquo;fuck.&rdquo;

So I am asking you to fuck off.  Do not send us any
more of your letters.  Return our money immediately.

—Martin Fincun, Fincun Court Reporters, Cleveland, Ohio

cc: Essex Conn. Police Dept. with page 4 &amp; 5 of subject
publication  
U.S. Postal Service, Washington, D.C. with page 4 &amp; 5
of subject publication


### Reviews: _BRITISH SELF-TAUGHT: WITH COMMENTS IN AMERICAN_ 
Norman W. Schur, Macmillan, 1974

Norman Schur, Esquire, is an American attorney who
divides his time between England and America; I am an
American lexicographer who divides his time between
England and America.  Norman Schur loves England and
Briticisms; I love England and Briticisms.  Norman Schur
has compiled a dictionary of Briticisms; I have not compiled
such a dictionary but have the advantage over Mr.
Schur, for I am reviewing it.  On my passport, under
Occupation, it says &ldquo;Lexicographer.&rdquo;

First, let me say that this is a smashing book, strictly
first rate; top-hole!  Though written in entertaining style,
its amusement stems from the frequent incongruities inherent
in the subject-matter and not from any supercilious
flippancy on the part of the compiler.  This book should
prove the definitive successor to all the silly articles that
occasionally crop up in the Sunday supplements and in the
airline magazines.  Schur is a serious compiler and his
definitions are always to the point; where he deemed it
appropriate, he added information that is sometimes cultural,
sometimes etymological, sometimes laconically editorial,
always interesting.

Thirty-odd pages of Introductory Notes provide essential
guidelines not only to the use of the dictionary but
to the differences between British and American English at
the semantic, phonetic, morphological, and cultural levels.
I must admit that trying to do one's homework in a subject
for which adequate documentation is so sorely lacking is a
difficult task, and we must be grateful to Mr. Schur for
having acted as researcher, compiler, and editor all in one.
There is a great deal of fascinating material here that anyone
interested in the (American/British) England language
should have at his fingertips.  Here are a few
examples:

|ENGLISH| AMERICAN |  
|-------|----------|
| cooker | stove | 


Cooker is the normal English word for stove.  An Englishman
would hardly ever say electric stove, but gas stove
is heard.  The generic term for this kitchen appliance in
England is, however,_cooker_.

|ENGLISH| AMERICAN |  
|-------|----------|
| one-eyed village | one-horse town | 

Also known in American as a _whistle stop_.

|ENGLISH| AMERICAN |  
|-------|----------|
| turnabout | reversible | 

Applied to overcoats.

|ENGLISH| AMERICAN |  
|-------|----------|
| waving base | observation deck | 

At an airport.  The English expression implies much livelier
activity than just looking.  At Scottish airports they call it by
the rather stuffy term spectator's terrace.

|ENGLISH| AMERICAN |  
|-------|----------|
| Wren, n. (col.) | Wave | 

A member of the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS).
in praise of these patriotic ladies: &ldquo;Up with the lark and to
bed with the wren.&rdquo;

My questions are based on a close examination of A
to D and some spot checking elsewhere, from E to (as
they say) Zed.  I think that Schur has included some entries
that are not exclusively Briticisms: _Balaclava_ (helmet),
_bandy-legged, bill_ ('small machete'), _brimstone_ ('sulfur'),
_budgerigar, canterbury_ ('magazine rack'), _clue_ (in &ldquo;I
haven't a clue&rdquo;), _compositor_ ('typesetter'), _coomb_ or _cwm,
cos_ (kind of lettuce), _distemper_ (painting with a size
base), _doyen, loofah, ring the changes, tantalus_.  On the
other hand, I found entries, which I would consider common
Briticisms, missing: _aerial_ (Brits never say 'antenna'
except for insects), _arse_ (for 'ass' or 'bottom'), _back bacon_
(something like Canadian bacon), _bottle_ or _rigging screw_
(for turn-buckle: I didn't want to get into nautical terminology,
but, since Schur has _bag_ ...), _icing sugar_ (for
confectioner's sugar), _coffee sugar, come a cropper, Demerara
sugar, down printing, drone_ (_spiv_ is in), _duvet, film_
('movie'),?  _five honours_ (_four honours_ is in), _moving stairway,
multi-storey, rooms_ ('a surgeon's offices'), _singlet,
starter_ ('appetizer'), _streaky_ (the kind of bacon sold in the
U.S.), _twit_ ('a silly person; dumbbell'), _Uncle Tom Cobbleigh
and all, zebra crossing_ ('pedestrian crossing'), _pelican
crossing_ (Pe (destrian) Li(ght) Con (trolled) Crossing),
and _Belisha beacon_.

Other matters: I think _accumulator_ is reserved for
'storage battery'; 'battery' is used for dry cells.  Why not
gloss _as soon as say knife_ as 'before you could say &ldquo;Jack
Robinson&rdquo; '?  At _bags I!_, I am more familiar with 'Dibs
on...!' than with 'I dibsy!'  It would have been useful
to comment that _balls_, although used colloquially, is not
considered vulgar.

_Bangers_ are called that everywhere they are eaten, not
just at agricultural shows.

The comment about _BBC English_ is no longer true since
the BBC started employing people who don't necessarily
speak RP.

Under _beat up_, it would be less far-fetched to recall the
beaters who flush grouse, pheasant, partridge, quail, and
other game birds than the Africans who rouse beasts for
white hunters.  My informants know _beat up_ only in the
sense of 'give a thrashing to,' and are more likely to use
_knock up_ in this sense.

_Beggar_, I think, is a euphemism for 'bugger.'

The description at _biscuit_ is a noble effort, but the matter
may never be straightened out!  Jacobs, an English company,
markets &ldquo;Cream Crackers&rdquo; that are neither firecrackers
nor explosive bonbons.  Sorry, no suggestions from
this quarter.

A _broadsheet_ is also called a 'broadside' in America--
picturesque, eh?

_Browned off_ needs a usage label.

_B.S.T._ stands for _British Summer_ (not Standard) Time;
_G.M.T._ is not in.  It's very confusing since the U.S. went on
Daylight Saving for two years starting last November.

At _bugger off_ (and elsewhere, e.g., _take your finger out_,
for which I have a citation for its public use by Prince
Philip), I cannot agree with Schur's &ldquo;delicacy&rdquo;--or should
I be blaming his editor at Macmillan?

The definition of _bump-start_ is fine, but I use _jump-start_,
given as the American equivalent, to mean a start using
jumper cables from another car's battery to start a car
whose battery is dead.  As a Briticism, _jump-start_ means to
get an engine started by engaging the clutch while the car
is rolling after a push.

'Give a hoot' might have been a more felicitous equivalent
for _care a ninepin_ than 'give a damn,' which is
stronger.

_Carry on_ is well handled as it is, but its use in the context
of 'You, first,' when offering to hold a door for someone,
is missing, and 'keep going,' fine for other contexts,
doesn't quite cover it.

A _chesterfield_ isn't just any kind of sofa.

A _cinema_ is a 'movie house,' not 'movies.'  A movie is
usually called a film (not in).

At _cock_, something might have been said about Americans'
mincing, wincing use of the word.  Englishmen
mocking this squeamishness have been heard to refer to
'roostertails' for preprandial spirits, 'pet roosters' for petcocks.

A _conker_ is a horse chestnut, whence _conkers_, the children's
game.

_Get your knickers in a twist_ means to 'make a muddle of
because of utter confusion,' not to 'make a great fuss.'

And _nick_, in addition to the sense given, means to 'steal'
and to 'arrest.'

All that would seem either to detract from the praise
given Mr. Schur's book earlier in this review or, if mitigated,
to leave you with the notion that, despite our criticism,
we like it because it's the only game in town.  But I
have two replies to that: first, I confess to having indulged
in the usual game of carping at dictionaries; second, because
the matters I have found to comment on here occupy
a few lines, while Mr. Schur's book occupies almost 500
pages.  In short, it contains a huge amount of extremely
valuable information on a subject that is too often treated
frivolously and facetiously by writers who know far less
about language than does Mr. Schur.

I, for one, welcome him to the depleted ranks of lexicographers.
I welcome his book as an important work of
scholarship and integrity.


## Review: _MRS. BYRNE'S DICTIONARY of Unusual, Obscure, and Preposterous Words_ 
Josefa Heifetz Byrne, University Books, Inc., 1974 

Containing about 6000 entries, this book is no bargain.
Although it does list unusual, obscure, and preposterous
words, it also lists many that are not (_clyster, cloaca,
clabber, clonic, claqueur, cimmerian, cicada, chrestomathy,
cidevant, cist, clerihew, clepsydra_—all words known to the
average literate person).  Some are inaccurately or poorly
defined: &ldquo;_churriguerism_...grossly ornamental architecture&rdquo;
instead of &ldquo;the practice of designing grossly ornamental
architecture&rdquo;; &ldquo;_pleonastic_...pertaining to oral
or written repetitiousness&rdquo;; &ldquo;_tribadism_...mutual genital fondling
between lesbians.&rdquo;  Inconsistencies and nonparallelisms
abound: _cisatlantic_ is in but not _cisalpine_;
_tramontane_ but not _cismontane; poikilothermal_ but not
_homoiothermal_.  Some words are not properly English at
all, appearing to be nonce borrowings: _jadu, jama, jambee,
jamdani, jami, jampan, jararacussu, jasey, Jataka, jauk,
jenna, jeziah, jheel, jhool, jicara,...ka, kaaba, kaama,
kabaya, kaberu, kaffiyeh, kaha._

Mr. Byrne, in the Editor's Introduction, writes, &ldquo;Incredible
as it may seem, every entry in this book, even the most ludicrous, has been accepted as a formal or legitimate
word by at least one major dictionary.  The dignity that
goes with endorsement by lexicographers of trusted sobriety...etc.&rdquo;
I am sorry to say that both Mr. and Mrs.
Byrne have misconstrued the function--nay, the duty--of
the lexicographer, who neither accepts nor rejects but, with
scholarly aplomb, merely records.

In short, it is difficult to work up much enthusiasm for
this book: I predict for it a long life on the warehouse
shelves of the remainder booksellers.

## Review: _STRICTLY SPEAKING_
Edwin Newman, Bobbs-Merrill, 1974

Linguists, especially lexicographers, are bound by a
scholarly oath to describe--neither to prescribe nor pro-scribe--language,
and their mission is to record, in as
scientific and as unbiased a manner as possible, their observations
on language and on how and why it functions.
However, as a linguist and lexicographer, I must confess
publicly to a form of schizophrenia that I believe afflicts
many of my colleagues as well, but to which they might
not admit very readily.  The schism occurs between what
I _do_ about language, professionally, and what I _feel_ about
language, emotionally.  I think I can be objective about
utterances like _he don't, I know who you mean, ain't that
great, and real good_ as &ldquo;typical of a particular linguistic
level and/or dialect&rdquo;; but I cannot bring myself to use them
nor do I condone my children's use of them, for I consider
them marks of poor education and poor style.  I am a
linguistic snob.

The stimulus for this confession is the subject book of
this review, for, from the advance publicity for Newman's
book, I expected to be raising a supercilious eyebrow
(_there's_ an etymological redundancy for you!) at someone's
rantings about the unfortunate yet ineluctable fact
that &ldquo;They don't speak English the way they used to!&rdquo;
My professional hackles rise; my emotions find solace in a
kindred soul.  However--I was misled.  Not by the book
itself, which doesn't appear to have been read by the
publicity department, but by the publisher's advance
publicity, which describes a book somewhat different from
the one published.  _Strictly Speaking_ is an interesting, often
hilarious, unevenly organized collection of chapters in
which Newman vents his spleen on the written and oral
journalism of the day.  In general, he is right; he is correct
more often than not.  But on occasion he slips, as on the
subject of _convince_ to (as in _It may be impossible to convince
many people to stop smoking_):

You may convince that.  You may convince of.  You may
not convince to.

The object of _convince_ may be a noun (_I convinced him_)
or a noun phrase, usually (when not in passive constructions)
found as a complementary object of a person or
pronoun: _I convinced him [that he ought to go_], where
the complement is in brackets; _I convinced him of [his
right to remain_], where the of is the particle used, idiomatically,
with _convince; I convinced him [to go with me_],
where the complementary noun clause happens to be an
infinitive, _to go_.  Nothing could be more idiomatic, proper
English.  Never content to rely on myself as a sole informant,
I checked about a bit (_Merriam-Webster III, OED_
and _Supplements, Fowler, Horwill, Evans, White, Alford,
Hodgson_, etc.), yet could find not a single syllable on
_convince_, let alone _convince_ to.  Even _The American Heritage
Dictionary_, with its stable of proscriptive literati, went
no further than _The Random House Dictionary_, which
merely observed that _convince_ is &ldquo;often fol. by _of_.&rdquo;  Maybe
we ought to convince Newman to write &ldquo;I shall not contrive
imaginary rules for English style and syntax&rdquo; on the
blackboard 500 times.

There are other inconsistencies in the book.  For instance,
Newman doesn't seem to be able to remember how many
years he spent as drama reviewer for NBC, five (pp. 10,
103) or six (p. 50).  He offers some amusing, if snide comments
about the wire services' love for middle initials, then
lists himself as Edwin H. Newman on the copyright page,
though elsewhere he appears as just Edwin Newman.  He
uses &ldquo;and/or,&rdquo; which surprises me, he misdefines _lordosis_,
and he allows, &ldquo;he anchored&rdquo; to appear in the jacket blurb
about his NBC activities (that is, not about his sailing
activities).  Other objections; Newman's beating of a dead
horse with his (now untimely) profuse comments on
Nixon; the final chapter, in which the author records what
he considers as some of his own best puns.  Somewhere
from the dim past I recall my father's exhortation to &ldquo;Let
others praise thee, not thine own self.&rdquo;

The book does not fulfill the promise of its rather good,
earlier chapters: it starts with a bang but ends with a
whimper (or, considering the subject matter of the final
chapter, a groan).

All this sounds very unfriendly and damning.  Nonetheless,
the book is really very amusing--even downright sidesplitting
in places--and, if the reader can overlook its shortcomings,
he will find it a very entertaining collection, with
commentary, of the foibles of those responsible for communicating
to us (badly) the (bad) news of the day.


## Review: _THE ASTONISHMENT OF WORDS_ 
Victor Proetz, University of Texas Press, 1971

In the late 1940's, I was a member of a clandestine
clique devoted to the translation--the _literal_ translation,
that is--of popular American songs into foreign languages.
The results, as you can imagine, were often hilarious: renditions
like &ldquo;Ich werde dich wirden in einem Taxi, Honig,&rdquo;
started _The Darktown Strutters Ball_, treated elsewhere, in
another version, as &ldquo;Je vais dancer hors de mes souliers,/
Quand on joue le bal de g&acirc;teau gel&eacute;e....&rdquo;  It wasn't until
years later that I discovered that the songs we thought were
romantic or humorous in English were actually rendered in
other languages in often utterly ludicrous contexts.  _Exactly
Like You_ came up in German as: &ldquo;Weil ich dich so Lieb
hab'/ Will ich Garnichts viel/ Rauchts mir nur zu schenken/
Ein Automobil!&rdquo; At this point I cannot even remember
whether _Nature Boy's_ real or fanciful words in French
are the following: &ldquo;Y avait un gars/Un gars qui &eacute;tait tout
bizarre.  On dit qu'il marchait ci et l&agrave;,/ Haut et bas,/M&ecirc;me
en Calcutta./  Un peu farouche,/Et grande de bouche,/Il
mangeait des anchois....&rdquo;  Well, you get the idea.

Now Alistair Reid comes along with an anthology
gleaned from Victor Proetz's collection of memorable translations,
but most of these are serious ones.  At least you
may take as serious this translation of _Yankee Doodle
Dandy:_

<quote>
Ein Yankee Bursch ist fix und schlank

Und niemals &uuml;berfett, Herr,

Und wo Gelag und Tanz und Gang,

Wie'n Katz so flink und nett, Herr!

Yankee, acht der K&uuml;ste gut,

Yankee doodle dandy,

Drehn und Prahlen nichts dir thut,

Yankee doodle dandy!
</quote>

Proetz, who died in 1960, was by profession an
architect; yet he pursued his hobby of collecting ungainly,
unseemly, and entertaining translations like a professional
linguist.  His amusing comments abound in this book: in
failing to find Irving Berlin's _Over There!_ in German translation,
he wrote: &ldquo;...on second thought, it would have
to be changed to 'Over Here'!&rdquo;

Among the pop stuff are nestled gems from Blake,
Brooke, E. B. and Robert Browning, Burns (can you imagine
_To A Mouse_ in German?), Lewis Carroll (_Alice's
Abenteuer im Wunderland_ in which the Cheshire Cat becomes
&ldquo;die Grinse-Katze,&rdquo; or, if you prefer the French
version, simply &ldquo;le Chat&rdquo;; and wait till you read &ldquo;Jabberwocky&rdquo;
in French and German!), Chaucer, Coleridge,
Dickens, Dickinson, and others.  All in all, this is a very
worthwhile book even on the surface, often belying its
understated scholarship but never really answering the
question of what all those Japanese and Russian whalers
say when they want to shout &ldquo;Thar She Blows!&rdquo;

#### Review: _BUZZWORDS: A Guide to the Language of Leadership_  
Robert Kirk Mueller, Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1974

_Buzzwords_ could be called &ldquo;How to Lie with Language,&rdquo;
but I suppose that is too redundant a title to have
made the grade.  Mueller ought to know about such
matters: a top executive of Arthur D. Little, a former
officer of Monsanto Chemical, he has been exposed to the
nether reaches of business jargon and the nadir of expressivity
that refuses to call a spade a shovel.

Many such terms bombard the English language continually:
some are stopped at the barriers of honesty and
common sense; many invade the lexicon like novae, only
(like novae) to subside in brilliance and originality to be
replaced by others.  Slang yields the largest harvest for this
verbal canonical fodder, but the pseudo-intelligentsia and
the illiterati provide their own creations.  There would be
no point in condemning the practice: after all, as scholars,
we are supposed to be observers of the scene, not (necessarily)
part of it.  But the mind and one's sense of taste
for language are frequently strained by language habits
that appear to be contagious.  One of my least favorites is
the use of -_person_ as a suffix to indicate that the speaker
(or writer) exhibits no sex prejudice.  _Chairperson, salesperson,
anchorperson_ and other compounds of that ilk are
sheer nonsense.  I consider myself devoid of any sex prejudice
and think that people that use such terms are probably
&ldquo;protesting too much.&rdquo;  At least, that's often the case.

Often, neologisms are coined by the semi-educated
who are oblivious of the existence of a word in the language.
Identities abound in the jargon (_construct/construction;
consumerist/consumer; disaggregate/divide or
break down_) and it is often the person lacking in _Sprachgef&uuml;hl_
who will insist on a novel coinage.  On the other hand,
there are those who want to be modern (or mod), chic,
and in and who can demonstrate their being on the qui vive
only by introducing new ways of saying the same old
things.  Some are quite resourceful--I admire the metaphoric
coinage (even _eyeball_ for 'examine, look at'; _software_
for 'computer programs' opposed to _hardware_ for
'computer equipment'; and _interface_ for 'the area where
two systems, etc., meet') more than the lexical, especially
the fanciful (e.g., _inflaccounting, infrastructure, obscurate_).

These terms and hundreds of others are documented
and defined in Mueller's book.  Most are not in any dictionaries
and, should be recorded, opinions notwithstanding.
Six short essays (chapters) dealing with various aspects
of the development of _buzzwords_ precede the glossary.
Mueller is really a _wired in white hat_ for the _verbal
model_ he has provided.  As long as we continue to be
bombarded by phrases like _B.O._ and _biological stain_, and
meaningless expressions like &ldquo;It's the real thing--Coke is!&rdquo;
and &ldquo;The Pepsi generation,&rdquo; we shall need a Mueller to
record and interpret what's going on.

#### Letters {F. G. Cassidy}
Prof. Bolinger's amusing divagations on _darn, durn,
damn_ and their tribe [VERBATIM I, 1, 1-2] leave me somewhat
agape (and that's not Greek for a love-feast).  If his
&ldquo;guesstymology&rdquo; of _darn_, etc. derived from _down_ &ldquo;is a coincidence,&rdquo;
says he, &ldquo;It is too good to be true.&rdquo;  By that logic
the only true coincidences are bad ones! Could he possibly
have meant that it's too good a coincidence _not_ to be true?

The claimed coincidence is that _down_ was in use as an
intensifier before _darn_, etc., that _darn_ is an _r_-ful repronunciation
and spelling of _down_, and that _darned_ (and presumably
_darnation_, though he does not mention it) got the
suffix by &ldquo;a kind of secondary synonymy&rdquo; from association
with _damned_ (and presumably _damnation_).  Thus _darn_ was
not in origin a minced form of _damn_ but a pronunciation
variant of _down_ which later got into &ldquo;shady company.&rdquo;

What is his evidence?  He depends indirectly on
Wright's _English Dialect Dictionary_, which dates _down_ as
an &ldquo;intensitive&rdquo; earliest from north Lincolnshire in 1877 in
the phrases _re&auml;l doon good hand_ and _a doon ohd woman_
('thoroughly old woman'), in which _down_, clearly adverbial,
would translate into Standard English as _downright_
(_OED_ sense A2)--better than as _damned_.  (In other words,
Wright was downright right to list it where he does.)

Prof. Bolinger might have backed Wright up with
evidence from Wentworth's _American Dialect Dictionary_,
where _real doon_ is echoed in an 1893 quotation from Mississippi,
_That is real down nice_, &ldquo;Used by uncultivated
whites&rdquo;; and a closely similar use is to be seen in a 1938
quotation from southeast Arkansas, _That's just hard-down
meanness_.  Proof that _down_ as an intensive did cross the
Atlantic and hangs on in dialect use.

Further backing for Wright might have been found
in _OED down_, a., sense 4, labeled _Obs_., which takes the
intensive sense (at least as an adjective meaning _down-right_)
back to 1617 in Fletcher's rather poetic _down-denials_.
The latest _OED_ quotation, square-bracketed
(why?), is from _Galt_, 1830: _down nonsense_.  This last certainly
comes closest to _darn nonsense_ as we say it today,
though still quite a distance from _damn (ed) nonsense_.

Meantime, _OED_ takes _darn, darnation, darned_ (as
'perversions of _damn, damnation, damned_') back to 1837-1840
in the phrases _darned fools_, and _darn it all_, and to
1844 in _I'll be darned_, both of which connect syntactically
far better with _damn_ and _damned_ than with _down_.  (No
evidence in Wright or elsewhere for \?\_down it all, \?\I'll be
downed, \?\a downed fool_.  The missing link.) _OED_ labels
these &ldquo;Chiefly _U.S._&rdquo;--and indeed _DAE_ documents them
back to 1789 _darn_ adv., 1808 _darn_ v., 1825 _darnation_ n.,
c1815 _darned_ a., 1806 _darned_ adv.  The 1789 quotation is
from Webster, who takes _darn_ as in _darn sweet_ to be
descended from the older word _dern_, originally meaning
'secret,' and later 'dark, dismal, dire.'  In a note preceding
the quotation, Craigie (or one of his staff) accepts this! It
has been a hardy perennial of etymology.

However, Burchfield's _OED Supplement_ Vol. 1 A-G
has now definitively knocked it out, one may hope, with a
quotation antedating that from Webster: 1781 _Pennsylvania
Jrnl_.  20 June, &ldquo;In New England prophane swearing
is so far from polite as to be criminal, and many use
substitutions such as _darn_ it, for d--n it.&rdquo;  Bolinger, at least,
has wasted no dalliance on this.

What is the upshot?  Certainly there were two forms,
_down_ and _darn_, both with intensive senses, but there the
coincidence ends.  _Down_ was English, fell from literary
use, developed no other forms, and though brought to
America had scanty use here.  _Darn_ was chiefly, perhaps in
origin, American, as were probably _darned_ and _darnation_
(see _DAE_), parallels to _damn, damned, damnation_.  That
_darn_ could be from _down_, while not impossible, is certainly
implausible.  _Darn_ had no need of _down_.  A dying _down_
could have been overrun by a lively, growing _darn_, but
this does not even qualify as an example of reinforcement.
Meantime there is the positive contemporary statement of
the 1781 quotation from the _Philadelphia Journal_.

I wish I could claim to have exploded Prof. Bolinger's
&ldquo;etymological landmine,&rdquo; but the bang is too inconsequential.
Still, darn it, it is mine....

F. G. Cassidy, University of Wisconsin

#### Letters {Archibald A. Hill}
Dwight Bolinger's amusing comment on &ldquo;Darn, Durn,
Doon, Damn,&rdquo; [VERBATIM I, 1, 1-2], is certainly right
in connecting the 'comfit-maker's oath' _darn with down_ (as
in 'right down splendid') and in describing the /-r-/ sound
as intrusive.  I believe, however, that there is a different
route of derivation which is at least possible, and which
involves different chronology.  Either in Late Middle English
or Early Modern English, the vowel in the ending of
_damned_ was lost, giving the pronunciation in which there
is a sequence /-md/, as in Modern English.  The Modern
English sequence is subject to assimilation at least in rapid
pronunciation where consciousness of the separateness of
the past ending is lost.  Such an assimilation, giving nasal
and consonant of the same point of articulation, would give
the sequence /-nd/.  This is the assimilation which gives
the modern word _ant_, from Middle English forms with
/-mt/.  The result of the assimilation in _damned_ would
then be a hypothetical form \?\/&aelig;nd/, with the same vowel as
that in _ant_.  It is true that I do not have documentation for
this assimilated form, but I believe that later history makes
the assumption that it did indeed exist at least possible.

In a study on &ldquo;Early Loss of r,&rdquo; (_PMLA_ 1940) I
found many examples of forms in which an r-sound was
lost before such consonants as _n_.  An example is _lan_ with
the vowel of _ant_, for _learn_.  Such forms, were however,
generally corrected by restoration of the r-sound, with varying
developments, giving variants such as the MnE _learn_,
and its dialect equivalent, _larn_.  Such forms are examples of
regression, which could occasionally be a little too correct,
producing r-pronunciations in words where the _r_ is not
historic.  Such a form is the modern _parsnip_, explainable
by the assumption that if _parcel_ is more elegant than _passel,
parsnip_ must be more elegant than the historic _pasnip_.  I
should then derive both _darn_ and _durn_ from the hypothetical
\?\_dan_.  There is, of course a later and general loss of all
post-vocalic _r_'s in many dialects, which would give a form
which can be approximately rendered _dahn_.  It is this form
which can be confused with _down_, since in slurred speech
the glide which occurs in _down_ can also give rise to something
very like -_ah_-.  There is only one other thing to add
to this history of the comfit-maker's oath.  In his novel, _Maid
in Waiting_, Galsworthy introduces an American character
who speaks in a dialect most strange and barbarous.  One of
his least believable expressions is 'God-darned,' which euphemizes
the relatively harmless second half, but leaves the
name of the deity undisguised.

Archibald A. Hill, University of Texas at Austin

#### Letters {Charles F. Netzow}
Professor Wescott's &ldquo;Word Chains&rdquo; [VERBATIM Vol.
I, No. 1] describes _abba, dabba, doo_ as being derived from
a comic war-whoop, and _cheery, beery, bee_ as originating
from a song refrain.

It is my belief that the Abba-Dabba Honeymoon song
is the source, it in turn taking its name from the city of
Abu-Dhabi, and the _cheery, beery, bee_ from the title of the
song _Ciribiribin_.  Whether John &ldquo;Dizzie&rdquo; Gillespie deserves
credit for _oobie, doobie, doo_ instead of simply the &ldquo;song
refrain&rdquo; accreditation shown may be debatable; in any case,
the evidence suggests Wescott's musical background is
quite light.

Despite these complaints and despite grave misgivings
about Landau's reason for his choice of topic I think VERBATIM
is off to a highly promising beginning.  Here I refer
to content as well as typography, layout, design and paper.

Charles F. Netzow<, Milwaukee, Wis.

#### Letters {Mrs. K. M. Brown}
While making the delightful discovery in VERBATIM
[Vol. I, No. 1, &ldquo;Word Chains&rdquo;] that there are other linguistics
fanatics of my ilk, I recalled a word chain to add to
your examples: _sweet, simple and girlish_.

This phrase, usually preceded by &ldquo;too,&rdquo; was used by
daughters objecting to mother's choice of &ldquo;suitable&rdquo; dresses.

Mrs. K. M. Brown, Woodcliff Lake, N.J.

#### Letters {Otto F. Reiss}
On page 3 of VERBATIM [Vol. I, No. 1] (which a
friend lent me) you mention _high, wide and handsome_.
Permit me a comment.  This phrase is more than a popular
cliche.  It describes the manner in which a well-trained
horse moves its forelegs.

Good wishes for your new publication.

Otto F. Reiss, Publisher &amp; Editor Art and Archaeology Newsletter


_Professor Wescott replies:_

I'd like to thank Messrs.  Richard Abraham, Richard
Donati, Charles Netzow, and Otto Reiss as well as the
various personal friends and professional colleagues who
responded to my article &ldquo;Word Chains&rdquo; VERBATIM (I,
1, 3).

Apologies are due to all of them, because, in my zeal
to comply with the Editor's well-taken suggestion that
authors avoid excessively technical language, I oversimplified
my definition and description of word chains.  In
addition to what I did write, I should also have stated that
what sets word chains apart from alliterative sequences like
_fair, fat and forty_ or rhyming sequences like _screwed, blued,
and tattooed_ (a favorite with my respondents!) is the fact
that their first and third components do _not_ share sounds.
Word chains--at least as I define them--resemble metal
chains in that their first and third links are not directly
connected.  Instead, they are indirectly connected by means
of the second link, which exhibits one kind of sound connection
with the first link and a different kind of sound
connection with the second.  Typically, links one and two
are connected by rhyme, and links two and three by
alliteration.  In schematic terms, a typical word chain has
the pattern AB-CB-CD, where A and C represent initial
consonants but B and D represent stressed vowels optionally
followed by final consonants, consonant clusters, or
stressless syllables.

In concrete terms, the following sequences (not cited
in VERBATIM) are canonical word chains:

<quote>
_itchy-kitchy-coo_
_higglety-pigglety-pop_

_wine, dine, and dance_
_raid, trade, and travel_

_walk-and-talk tours_
_logical dodgical death_
</quote>

Near canonical word chains deviate from canonical
ones in that they invert the order of rhyme and alliteration,
putting alliteration first and yielding the schematic pattern
AB-AC-DC.  Two examples (likewise uncited in VERBATIM)
are these:

<quote>
_Big Bow Wow_
_grunt, groan, and moan_
</quote>

Still more deviant patterns involve the use of sound-repetitions
other than rhyme or alliteration or exceed the
normal limit of three stressed forms.  Although I could cite
some new examples of these too, I would prefer to await
word from my respondents before elaborating further.
I'm still keen on getting genuine word chains from some
source besides myself!


#### Letters {Warren E. Preece}
VERBATIM is very nicely done indeed.  I enjoyed
almost everything in it and hope that it will have the long,
useful, and hopefully sprightly life that it so obviously
deserves.

The problem of words is, of course, particularly acute
for those of us who work on publications like the _Britannica_
which are based somehow on the erroneous (because clearly
illogical) assumption that simply because people speak the
same language, they understand the same language.  I look
forward to future issues of VERBATIM.

—Warren E. Preece, The General Editor, The Encyclopaedia Britannica</place>

#### Letters {Wendy Thompson}

Somehow this is not at all what I expected.  I would
appreciate your sending my money back....

—Wendy Thompson, Ravenna, N.Y.

#### Review: _WORDS AND THEIR MASTERS_
Israel Shenker, Doubleday, 1974

I must admit that reading Israel Shenker's articles in _The
N.Y. Times_ these past years did not fill me with glee, for
I always thought them somewhat superficial.  Whether or
not they have been reedited for publication in this collection,
I cannot say, but I resoundingly announce my complete
_volte-face_: these are excellent.  Although the professional
linguist's writings (as in VERBATIM) will reflect
his own opinions, hypotheses, and so forth, the reporter
must suppress his own opinions in favor of those of his
interviewees.  Shenker is expert at the technique; he writes
sympathetically, intelligently, articulately, and good-humoredly
about a subject that clearly fascinates him--
language--and about the people engaged in its study and
artistic pursuit.

There are 67 pieces in this volume of which 24 deal
with language directly, sometimes in its various guises as
communication.  Included among these are articles on
American English, British English, dictionaries, style, children's
speech, and onomastics.  Each is associated with an
interview with a practitioner in the field--Allen Walker
Read, Robert W. Burchfield, Frederic G. Cassidy, Roman
Jakobson, Noam Chomsky; each examines a different facet
of language.

The other 43 articles are entirely relevant, as well.  It is
engaging to read about Perelman, Nabokov, Van Doren,
Singer, E. B. White, Flanner, Hellman, Ionesco, Beckett,
and others who are so deeply involved in the artistic applications
of a subject treated by linguists with such scientific
aplomb.  Even Groucho is there, and rightly so, for if his
punning isn't the ultimate art, much of Groucho's humor
can be traced to his extraordinary ability to expose common
occurrences and situations by singling out their more
ludicrous characteristics and, in doing so, to make us see--
via language—the foibles of our behavior.

Although we can recommend _Words and Their Masters_
as a gift for any occasion, we urge that you be selfish—at
least this once—and get a copy for yourself: it will be a
rewarding indulgence.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v1n2_1974-09)