---
title: "Vol I, No 3"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Elements of Semantic Change  
_R. B. Lees, Professor of Linguistics Tel-Aviv University_

We seem now to have discovered all the chemical
elements necessary to account for the materials of
which the universe is composed and have even manufactured
a dozen or so unstable ones to boot.  The list
comes to some 103, ranging from the most abundant
and simplest of all, hydrogen, to the transuranic monsters,
nobelium and lawrencium.

Each has its name, for convenience, though these
names convey almost no interesting information about
the elements that bear them.  They are not even all internationally
uniform: only the most technical and
recently adopted ones are roughly the same in almost
all languages.  Each element also has an internationally
adopted, standard symbol derived from a name; thus
some of these do not correspond to the name in most
languages.  For example, the symbol _Fe_ is used everywhere
for iron, the 26th element in the Periodic Table,
but that symbol is reminiscent of the name of this
common metal only in Latin (_ferrum_) and languages
derived from Latin (French _fer_).  But even Spanish
_hierro_ is already becoming opaque.

It is easy to see why the names of roughly the
same list of elements fail to correspond from language
to language.  These are by and large the elements for
which there is likely to be a nonchemical, native, or
old loan name.  Moreover, some languages have constructed
a few modern terms for others, especially
when the element or its most familiar compounds are
abundant or likely to be widely known.

Thus, in a variety of unrelated languages, sulfur,
iron, copper, silver, tin, gold, mercury, and lead are
very likely to have native names; sometimes also zinc,
carbon, arsenic, and silicon.  The former eight were
known to some peoples prehistorically, and, except
for tin and mercury, are found in the free state in
nature.

Some native names are merely loan translations.
Thus, Russian _ugl,erod_ and Hebrew _pahman_ are
calques on German _Kohlenstoff_ 'carbon,' derived respectively
from _ugol_, and _peham_ 'coal.'  The Japanese
characters for mercury are _sui_ for 'water' followed
by _gin_ for 'silver,' a perfect calque on the Greek:
_hydr&aacute;rgyros=h&yacute;d&omacr;r_ 'water' + _&aacute;rgyros_ 'silver' (giving
latin _hydrargyrus_, hence the chemical symbol _Hg_).

Hebrew even has a little series, mostly loan translations,
some new creations on a semantically similar
pattern: _zarh&aacute;n_ 'phosphorus' from _zer&aacute;h_ 'shining' (_ph&omacr;s_
'light'), _sid&aacute;n_ 'calcium' from _sid_ 'lime' (_calx_ 'lime'),
_e&scaron;lagan_ 'potassium' from _e&scaron;l&aacute;g_ 'potash,' _tsor&aacute;n_ 'silicon'
from _tsur_ 'rock' (_silex_ 'flint'), and _avn&aacute;n_ 'lithium' from
_&eacute;ven_ 'stone' (_l&iacute;thos_ 'stone').

Also, a few elements are named for common uses
of a compound; thus, for arsenic Turkish can use (beside
Persian-derived _zirn&iacute;k_) _si&ccaron;&aacute;notu_, lit. 'shitter-herb,'
i.e., 'rat poison' (a common name for the mouse and
rat is _si&ccaron;&aacute;n_ 'defecator').  Similarly, Russian has _my&scaron;,yak_,
probably derived from _my&scaron;_ 'mouse' from the use of
arsenicals as rodent poisons.  Also, antimony is called
in Turkish _s&uuml;rm&eacute; ta&scaron;i_ 'smearing stone' (also _antimon_)
from the ancient use of stibium (mineral antimony
sulfide) as an eye cosmetic.  Here Russian has borrowed
the Turkic verbal noun _s&uuml;rm&eacute;_ as _sur,ma_ 'antimony.'
(The W. Semitic name for this same Sb\?\2S\?\3, stibnite,
a lead-gray metallic mineral, in Hebrew _koh&aacute;l_,
Arabic _al-kahl_, Aramaic _kuhl&amacr;_, etc., gave rise to a long
semantic development during alchemical times from
'stibium eye-shadow' to 'fine powder' to 'essence' to
'spirits of grape,' i.e., 'alcohol' = _al-kohl_.)

Now, among the various borrowings and loan-translations
for element names there are two that incorporate
a kind of chemical confusion or misunderstanding,
passed on from language to language, and
authorized by modern language academies, whose
members ought to know better.

The first is the name for nitrogen, element number
7.  It was named _nitrog&eacute;ne_ in French by Jean-Antoine
Chaptal in 1790 as a compound of Greek
_n&iacute;tron_ 'sodium carbonate' and -_gen&emacr;s_ 'born of, produced
by.'  But what on earth is the connection between
sodium carbonate, Na\?\2CO\?\3, or washing soda,
and the relatively inert atmospheric gas nitrogen, N?
Surely no chemical relation between soda and nitrogen
accounts for Chaptal's choice.  The answer goes back
to a confusion in the 16th Century between two alchemical
names used, e.g., by Ram&oacute;n Lull (Raymondus
Lullius, c. 1235-1315).  Lull called soda _nitrum_,
and he called saltpeter _sal nitri_.  His word _nitrum_ (from
Latin from Greek _n&iacute;tron_) continued on, along with
_nitre_, as names for saltpeter (from _sal petrae_), i.e.,
potassium nitrate.  Another form, _natron_, is still used
for soda, i.e., sodium carbonate.  (The word _nitre_
'KNO\?\3' is from French _nitre_ from Latin _nitrum_ from
Greek _n&iacute;tron_ 'native Na\?\2CO\?\3, natron' from either
Egyptian _ntry_ or from Hebrew _n&eacute;ter_, cognate of Akkadian
_nitiru_; the word _natron_ is from Spanish _natr&oacute;n_
from Arabic _natr&umacr;n_; from Greek _n&iacute;tron_.)

The irony here is that French later itself avoided
the confusion when Lavoisier named the gas _azote_
(from _a_- 'not' + _z&omacr;&emacr;_ 'life') since he observed that
nitrogen, the major component of air, will not itself
support life.  Other languages either borrowed the
French _azote_ (e.g., Russian _azot_) or calqued it (e.g.,
German _Stickstoff_ 'choke-damp,' further calqued to
Hebrew _hanq&aacute;n_ from _h&eacute;neq_ 'suffocation').

Finally, having straightened out French nitrogen
to _azote_, Lavoisier himself now generated a new confusion
which nearly everyone inherits today.  He
studied the other major atmospheric gas, oxygen, and
its mate in water, hydrogen.  In 1787 he named the
latter _hydrog&eacute;ne_ for its origin in the decomposition of
water (from _h&yacute;d&omacr;r_ 'water'), and that term is either
borrowed into other languages (e.g., Turkish _idrojen_,
Hungarian _hidrog&eacute;n_, or Arabic _idr&umacr;j&imacr;n_), or it is
calqued (e.g., Hebrew _maym&aacute;n_ from _m&aacute;yim_ 'water', or
German _Wasserstoff_, or Russian _vodorod_, or Japanese
_sui-so_ 'water element').

But, when creating a modern theory of combustion
to replace the fanciful phlogiston theory, Lavoisier
investigated the properties of oxides and of _oxyg&eacute;ne,_
as he called the life-supporting gas, constituting 21%
of the air and about half of everything on the earth.

Where did he get this name in 1777?  The gas
had been isolated first by Joseph Priestley in 1774,
who called it &ldquo;dephlogisticated air,&rdquo; for such was the
prevailing view of combustion at that time.  Priestley's
investigations no doubt stimulated Lavoisier later to
continue his experiments with combustion and the
calcining of metals.  Since to explain his 1772 results
on the increase in weight of burned sulfur, phosphorus,
or lead, one would have to assign to phlogiston a negative
weight (_sic!_), he saw that burning must be an absorption
of something, and he was able to identify the
burner as Priestley's &ldquo;dephlogisticated air.&rdquo;

Since this substance was typically associated with
metallic oxides, which in turn usually produced acids
in aqueous solution (e.g., sulfur trioxide, when dissolved
in water, yields sulfuric acid), Lavoisier named
the gas _oxy-g&egrave;ne_ (from Greek _ox&yacute;s_ 'sharp, acidic').

Despite his having laid the very foundations of
modern chemistry, Lavoisier lost his head in that
French fracas before he could find that what is responsible
for acid formation is not oxygen, but hydrogen,
his water generator! (Notice, e.g., that muriatic acid is
hydrogen chloride, HCI, with no oxygen at all.)  This
mistake was never corrected in the names, and now
everyone has his oxygen named for sourness:

| language | word |
|-----------| ---------|
| Turkish     | _oksijen_ |
| Hebrew      | _hamts&aacute;n from h&oacute;mets_ 'vinegar' |
| German      | _Sauerstoff_ |
| Russian     | _kislorod_ from _kisly&iacute;_ 'sour' |
| Arabic      | _&umacr;ks&imacr;f&imacr;n_ |
| Hungarian   | _oxig&eacute;n_ |
| Japanese    |  _san-so_ for 'acid-element' |

Such was the authority of Lavoisier's French, or,
even more probably, of 19th-century German chemistry,
with its _Sauerstoff_, that reviving languages like
modern Hebrew simply took over Lavoisier's little
slip and perpetuated the chemical confusion.


### INTER ALIA I.3.a

... The Director of Radcliffe's Course in Publishing Procedures,
Harvard Summer School, is Mrs. Diggory Venn.
... Pat Sheehan, on &ldquo;Action News&rdquo; (WTNH New Haven)
at 11:00 P.M. on May 27, 1974, referred to E. Howard
Hunt as &ldquo;the convicted Watergate bugger.&rdquo;  ... If you
like entertaining, literate comment about language, you
should be reading Thomas H. Middleton's &ldquo;Light Refractions&rdquo;
in the (fortnightly) _Saturday Review/World_ ....
&ldquo; ...For many New Yorkers, the idea of 'country' itself is
vague. For many it means second homes, hotels, inns and
relatives in such places as the Hamptons, Bucks County,
the Berkshires and the Catskills.  For others it is a patch of
grass bordering a parking lot on the West Side Highway,
or a grove with a rusty barbecue hibachi in Van Cortlandt
Park. 'Country' is where you go on the fourth of July weekend
to escape from your city responsibilities, and when
country-time ends, re-entry can be traumatic....&rdquo;  [_NY
Times_, 8 July 1974, Michael T. Kaufman]... The following
responses appeared in the Letters column of _The
Sunday_ [London] _Times_, 23 June 1974, under &ldquo;I am, therefore
it's me&rdquo;:


&square; One really must take issue with Lt.-Col. R. B. Robinson
and his slander of the Latin language (Letters, last
week); quite apart from the fact that learning Latin was
an outlook and a discipline in itself, much of the Englishman's
inability to spell can be put down to lack of Latin
knowledge.

How else should one decide whether a word ends in -ant
or -ent and many other instances?  Not for nothing did
Benjamin Jonson talk about &ldquo;Latin, queen of the tongues.&rdquo;
Far worse, however, is the fact that Mr. Robinson refers to
&ldquo;C'est moi&rdquo; and calls the &ldquo;moi&rdquo; an accusative.  This word is
a disjunctive personal pronoun and is as much a nominative
as &ldquo;je,&rdquo; merely being more stressed.  If, though, Mr. Robinson
would have liked to say that &ldquo;It's me&rdquo; is philologically
speaking perfectly correct, as the &ldquo;me&rdquo; is probably a disjunctive,
this view is quite acceptable.  —_David Wendon, Lowestoft_.

&square;  Lt.-Col. Robinson was indeed taught English badly.
The fault lies not with Latin grammar but with its abuse
by inept pedagogues.

Logic, not Latin, makes the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; intransitive.
Nevertheless, &ldquo;it's me&rdquo; is perfectly acceptable colloquial
usage; it's comfortable (as Fowler said in a different context)
and your correspondent should feel free to use it, and
not to blame onto Latin the results of sloppy teaching or
thinking.  —_(Mrs.) Marion Friedmann, London NW3_.

&square;  Lt.-Col. Robinson's distaste for constructions such as
&ldquo;This was given to my wife and I as a wedding present&rdquo;
will be shared by many especially when the solecism is
foisted in stage and TV performances upon authors who
did not use it (as in the TV production of Jane Austen's
Emma, in which Emma is made to say &ldquo;between Miss Fairfax
and I,&rdquo; where the text, chapter 24 has me).
But it would be interesting to learn from some authority
on historical English usage whether the thing was once a
permissible colloquialism (like &ldquo;was you?&rdquo;  now very vulgar).
In Goldsmith's She Stoops to Conquer, Mrs. Hardcastle
says to Tony Lumpkin: &ldquo;Give your father and I some
of your company&rdquo;; and a character in Ben Jonson's Bartholomew
Fayre says (V. iv 253): &ldquo;Between you and I, sir, we
do but make show.&rdquo;  Did this sort of thing go underground
and reappear in modern times?  —_J. F. Killeen, Galway.

&square;  Baffled by the usage of &ldquo;I&rdquo; and &ldquo;me,&rdquo; Colonel Robinson's
friend should fall back on the safety and modesty of
&ldquo;myself.&rdquo; —_D. M. Greenhalgh, Southampton_.




## An Intolerant View of Intolerance
_Laurence Urdang, Editor, VERBATIM_

Notwithstanding the redundancy in the title, I
consider myself--as, I am sure, everyone regards
himself--a tolerant human being: I try to avoid prejudice
in all things.  Yet I must confess to a seemingly
uncorrectable, irrepressible foible: I am intolerant of
intolerance, especially when it comes to language.
Language, as we all know, is an uncommon denominator:
not everyone uses it in the same way.  In fact,
it is likely that no two people use it in identical ways.
When we have been taught that _like_ is a preposition,
not an adverb or conjunction substitutable for _as_ in
constructions like _Do as I say, not as I do_, and then
encounter someone who does just that, the very fact
that the other person speaks or writes in that fashion
tells us something about him.  It may tell us that he is
trying to be &ldquo;in&rdquo; by being colloquial with his up-to-date
slang, or it may tell us that he is an unfortunate
who has not had the benefits of our (superior) education.
But it cannot be denied that usage informs us
about the user.  If everyone spoke and wrote in exactly
the same way, saying &ldquo;If I were he&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;If I
was him,&rdquo; &ldquo;She doesn't love me&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;She don't
love me,&rdquo; &ldquo;Between her and me&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;Between
she and I,&rdquo; &ldquo;nuclear&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;nucular,&rdquo; and so on,
not only would it be difficult to tell one speaker from
another in _level_ and expressivity, but listening to
speech and reading writing would prove an unsupportable
bore.

A measure of my irritation with intolerance stems
from my general experience with purists who want
everyone to speak the way they do (which isn't always
formally proper, either, mind you), but the precipitating
catalyst of my present dyspepsia was an article
by Jean Stafford, &ldquo;At This Point in Time, TV Is Murdering
the English Language,&rdquo; which appeared in the
(Sunday) _New York Times_, 15 September 1974.  In it,
this self-appointed Guardian of the English Language
(I must interrupt myself here to point out that everyone
who is intolerant of the way others use English is,
by definition, a &ldquo;Guardian of the English Language&rdquo;;
&ldquo;self-appointed&rdquo; is a truistic propagandism since such
Guardians are seldom appointed by a committee; by
this token, I suppose I am an appointed--by implication--Assailant
of the English Language.  I have a
nagging suspicion that either the roles or the titles
have got somehow reversed.  Anyway,...) this Ste.
Peter who would bar from the Elysian Fields any who
violate the Rules as she sees them condemns a number
of grammatical, semantic, and syntactic anomalies
which, in her view, spell the doom of civilization.  I
am tempted to add, &ldquo;...as we know it,&rdquo; one of the
more boring clich&eacute;s of our time, but I shall restrain
myself.

Here, in (mercifully) abbreviated form, is a selection
from those stylistic solecisms that Miss Stafford
singled out for vituperative comment:

&ldquo;[Let us] declare a honeymoon.&rdquo;  --Walter Cronkite.
Qy: How is a honeymoon declared?

_diaper_ &ldquo;has three syllables, not two.&rdquo;  --Various commercials.

&ldquo;nucular&rdquo; for _nuclear_.  --Pres. Eisenhower.

_hopefully_,... --Pres. Kennedy.

&ldquo;All aspirin is not alike.&rdquo; --TV commercial.

&ldquo;nauseous&rdquo; for _nauseated_.  --TV commercial.

_gasid_ indigestion.  --Various commercials.

&ldquo;You get a lot of dirt with kids; you get a lot of _clean_
with Tide.&rdquo;  --TV commercial.  Qy: When did _clean_
become a noun?

&ldquo;Adhesive that will really _bond_ the denture to the
gums.&rdquo;  --TV commercial.

_guesstimate_.  --prevalent.

&ldquo;...a system for learning in depth...&rdquo; --_Britannica_
commercial.

_opt for_.  --prevalent clich&eacute;.

_life style_.  --prevalent clich&eacute;.

_irregardless_.  --prevalent tautology.

_funded_.  --use of noun as verb.

_feedback_.  --semantic shift.

_input_.  --semantic shift.

_career experiences_.  --bureaucratic gobbledygook.

&ldquo;Economy doesn't have to be dull.&rdquo;  --TV commercial.

_self-destruct_.  --nonword.

&ldquo;enormity&rdquo; for _hugeness, enormousness, great importance_.

_no-commenting_.  --use of phrase as a verb.

_stonewalling_.  --neologistic clich&eacute;.

_specificity_.  --clich&eacute;.

&ldquo;At this point in time,...&rdquo; --wordy clich&eacute; for _now,
at present_.

_phased out_.  --semantic shift and clich&eacute;.

-_wise_.  --trite suffix for making nouns into adverbs.

It would be very dull, indeed, to examine each one of
these citations, but a few generalizations seem to be
in order.  First of all, the problems can be classified into
relatively few categories:


(1)  redundancies and tautologies: _irregardless_

(2)  boredom of the clich&eacute;: _guesstimate, opt for, life
style, specificity, stonewalling, -wise, At this point in
time,_ etc.

(3)  intentional/unintentional and/or illogical gobbledygook:
_career experiences, Economy doesn't have
to be dull,_ etc.

(4)  metaphor: _declare a honeymoon, in depth, feedback,
input, phased out, bond,_ etc.

(5)  linguistic change: _clean, funded, no-commenting,_
etc.

(6)  semantic change: _nauseous, bond, enormity,_ etc.

(7)  neologisms, blends, etc.: _guesstimate, self-destruct,
stonewalling, gasid_ (_indigestion_), etc.


As can be seen--and I haven't tried being exhaustive
in this superficial analysis--some of the more
heinous examples cited by Miss Stafford fall into more
than one category.  It is noteworthy that except for
classifications 1, 2, and 3, which are usually so ephemeral
as to have little or no effect on language (however
they may affect thinking, patience, and nerves),
all these categories are the stuff of which language is
made.  Change is one of the definitive characteristics
of language, despite Miss Stafford's unwillingness to
recognize it.  Critics of contemporary language have
always been among us—Richard Grant White was a
famous Victorian example—but the language has survived
despite their quixotic failings.  In fact, if, fifty
years later, one examines the solecisms which they
often became most excited and scornful about, it often
turns out either that the same condemned usages are
still the object of Guardians' censure or that they have
become standard, and it is hard to understand what
the fuss was all about.

Miss Stafford, self-appointed (and, I suspect,
_Times_-supported) Defender of the Faith in the English
Language, fails to recognize these elementary
facts.  After all, if everyone had her gifts, chances are
she never would have received her Pulitzer Prize—if
one could be awarded at all.  If she needs evidence that
language changes, let her analyze and compare with
Modern English writings of which she approves the
writings of Spenser, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton,
Austen, and other English &ldquo;masters of style&rdquo; whose
writings need varying degrees of interpretation, depending
on their remove from the contemporary
reader.

The problem, which seems to elude Miss Stafford,
lies not with TV, which is, after all, merely the medium
of expression and not the expression itself, but with
the poor _style_, not the poor language.  Yet Miss Stafford,
either blinded by her contumelious zeal or hanging
on for dear life as her runaway hobby horse gallops
into the sunset (possibly both), deplores the povertystricken
imagery that is often the result of a combination
of an impoverished imagination and a hyperactive
gift of gab instead of ignoring it, comforted by the
knowledge that it will all soon dry up and blow away.

In short, she is playing right into the hands of
those she criticizes, for all they want is to be attended
to and remembered, and, through her articles, Miss
Stafford is elevating them to a higher memorial than
they could otherwise merit.  Come to think of it.  I
should never have written this article.



### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: _-oon_

John P. Hughes, St. Peter's College 

The English language has, as a heritage from Latin,
a most remarkable suffix.  It is amazing how versatile it is.

The story begins in Latin, where a number of nouns
that ended in _-o_ in the nominative had a genitive ending
in _-onis_, like _leo_, _leonis 'lion'_, and _latro, latronis_ 'thief.'
Somehow, this type of ending became generalized into
a suffix meaning 'big,' 'strong,' 'dominant,' and was added
to other words to give them this meaning or coloring.
The suffix appears as _-one_ in Italian, _-on_ in French, _-&oacute;n_
in Spanish, and _-oon_ in English.  Thus, in Italian, _libro_
is 'book' and _librone_ is 'big book,' _ragazzo_ is 'boy' and
_ragazzone_ is 'big boy,' and so on.  In English (following
Spanish) a _doubloon_ was a coin worth two pesetas--the
pirates' 'piece of eight,' because the peseta was equivalent
to four reals.  It is said that our dollar sign developed from
the symbol for the doubloon: 8.

Some idea of the versatility of the _-oon_ suffix will
emerge if one traces the words having this ending that
have lost the semantic connection with their original stems.
For instance, a _balloon_ is a big _ball_, a _pontoon_ a big
_bridge_ (from Romance _pont, ponte_), probably in contrast
with a rustic arch.  From _sala_, 'room,' come French _salon_,
with its implied elegance, and English _saloon_, which, itself,
has split into American 'a large room for drinking, a barroom'
and British 'a large room' (dining _saloon_) and 'a
roomy car, sedan.'  From Latin _campus_, 'field of battle,'
come Spanish _campear_ 'to fight' and _campe&oacute;n_, ultimately
yielding English _champion_, 'big fighter.'  The suffix can also
be found attached to non-Romance stems, e.g., _spittoon_.

It is likely that a search for words ending in _-oon_ will
lead to many more surprising discoveries!


_Editor's Note:_ It is with regret that we note, shortly following
the receipt of the preceding, the untimely death of our
friend, Professor Hughes.  A specialist in Celtic languages,
John Hughes led an academic life that will prove to be of
lasting influence on those whom he taught so well.
For those who may doubt that their work on words ending
in _-oon_ may occupy them for many m-oons to come,
here is a partial list of those they might like to examine:
(alphabetized from the right): _baboon, racoon, cocoon,
tycoon, rigadoon, buffoon, lagoon, dragoon, typhoon,
pantaloon, simoon, lampoon, harpoon, macaroon, picaroon,
vinegaroon, maroon, gadroon, quadroon, octoroon,
patroon, poltroon, platoon, cartoon, festoon._  And let the
folk etymologist beware!


### Reviews: THE HARVARD CONCORDANCE TO SHAKESPEARE  
_Marvin Spevack, Belknap Press, 1974_

Professor Spevack is credited as compiler, but the
computer that did all the dogwork gets nary a mention.
This one-volume work, which we haven't seen but which
we are reviewing from a brochure that contains ample
samples, would be useful not only to the Shakespeare
scholar but to the speechwriter and to anyone who really
wants a detailed reference work listing every occurrence
of every word in all of the Bard's works.

Pick a key word--say, _torture_--and find it immediately
in the alphabetical listing.  Statistical data shows that it
appears 33 times, has a frequency of .0037%, that 31 of the
references appear in verse and 2 in prose.  There follows a
complete list of all references accompanied by some brief
identifying context:

<quote>
i will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the
</quote>

That's pretty short, but there follows the reference &ldquo;WIV
3.02.40 P&rdquo; which I take to mean &ldquo;from _The Merry Wives
of Windsor_, Act III, Scene 2, line 40.&rdquo;  What could be
easier?  Of course, you have to have a complete set of
Shakespeare handy, but what household could be considered
complete without one?

It took Professor Spevack more than nine years to
complete this work—29,000 entries yielding 500,000 quotations,
1600 pages in all—and every syllable of it is worth
the effort.  It should be a basic work of reference for all
who love Shakespeare and language.


### INTER ALIA I.3.b

&ldquo;Giving the English language to the Americans is like
giving sex to small children: they know it's important but
they don't know what to do with it.&rdquo; [Morton Cooper,
American author of _The Queen_, as reported in _The Times_
(London), 1 November 1974]...&ldquo;Some races are more
prone to use filthy language than others, Mr. Justice Faulks
said in the Family Division of the High Court yesterday.
He was dealing with the divorce case of a Jamaican couple.
The judge, who yesterday criticized Britain's 'pink knickers'
divorce laws, added: 'But in my years on the Bench I have
never given anybody a divorce because of rude language.' &rdquo;
[_The Times_ (London), 5 October 1974]... &ldquo;The Greeks
do not have a word for it, and that caused all the trouble.
The English word is 'rubbish.'  When the USIS [in Athens]
tried to translate it, they came up with a slangy Greek
expression not generally used in polite company, let alone
in official documents.  The result was a diplomatic brouhaha
that added to the tension between Athens and Washington.
Last week several European newspapers reported that the
American Sixth Fleet had stopped Greek aircraft from joining
the fighting in Cyprus.  A State Department spokesman,
asked for a comment on the report, said: 'It is just complete
rubbish.'...  No Greek word precisely conveyed
the meaning of 'rubbish' in the sense of 'garbage.'  But the
Americans wanted something forceful, so they used the
Greek word 'bourthes.'  'Bourthes' can be translated in
many ways, such as hot air or baloney or a lot of bull.
...a columnist...wrote that 'bourthes' was 'very expressive
and to the point, and now that the U.S. Embassy
has honored it with its authority, it gains, I believe, special
importance and may soon be very widely used.' &rdquo; [_The
New York Times_, 31 August 1974]

Even within English problems can crop up in the
writing of lucid, unambiguous prose.  The very lexicon
mocks us!  Here are five words with senses that are almost
direct antonyms of one another:

_scan_--'to examine closely' vs. 'to look over hurriedly'

_hew_--'to cut down or away' vs. 'to adhere closely'

_cleave_--'to split' vs. 'to cling closely'

_impregnable_--'pregnable' vs. 'not pregnable'

_inflammable_--'not flammable' vs. 'highly flammable'

_clip_--'to cut off' vs. 'to hold together'

Admittedly, such words may be homographs--for instance,
the two _clips_, though spelled and pronounced identically,
have different etymologies; but what difference should that
make?  One doesn't announce the etymology of each word
he uses in speech or writing.

_Mademoiselle_ for September 1974 published an article
on Eric Partridge's _Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional
English_ and _A Dictionary of the Underworld, British and
American_.

On the Op-Ed Page of _The New York Times_, William
Safire, in an excellent essay on Webster's birthday, notes
that at the Senate hearings the word most frequently misspelled
was _misprision_, being replaced by _coverup_, which
&ldquo;had lost its hyphen and thus its virginity,&rdquo; immediately
suggesting a hymen/hyphen play on words.  _The Times_,
like a dutiful parent, still maintains the hyphenated form,
_cover-up_, rather than the copulated form, the marriage not
having been consummated....  In the same (sexual) vein,
_The Times Book Review_ [27 October 1974], in a review of
Peter De Vries' _The Glory of the Hummingbird_, included,
in a &ldquo;shock of recognition&rdquo; tone, the phrase, &ldquo;lovers' loins
'sweetly hyphenated.' &rdquo; (_Hyphen_, from Greek, meant
'under one.') [C. J. Tamulonis, _Pottsville, Pa_.]

Bill, an American friend of ours with a business in
Berlin, visited us in the U.S. with his fiancee, a native-born
German girl with just a fair, conversational grasp of English.
I had picked up a little German as a child, so I asked
Berta, &ldquo;Just how can you be sure when to use the polite
or familiar forms in German?  That 'Sie' and 'du' always
puzzle me.  Does it depend on age, or family, or rank in
society, or what?&rdquo;  She started to answer, when I continued,
&ldquo;Now if I were all dressed up in Berlin and wanted
to ask directions of a dirty, old, street-cleaner, would I use
'Sie' or 'du'?&rdquo;  Again, before Berta could answer, her fiance
interjected, &ldquo;I think that you'd use 'du' if he's a peon.&rdquo;
Berta broke up; gasping with laughter, she finally replied,
&ldquo;Bill, what grammatical difference does it make if he's
a-pee-in' in the street or not?!&rdquo;  Whereupon we all collapsed
and refilled our steins.  [George J. Grieshaber, _Lockland,
Ohio_]


### Letters {Harold Orton}
I have just received a copy of VERBATIM for September.
I would like to congratulate you on the very interesting
production which is both scholarly and entertaining.
I am glad that you have got together a team of writers who
can produce such excellent articles.
—Harold Orton, Professor Emeritus, University of Leeds

### Letters {Ethel Strainchamps}
Edwin Newman was not &ldquo;contriving an imaginary
rule for English style and syntax&rdquo; when he proscribed
_convince to_ [referred to in the review of _Strictly Speaking_,
by Edwin Newman, in VERBATIM I, 2].  He was simply
stating an obsolete rule.

_Convince_ to did not surface until the 1950's; therefore
there was no reason for Fowler, Evans, and others to make
judgment on it, and there were no cites for the big dictionaries
to include.  Follett/Barzun (1966) comes out against
it, however--too late, as usual--on the grounds that it is
&ldquo;unidiomatic,&rdquo; furnishing numerous examples from varied
sources that inadvertently prove the adjective to be inapplicable.

Newman is also supported by _The Random House
Dictionary_ (also 1966).  The _College Edition_, edited by
one Laurence Urdang, refers us at _convince_ to _persuade_
for synonyms.  There we learn that _persuade_ and _induce_
are followed by _to_, but: &ldquo;Only when followed by a _that_-clause
may CONVINCE refer to winning a person to a course
of action: _I convinced her that she should go_.&rdquo;  That was
rather far along in the game for such a ruling.  I have 1961
and 1962 cites from Paul Pickrel (_Harper's_), Harvey
Shapiro (_N.Y. Times Book Review_), Jason Epstein (_Commentary_),
and Joseph Wechsberg (_Esquire_), plus anonymous
ones from _Time, Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal_,
etc.  (My first year of collecting was 1961, but the construction
was already quite familiar to me by then.)

If Edwin Newman had been relying on _Random
House_ for his lexicographical information, he must be feeling
betrayed.
—Ethel Strainchamps, New York, N.Y.

_Perhaps we didn't express ourselves as fully as we
might have in the review of_ Strictly Speaking.  _English
allows for many alternative syntactic constructions that,
lexically/semantically, may say the same thing, differing
only in style.  Thus, I regard constructions like_ I convinced
(persuaded, urged, _etc._) her to go _as the lexical/semantic
equivalent of_ I convinced (persuaded, urged, etc.) her
that she should go, _though they might differ in style.  The
usage books cited in the review are silent on the subject of_
convince to, _and such silence must be construed as meaning
that the construction is acceptable in standard English.
The usage notes in_ The Random House Dictionaries _were
prepared by Theodore H. Bernstein of_ The New York
Times, _and they do not, necessarily, reflect the views of the
editors of those dictionaries._  --Editor.

### Letters {Larry Barker}
I love words, and so far I like VERBATIM.

But the review of _Mrs. Byrne's Dictionary_ in the second
issue underlined my fears.  If _clyster, clonic, chrestomathy,
cidevant, clerihew_, and _clepsydra_ are &ldquo;known to
the average literate person,&rdquo; then I can only be thankful
that VERBATIM is a quarterly so I'll have time to look up
all the words.

All this by way of saying that I hope, as you edit for
your readership, you'll keep the lower end of the literacy
scale in mind.  If you will, then I'll dedicate myself to
becoming an average literate person--which I thought I
was.

Meet you half way.
—Larry Barker, Louisville, Ky.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v1n3_1974-12)