---
title: "Vol I, No 4"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---


## Family Words in English [^1]
_Allen Walker Read, Emeritus Professor of English, Columbia University_

Students of language have long been aware that
every speaker participates in a number of overlapping
speech communities.  The broadest speech
community is that using &ldquo;the language&rdquo; itself.  In the
case of English, this is the body of speakers not only
in the home area of the British Isles but in the farflung
regions where English has been carried.  Then
there are speech communities of descending size, on
the basis of geography, social class, education, occupation,
ceremonial activities, recreational interests, and
so on, until one reaches the fundamental speech community,
the family.

In this article I present examples of words that
have had their currency within family limits.  Here we
can see to good advantage the effervescing of language
creation.  My material is drawn from a variety of
sources: oral reports from friends and students, autobiographies
and reminiscences, and in some cases
fictional accounts that report family situations with
an attempt at verisimilitude.

Let us first take up some expressions that involve
figurative speech, chiefly metaphorical leaps in the
naming of things.  In a New York family, according to
a student, parsnips are known as _white carrots_ and
pepper as _black salt_.[^2] In the family of Henry Beckett,
a New York journalist, an airplane was called a _bird-bus_,
from the coinage of his daughter Martha, and the
American Museum of Natural History was _the bone
house_.[^3] In another New York family,
that of Frederic Fredman, _pooh-pooh-head_, coined by a daughter, is a
term of derogation used about adults. William Holt, an English broadcaster, has reported
an animal known as a _Yukon_, invented by his
daughter:

She had invented fanciful animals which were suggested
to her by new words and names which she had heard or
come across when reading.  Animals such as 'Yukons.'
She really believed at one time that there was such an
animal.  The word 'fetlock' provided her with a useful
collective noun for associating with Yukons—'a fetlock
of Yukons.'  When I probed her with questions as to
where her idea of a 'Yukon' had come from she told me
she had seen a book being loaded on to one of my motor
libraries, called _The Call of the Yukon_, and I have no
doubt that she distinctly heard its peculiar cry. [^4]

Let us turn next to instances in which devices
of word coinage are illustrated.  The verb to _gramp_,
a back formation meaning 'to blow like a grampus,'
can be given.  W.E. Collinson has said of it: &ldquo;This is a
good instance of an individual's creation becoming a
family word.&rdquo; [^5] The process of analogy accounts for
_drinkative_.  As a writer of 1942 has recounted: &ldquo;A
family I know has invented a word (I think) which
always pleases me—'drinkative'—less objectionable
than 'drunken.'  It is probably based upon 'talkative.'&rdquo;[^6]

The change from one part of speech to another
was reported by a New Englander in 1908:

There is hardly a family but has some expressive
improvised word.  In my own family 'humbly' reigns
supreme.  This is not the adverb of current usage, but
an adjective, and a cross between 'humble' and 'homely';
and it was first used to describe our washwoman, who
takes such pride in her humbleness, and is of such a
superlative weatherbeaten homeliness, that she needed
something special to express her personality....
'Humbly' she is, and as 'humbly Mrs. Wheeler' she will
be known in our family, while the brother who invented
the word quite puffs himself up about it.[^7]

Blending, or the formation of portmanteau words,
is found in other families.  Herbert Quick, the Iowa
novelist, in _Vandemark's Folly_ of 1922, put into the
fictional narration of an old Iowa pioneer the following
sentence: &ldquo;I remembered, though, how she had
skithered back to the carriage.&rdquo;[^8] Then he added a footnote
to _skithered_, attributed to an educated granddaughter
of the pioneer:

A family word, to the study of which one would like to
direct the attention of the philologists, since traces of it
are found in the conversation of folk of unsophisticated
vocabulary outside the Clan van de Marck.  Doubtless
it is of Yankee origin, and hence old English.  It may,
of course, be derived according to Alice-in-Wonderland
principles from _skip_ and _hither_ or _thither_ or all three;
but the claim is here made that it comes, like monkeys
and men, from a common linguistic ancestor.[^9]

The cleverest of all the family words that have
come to my attention is one from Scotland: a celebration
of Burns's birthday, at which haggis was served,
was known by the &ldquo;sandwich&rdquo; formation _Walp-haggisnicht
!_[^10]

Fairly mysterious is the word _hoosh-mi_, from the
royal family of England.  As the Queen's former nanny,
Marion Crawford, has chronicled:

The pram...remained in purdah for some years
together with...the hoosh-mi dish.  'Hoosh-mi' is a
pleasant word made up by [Princess] Margaret for the
nursery mixture of chopped meat, potato and gravy, all
'hoosh-mied' up together and spoon-fed to its victim.  Later
the word was to become part of the schoolroom vocabulary,
and a mix of any kind was always known as a hoosh-mi. [^11]

Its use is illustrated in a later passage by the nanny:
&ldquo;Margaret...has a large round table on which can
always be found a lavish clutter.  Letters, invitations,
dance programs, greeting telegrams—in short, a hooshmi.&rdquo;[^12]

Another favorite type of family expression is the
alphabetical abbreviation or acronym.  One immediately
thinks of _F.H.B._, for _Family Hold Back_ as a
warning when an article of food is low but guests are
not supposed to know it.  Quite probably this arose as
a family expression, but it broke into general usage
many generations ago.  I remember it from my boyhood
as a subject of joking, and Partridge has marked
it as from the mid-nineteenth century.[^13]

Let us turn now to expressions that have their
origin in chance incidents that have taken place in a
family.  Thus, _You ought to see my aunt_ had currency
in an American family, as recorded in 1924 by Harry
G. Paul:

In another home a dull servant once said, 'If you think
I am foolish, you ought to see my aunt'; from this grew
a custom of the various members of the family censuring
themselves for any unwise act by repeating 'You ought to
see my aunt,' an expression which sometimes astonished
and puzzled any stranger who happened to hear it.[^14]

From an Irish family is recorded the idiomatic
phrase, _to sing the hundredth psalm_.  As R. A. Stewart
Macalister, the Irish archeologist, explained it in 1937:

How could any non-initiate guess that 'to sing the
hundredth psalm' meant 'to fetch a glass of water'—
as it does in a family known to me?  If he be admitted
to the domestic arcana so far as to learn the phrase
and its meaning, how could he guess the nexus between
the two ideas—a chance remark made upon a midsummer
day, that to allow the heated water to run off from
the cold-water tap took about as long a time as it
would take to perform the act of piety specified?[^15]

Another fruitful source of family words is the
naming of various rooms of a house.  Robert Haven
Schauffler in 1925 recorded the following: &ldquo;Children,
too, have a sure instinct at times for word coining.
I know some who christened their play-room 'The
Squealery.' &rdquo;[^16]  In a family in Essex, the water closet
was called _the Euphemism_.  This arose from the time
when a party of visitors came and one delicate-minded
lady asked in a whisper, &ldquo;May we, to use a euphemism,
wash our hands?&rdquo;  Thereafter, the lavatory was always
referred to as _the Euphemism_.[^17]

The terms such as I have been citing are of small
use to the lexicographer.  He would not wish to include
them in his inventory, unless they could be shown to
have broken into wider currency.  Nevertheless, such
material should be watched by the lexicologist for its
value in showing tendencies in the language.  The
family is the matrix in which we see the bubbling
up of linguistic experimentation.  One of the greatest
gifts that can come to a speaker of a language is the
sense of freedom to move about among the possible
patterns that the language provides for him.  This feeling
of &ldquo;at-home-ness&rdquo; develops and flowers in the
family circle.

[^1]: Abridged from &ldquo;Family Words in English,&rdquo; by Allen Walker Read,
AMERICAN SPEECH, February 1962, &copy; copyright Columbia University
Press.
[^2]: From a report written by Catherine White.
[^3]: New York _Post_, March 5, 1950, p. 32/I. 
[^4]: _I Still Haven't Unpacked_ (London, 1953), p. 227.
[^5]: _Contemporary English: a Personal Speech Record_ (Leipzig, 1927), p.
118. 
[^6]: _Notes &amp; Queries_, CLXXXII (1942), 77.
[^7]: &ldquo;Improvised Words,&rdquo; _Atlantic Monthly_, CII (1908), 714.
[^8]: _Vandemark's Folly_ (Indianapolis, 1922), p. 143.
[^9]: _Ibid_. Cf. the discussion by A. G. Kennedy in _American Speech_, II
(1926), 155.
[^10]: Collinson, _op. cit._, p. 118, footnote.  For the category &ldquo;sandwich
word,&rdquo; see Harold Wentworth, &ldquo; 'Sandwich' Words and Rime-caused
Nonce Words,&rdquo; _West Virginia University Bulletin: Philological Studies,_
III (1939), 65-71.
[^11]: _The Little Princesses_ (New York, 1950), p. 34.
[^12]: _Ibid._, p. 237.
[^13]: _A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English_ (London, 1937),
p. 261.
[^14]: _Better Everyday English_ (Chicago, 1924), p. 79.
[^15]: _The Secret Languages of Ireland_ (Cambridge, England, 1937), p. 92.
[^16]: _Peter Pantheism_ (New York, 1925), p. 60.
[^17]: Ethelind Fearon, _The Fig and Fishbone_ (London, 1959), p. 110.

### INTER ALIA I.4.1

&square;  [The following is reprinted in its entirety from the
Public Notices section of _The New York Times_.]

Having left my bed &amp; board, I, Robert W. Schruhl of
20 Muriel St., Freeport, N.Y. 11520, will not
be responsible for any debts incurred by my wife
Tanya J. Schruhl.


### INTER ALIA I.4.2: _Stoke Your Own Poges_

Wordmongers can hardly fail to be roused to shire
ecstasy in browsing through any guidebook to Merrie England.
In fact, it may be their names alone that keep some
places merry.  Here are assembled in two shameless strophes
—by a deservedly nameless compiler—some onomastic gems.
They are apparently set to the rhythm of William Allingham's
famous tribute to the Little People, which may have
fascinated us in childhood but can indicate that one is
heading for that destination the second time, if the attraction
persists (_Up the airy mountain,/Down the rushy glen,/
We daren't go a-hunting/For fear of little men;/Wee folk,
good folk,/Trooping all together;/Green jacket, red cap,/
And white owl's feather_).

The selection of the meter is evidently based on the
accidental circumstance that Ascott-under-Wychwood was
chosen as the first line of this geopoetical gibberish.

There is, however, no rhyme and only occasional
reason—for example, the painful predicament implied in the
assonance of line one, or the moral decline lispingly suggested
in line two.  Other lines may breathe of athletic
triumphs (I.3), perhaps at the price of injury (I.4), with
more than a hint of foul play (I.5-6), but with subsequent
riotous celebration of victory (I.8).  Yet how much Wenlock,
holy or profane, can a Pucklechurch pre-screen?  (II.7)
Whether the flaming Saint of the ultimate verse kept the
wise bird imprisoned or was himself a wielder of the quill
is difficult to say.

Some interpreters, eschewing punemic analysis, would
doubtless insist on a Freudian explanation; others (Tredington-On-the-Swilgate
!) may prefer one founded on dialectal
(sic) materialism.  Honey's wacky; Molly pants!

I
Ascott-under-Wychwood,
Wotton under Edge,
The Cokers Down Ampney
Cold Ashton Lower Swell;
Bewdley, Stewkley,
Birdlip Upper Slaughter;
Leatherhead, Mow Cop
Great Gidding Puncknowle!

II
Meysey Hampton Horspath,
Ashby-de-la-Zouch,
Great Missenden Woking
Much Wenlock Crickhope Linn;
Thrapston, Bawtry,
Fencot Murcot Firkins;
Pucklechurch Preesgweene
St. Blazeys Owl Pen!
[Robert A. Fowkes, _New York University_]



### Reviews: THE LANGUAGE OF OPPRESSION
_Haig A. Bosmajian, Public Affairs Press, 1974

One gets the impression from reading Professor Bosmajian's
book that its title carries in it an ambiguity, but
it is unclear whether the ambiguity is intentional or not.  Is
the &ldquo;language&rdquo; of the title the _kind_ of language referred
to throughout the book, or is it, specifically, the English
language?  The author doesn't discriminate in so many
words, though his description of the uses of language as
propaganda treats either English alone or, when treating
the propaganda of Nazi Germany, the _technique_ rather
than the language.  The argument is a little uneven, for
here it delivers a polemic against name-calling, there
against grammar.  A collection of essays that could have
been better edited for publication in a single work, the
book would have been more usefully organized had the
distinction been made between those elements of language
that fall under the command of the speaker (e.g., usage,
name-calling, style, etc.) and those that are inherent
requisites in the language (e.g., grammar, syntax, etc.).

From a strictly linguistic point of view, the author's
purposes would have been better served had he presented
the evidence in a purely descriptive manner throughout,
preserving opinion for his Conclusion.  The chapter on &ldquo;The
Language of Anti-semitism&rdquo; is, indeed, handled in this
way; even though it is a more deadly issue than those
treated under &ldquo;The Language of White Racism,&rdquo; &ldquo;The
Language of Indian Derision,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The Language of
Sexism,&rdquo; its very remoteness in time appears to have
qualified it for treatment with a somewhat cooler detachment
than that accorded the latter subjects.  (That is not
to say that Anti-semitism is dead, only that the expression
of it is focused on Nazi Germany.)  Or perhaps it is because
Professor Bosmajian has spent a score of years investigating
Anti-semitism and has turned only recently to the others.

While we cannot deny that the plethora of legal citations
in the chapters &ldquo;White Racism,&rdquo; &ldquo;Indian Derision,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Sexism&rdquo; makes for interesting reading (as well as
providing useful documentation on Archie-Bunkerism), it
cannot be said to deal precisely with the &ldquo;language of oppression,&rdquo;
unless we are to include in the &ldquo;Language&rdquo; of
the title a third rubric, namely, &ldquo;anything that is couched
in language is language.&rdquo;  Rather, these legal citations reflect
the mores of the people that framed them and not
the use of language in their implementation.  Deplorable
though prejudice may be, its deplorableness is a moral, not
a linguistic issue, and the author's proselytizing in behalf
of liberty, freedom, and a number of other desirable features
of life, though expressive, is inappropriate in a work
purporting to deal with language.  The problem for the
reviewer, consequently, arises when he is inclined toward
a comment about the author's treatment of his supposed
subject, lest that comment, if adverse, be construed as a
judgment of _what_ is being said rather than of _how_ it is
being said.

Returning to the question of the various aspects of
language and their uses in engendering prejudice and
bigotry, it is interesting to note that the chapter dealing
with Anti-semitism, notwithstanding its dealing with Nazi
propaganda, makes no mention of the fact that the propaganda
was conducted, of course, in German.  Now, German
has grammatical gender, not sex gender.  That is, one says,
for example, _das M&auml;dchen_ 'the young lady or woman,' in
which the gender of the word is neuter, without any reflection
on the sexual (or asexual) proclivities of the ostensive
object referred to.  French, with only two genders, also has
grammatical gender, there being nothing more feminine
about _la table_ or masculine about _le papier_ 'the paper' than
even the French might allow.  English, on the other hand,
except for some lingering archaisms like _she_ as a referent
for _ship_, refers to females as _she_, to males as _he_, and to
inanimate objects and (some classes of) animals _as it_.
Thus, interestingly enough, the argument against English
sexist &ldquo;prejudice,&rdquo; as described in the chapter on sexism,
would carry no weight if applied in German or French, and
the author, though he has no justifiable reason for raising
the issue when discussing German propaganda, sees no
justification for defending sex gender in English when discussing
its pronouns of reference under &ldquo;Sexism.&rdquo;  In short,
if we hold no brief for prejudice of any kind against women,
the arguments in favor of changing the grammar of English
because it is thought to reflect and perpetuate sexism (or
any kind of -ism) are on flimsy foundation, indeed.

The use and avoidance of specific words are another
matter entirely, even though the coinages _chairperson, mailperson_,
etc., might appear to be as ludicrous as reference
to the _Ten Compersondments_, _woperson_, etc., which, it is
hoped, would not become _persondatory_.  We haven't seen
any active campaign being waged for _garbageperson_, (telephone)
_lineperson, lumberperson_ (for &ldquo;lumberjane&rdquo;?), and
_groundperson_ (for &ldquo;groundsow,&rdquo; 'a woman who works in
tunnels'?).  But then, such campaigns always tend to be
self-serving.  As far as _Neanderthal Man, Java Man_, and
_Cro-Magnon Man_ (cited by the author) are concerned, the
Anthropology Department of the American Museum of
Natural History reports that their fossils are actually male
and female, but that the man in the title is used to indicate,
generically, _human_ (&ldquo;_huperson_&rdquo;?) and not male or female.
The _reductio ad absurdum_ of the feminine linguistic argument
may be the word _man_ in &ldquo;Man wants but little here
below,&rdquo; which, if given a literal, feminist interpretation,
leads to all sorts of amusing possibilities for connotations
of _wants_ as well as for _below_.

The fact of the matter is that mores, politics, and sentiment
change; language changes, too, and it usually changes
to reflect the culture of its users.  We know of no rigidly
matriarchal or matrilineal society that has a language reflecting
its culture precisely, though the languages of many
peoples do reflect kinship relationships quite different from
the ones we are accustomed to or satisfied with.  For instance,
where English _uncle_ may refer, willy nilly, to the
brother or brother-in-law of one's mother or father—that's
four people—there are languages in which each of those
relationships can or must be expressed with lexical accuracy
(as distinguished, say, from a descriptive phrase like &ldquo;my
father's brother-in-law&rdquo;).  Similarly, pronouns of reference
in certain languages differ; more important, they change
(or can change) though, to the best of our knowledge, the
grammar of no language has ever been changed by decree.
Lexicon, however, is another matter.

Thus, lexicon has been shaped by mores, grammar has
not been.  Though modern feminists seem reluctant to
acknowledge it, there have been times in history when
women required protection and when they were regarded
as chattel.  Our modern condemnation of this practice cannot
change history, and it is history that is reflected in the
language.  History is scarcely something for which we can
be held to account unless we perpetuate its evils, but the
language, _per se_, can scarcely be held accountable for that
perpetuation.  Unfortunate though it may be, prejudice
that is blind is also deaf: if people are bigoted against niggers,
kikes, wops, and women, changing their names to
Negroes (or Blacks), Jews, Italians, and &ldquo;persons&rdquo; is not
going to eliminate that prejudice: rather, it may clothe it
with a respectability that ill befits it.

Bosmajian's argument, had it been solely linguistic,
would have carried more weight with us, but this can be
only a minor criticism of a book that contains a great deal
of valuable information for the observer of Modern English.


#### Phonatics (sic[k])
_Robert A. Fowkes, Professor of Linguistics, New York University

It is possible that of the most significant works in
linguistics of this century two may have escaped
the attention of some readers of VERBATIM.  One is:
_Mots d'Heures: Gousses, Rames_, by Luis d'Antin van
Rooten, Grossman, 1967.  In that slender volume the
author regaled a still slenderer audience with his
fanatical phonetical rendition of children's rhymes,
and worse, and it was merely necessary to read the
contents aloud in one's second-year French to have
an ear-opening experience and to enjoy a feast of nonsensical
proportions.

I am sure that readers will recognize in _tous et
contes_, or two seconds, that the title is &ldquo;Mother Goose
Rhymes.&rdquo;  Having grasped that much, they are ready
for the following: &ldquo;Raia qu'&eacute;corce/turban beret crosse
/toussez afin laide y/a peau ne ouate torse/,&rdquo; which is
obviously, &ldquo;Ride a cock horse to Banbury Cross,&rdquo; etc.
In the same (jocular) vein, but in reverse disorder, I
unashamedly attempt a mad English version of the
following:

<quote>
Alonzo fondled up a tree-oh,
Insure the car, get Art away.
Count your noodles hot, we can eat-oh,
Eight hundred songs got on T.V.
  ''    ''     ''    '' ''  ''
Uptown in view, round Lincoln Center,
Music is fair, oh say, sold out?
It's Wednesday, she's got on no bra,
Ricochet, no fish, eh! no caba&ntilde;a.
Oh someone, sit by Anne,
For me no better one.
March on, march on, canned sanka's poor,
Oh brew another one!
</quote>

If you failed to recognize the &ldquo;Marshy Haze,&rdquo; you are
undoubtedly a good French scholar.

On an equally low plane, if not lower, is the brash
volume _Anguish Language_ by Howard L. Chase,
Prentice-Hall, 1956.  This, unlike van Rooten's crime,
confines itself to a monolingual view, which is at once
more restricted and more demanding.  There is less
phonetic exactitude but somehow greater play of
phonetic fancy; if there is parody, it is largely incidental,
save in some grandiose overall fashion.  Two
well-known song titles emerge as &ldquo;Freeze a Jolly Good
Furlough&rdquo; and &ldquo;Hormone Derange&rdquo; and convey some
idea of the possibilities for metrical mayhem.  I submit
without fear of praise the following effort of my own in
that direction:

<quote>
My body lice suffer devotion,
My body lice suffer deceit,
My body lice suffer devotion,
Oh, dingbat my botany beat!
</quote>

And, as a warning of the vile possibilities, I cite, from
reams of ruinous efforts, the following titles (or first
lines) of other works mangled by me:

<quote>
_Allergy-Ridden and a Gum-Tree Perjured_.
_Trick to Begonia, Victimize._
_Jos&eacute; Sans Souci, Bide a Tonsured Delight._
</quote>

And, returning to a bilingual relationship, I close with
the beginning of the Aeneid, that resounding hexed
ammeter: &ldquo;Armed with a rum cake and dough; crows
like he creamed us as tories.&rdquo;  The effectiveness of this
depends upon standard American public high-school
Latin pronunciation, obviously that employed by
P. Wear-Gillious Marrow himself.  _Qu'ouate un oeuf!_
</article>


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: Folk Etymology

_Graham S. Mitchell, Scott, Foresman and Company

A recent collegiate dictionary defines a folk etymology
this way: &ldquo;modification of a linguistic form according to a
falsely assumed etymology, as _Welsh rarebit_ from _Welsh
rabbit_.&rdquo;  The key word here is _assumed_.  What apparently
operates in this phenomenon of language is that speakers
hear a form that vaguely reminds them of something
similar, to which they refer it.  Historically, some examples
include _mushroom_, from the French _mousseron_; _crayfish_,
from the French _crevis_; and _Cape Despair_, from _Cape
d'espoir_ (Cape Hope).  It can easily be noted from these
examples that unfamiliar forms have been reshaped into
forms that are more familiar in the host language, English.

The process continues, apparently.  Recently, in the
glut of four- and twelve-letter words that appear routinely
in print these days, the term _ballbuster_ shows up.  It is a
graphic, forceful expletive, typically applied to a domineering
female.  At first glance, the formation seems obvious
enough, a compound of noun + verb + agential suffix, as in
_stickhandler, linebacker, bottlewasher_, and so on.

Consider, however, the Yiddish form _baleboosteh_, also
spelled _ballabusta_, or _balebosta_.  The similarity to the above
English form of this Yiddish word is remarkable, but what
we have here is just a feminine equivalent of _baleboss_, 'the
head of the household, manager, one who assumes authority.'
Hence the _baleboosteh_ is the wife of any of the above,
or female homemaker, or manager.  By a slight extension of
meaning, the term assumes the meaning 'bossy woman.'
The semantic leap as well as the shift in sound value to
_ballbuster_ is thus quite understandable.

It would seem that the ancient process of borrowing
into English and reshaping where it is necessary to fit English
sound patterns is still at work in this quite modern
case.  The _crayfish_ isn't a _fish_, a _mushroom_ has neither _mush_
nor _room_, there is hope, rather than _despair_ in _Cape
d'espoir_, and a _ballbuster_ just gets things done, like any
good manager.


#### Ameritalian
_Donald A. Sears, Professor of English, California State University/Fullerton_

For years French culture has had its effects upon the
Italian language of Tuscany from the caf&eacute; to the
toilette.  But the last few years have seen a linguistic
shift, paralleling the cultural and economic shift, from
France to America.  As the north of Italy has become
rapidly industrialized, urbanized, and mechanized in
the late 1960's, it is American loan words that have
been adopted, sometimes raw, more often digested into
an Italianized form.

If one approaches Florence on the new toll-free
_autostrada_ from Poggibonsi, he finds the road is distinguished
from its toll-gated counterparts by the name of
_Superstrada_, a combination of American and Italian.
Pervasively _super_- as a prefix is also found in _super-mercato_
(supermarket) and a _superbox_ manufacturing
company.  Equally useful is the attribute _sexy_: Milan-published
monthly _ABC_ advertises _Biancheria sexy_
(sexy lingerie) and _sexy occhiali_ (sexy eyeglasses).
_Mini_-, too, has swept in with such combinations as
_mini-market_.  (Note _market_ instead of _mercato_ in this
instance.)

Back on the _superstrada_, on which one is urged to
_relax a 160km all ora_ in his new DAF 55, one may stop
at an _Autogrill Pavesi_, the equivalent of a Howard
Johnson's.  There he will be served a _manzo amburghese_,
American hamburger translated into Italian.
If he forgoes vino, he may drink _gingerino_ (ginger ale)
or _bitter_ (bitter lemon), cold from the _frigo_ (short for
refrigerator).  At night one may stay at an Agip _motel_
and be refreshed at the _bar_ (shortened from the _American
bars_ of post World War I days in France and
Italy).  In the bar one may watch the _tivu_ (TV), the
American truncated form that replaces _televizione_,
both in conversation and in the popular novels of the
newsstands.  The bill may be settled by a _credit carta_.

As one drives away next morning, he soon discovers
that he is _turing_ (touring).  His gas is purchased
by the discount _coupons_ he got at the border from the
Automobile _Club_ Italiana.  And he will pass signs advertising
_Club Dancing_.  The special parks for those
who tent out are marked _Camping_.  For one to stop and
enjoy the view, the road provides frequent _parcheggio_
(parking) spots.

For some time now, words of sports have been
creeping into Italian: tennis, golf, sport itself.  One now
also sees new combinations: _Sala giochi—bowling_
(game room—bowling).  And _garden_ is ubiquitous in
such phrases as _Garden Ristorante_ (American and
French loan words).

Some trade names have long had an international
standing; _e.g., Gillette_ (for razor) and _Kodak_ (for
camera).  But new Americanisms are now apparent.  A
hot-air furnace advertises under the name of _Blowtherm_;
an automatic laundry calls itself a _Washiomat_.
Premium saltines, now manufactured in Milan, claim
to be _il nuovissimo cracker_ (the newest cracker).  A
caf&eacute; in Viareggio concocts a sundae called _Knickerbocker
Glories_, while nearby vending machines sell
chewing gum called _Brooklyn_.  At the same caf&eacute; one
eats a _tost[os]_ 'toast,' the Italian version of a toasted
ham and cheese sandwich, while listening to _il stereo_.

Opening the pages of the latest editions of the popular
Italian magazines _Epoca_ and _L'Europeo_, one is
greeted by a plethora of Americanisms in the pages of
advertising.  One is prepared for international trade
names like &ldquo;La Johnson Wax&rdquo; and &ldquo;Close-Up&rdquo; toothpaste,
although this latter is pronounced on Italian TV
as &ldquo;Close-OOP.&rdquo;  What is more revealing of the penetration
of English into Italian is the larding of advertising
copy with prestige words and catch phrases.  For
many years that fine export of Scotland has been known
in Italy as whiskey and appears today in such a trade
slogan as &ldquo;Whiskey e Libert&aacute;.&rdquo;  But trade names go on
and on: a new candy by Ferrero is called &ldquo;Pocket
Coffee&rdquo;; an electric drill by an Italian manufacturer is
called &ldquo;Baby Drill&rdquo;; Longo pens introduces its new
&ldquo;Fineliner.&rdquo;

Also generic terms like _after shave and deodorant_
appear in otherwise Italian copy.  In advertising a line
of masculine clothes one company lists &ldquo;Camicie, _pullovers_,
calze.&rdquo;  Strega tells how it may be used in &ldquo;gelati,
caffee, _long drinks, cocktails_.&rdquo;  This lacing of the native
language with foreign words and phrases seems aimed
at the Italian's love of owning American products.
Even products of Italy, therefore, are praised with
American words as a kind of snob appeal: outsized
tires by Kl&eacute;ber are called &ldquo;il gigantesco _Jumbo_&rdquo;; Certina
claims that its new quartz watch achieves &ldquo;il nuovo
_standard_ di precisione&rdquo;; Voxson lists itself as a &ldquo;_leader_
internazionale in ellettronica.&rdquo;  But the fullest exploitation
of macaronic copy is found in the full page ad of
Castelli, a furniture manufacturer of Bologna: Showing
an airport lounge set up with its chairs, the copy
read &ldquo;Quando arrivate al 'transit' prendetevi un attimo
di _relax_...&rdquo; ('when arriving in the transit lounge take
a moment to &ldquo;relax&rdquo;...').

A reserve brandy is marketed as &ldquo;you and me&rdquo;
and San Remo men's clothes proclaim a &ldquo;stile Italian
Day.&rdquo;  But _dry_ offers the most amusement for a word-watcher.
A waterproof watch by Vetta is called Vetta
_Dry_, and the aperitif Kambusa, available in regular
and dry, is presented as &ldquo;Kambusa _Dry_ dal gusto
secco.&rdquo; In avoiding the international word _sec_, the
writer has to explain his use of _dry_: Kambusa Dry with
the sec taste.  O brave bilingual redundancy!

Everywhere the French influence ebbs as it becomes
a matter of snobbism to lace one's Italian with
the new Americanisms.  And if sometimes a Briticism is
confused with an Americanism, it is no great moment:
_WC_ is in and _toilette_ is out as Anglo-American pervades
and prevails.


#### Homonymous Antonyms
_Harvey Minkoff, Hunter College of CUNY New York


A note in VERBATIM [Vol. I, No. 3] reminds us of
the existence of homonyms that are simultaneously
antonyms, for example _clip_ 'cut off' vs. _clip_ 'hold together,'
and suggests that such pairs may be homographs
with different etymologies.  While this may
certainly be true in some cases, in other cases what
is at work is that most fascinating and unpredictable
linguistic phenomenon—semantic shift.

Thus, _fast_ 'moving rapidly' vs. 'firmly in place'
is apparently the descendant of an intensifier still
functioning as such in the German and Yiddish
cognate _fest_, whence Yiddish _fest me&scaron;uga_ 'crazy as
hell.'  Presumably the present meanings of _fest_ arose
from a similar usage in English: &ldquo;He runs _fast_(!)&rdquo;  &ldquo;It's
stuck _fast_(!)&rdquo;

Since, of course, semantic shift is not unique to
English, homonymous antonyms are found in other
languages also.  To my mind among the most interesting
are a rather common group in Hebrew that combine
the sublime and the ridiculous, the holy and the
profane, in the same root.

All Semitic languages form words by inserting
vowels between the consonants—usually three—of the
roots.  The four roots _SRS, HRM, ZBL_, and _KD&Scaron;_ will
serve as illustrations.  The word _SaRiS_ means both
'eunuch' and 'governmental official,' the semantic shift
being obvious to anyone familiar with the social structure
of the ancient East.  A similar process affected the
root _HRM_, the Arabic cognate of which is the source
of English _harem_.  Originally meaning 'consecrate,' the
verb _HaRaM_ eventually took on the meanings 'excommunicate'
and 'forfeit' in a semantic development
that is transparent.

Quite a different type of semantic shift is demonstrated
in the root _ZBL_, from which arise both _ZeBuL_
'exalted' and _ZeBeL_ 'manure.'  Here, neither reflex
seems to represent the original meaning of the root,
and, though there is still considerable scholarly disagreement,
a possible explanation is that the core
meaning is 'piled up.'  If this hypothesis is correct,
then the two divergent meanings simply reflect what
was piled up.  And this type of divergence is exactly
what occurred within the root _KD&Scaron;_, resulting in the
contrast between _KoDe&Scaron;_ 'holy' and _KeDe&Scaron;ah_ 'prostitute.'
In all likelihood, the original meaning of _KD&Scaron;_
was 'taboo,' and the two descendants represent different
taboos.  Moreover, it is interesting to note in this
regard that Latin _meretrix_ 'harlot' is built on the
ethically neutral base _mer(e)_- 'earn,' which in Classical
Latin meant both 'merit' and 'demerit.'

And while we are on the subject of multilingual
homonymous antonyms, perhaps it is well to conclude
with an example from Chinese: the currently omnipresent
_kungfu_, with identical tones and identical
characters, actually translates as 'task; accomplishment'
and as 'leisure'!



### EX CATHEDRA: _1984 in 1975_?

Do you worry about being brain-washed?  Do you even
think about it?  Do you think you're immune to it?

These are questions that all intelligent people should
be considering if they are going to maintain a proper
attitude of skepticism about the propaganda that would
immerse them.  Newspaper and magazine advertising, for
some reason, is less insidious, less invidious, than television
commercials, which are both visual and auditory.  Radio
no longer plays an important role in selling.

Observing the TV commercial can be illuminating:
it doesn't require a visitor from another planet—one from
another country, even another _county_, would do—to be
shocked at Americans' apparent psychopathic preoccupation
with dirt, bad odors, and disease.  Whether advertising
is to be regarded as a social phenomenon, an exercise in
mass psychology, a necessary (ugh!) part of our commercial
economy, or all three, there is an inescapable fact: it
uses (and misuses) language to effectuate its message.
The misuse is often just plain lying.

For example, the tag line in the Crest commercial,
after one actor has protested, &ldquo;But _this_ toothpaste has
fluoride!&rdquo; is &ldquo;But you can't beat _Crest_ [their emphasis]
fluoride for fighting cavities.&rdquo;  Fluoride is fluoride.  Neither
can you beat Crest fluoride nor can Crest fluoride beat
Brand X fluoride, though the latter part of the argument is,
naturally, omitted by Crest.  (Crest is owned by the University
of Indiana, which ought to know better.)  Anacin
offers &ldquo;a higher level of relief... strong medicine for
the miseries of....&rdquo;  What does that mean?  Nothing.
Regulatory agencies like the FCC forbid claims of outright
cures, so advertisers support copywriters at exorbitant
salaries to devise alternative ways of saying the same
thing without running afoul of a Cease and Desist Order.

How dishonest can you get?  Very.  How about the
Contac commercial that compared other cold remedies by
describing one as containing an &ldquo;antitussive&rdquo; and another
an &ldquo;analgesic, not present in Contac.&rdquo;  From the tone and
construction of the line, one is led to believe that antitussives
and analgesics are virtually carcinogenic!  What
about an anti-perspirant that is &ldquo;anti-sticky&rdquo; and &ldquo;antistain&rdquo;?
Untrue!  It may be _non_-sticky and _non_-stain (ing),
but not &ldquo;anti-.&rdquo;  Have you &ldquo;let Country Morning take you
back again&rdquo;?  Back where?  How can a chiefly urban population,
however eagerly it may yearn for the green hills
of a &ldquo;home&rdquo; it never knew, be taken &ldquo;back&rdquo; somewhere
where it has never been?  Euell Gibbons, &ldquo;traveling the
countryside for Grape Nuts&rdquo; (whatever _that_ means), tells
us that the cereal &ldquo;reminds [him] of the flavor of wild
hickory nuts.&rdquo;  How many of you have ever _seen_ a wild
hickory nut, much less tasted one?  And if you have tasted
one, are they any good?

On the dirty, smelly front, we are besieged, night
and day, by commercials about detergents: housewives
meet at a &ldquo;laundry testing center&rdquo;—Have you ever seen or
heard of such a place?—to write &ldquo;greasy,&rdquo; &ldquo;oily,&rdquo; &ldquo;dirty,&rdquo;
and (horrors!) &ldquo;greasy oil!&rdquo; on a glass partition with what
I assume are their lipsticks, all the while reading off the
words with such excited revulsion that they seem ready to
gag on them.  Popped into the washer (with the appropriate
detergent, but I never seem able to remember which one
it is), the clothes emerge not only dazzlingly clean but
pressed and _folded!_  In another version, a mother and _her_
mother almost come to blows over the merits of a liquid
detergent, after which the (goody-goody) daughter/granddaughter
saves the day by proudly taking credit for cleaning
her &ldquo;Robin's&rdquo; uniform (a featherless outfit that had
somehow got salad oil on it), when we all know that it
was the detergent and the clothes washer that deserve
the credit.  (What's a &ldquo;Robin&rdquo;?)

It is unlikely, if we continue to live in America, that
we shall escape the gurglings from Di-Gel, Alka-Seltzer,
and Dr&amacr;no (who has glass plumbing?), the admonitions
about saving money by throwing away the solid airfreshener
and using Lysol instead (I'd rather have a house
that smelled from roast beef or roast turkey or fresh-baked
bread than from Lysol), the miasmic exudations we are
heir to as humid, human beings unless camouflaged by
mouthwashes, toothpastes, anti-perspirants (is it _bad_ to
perspire?), deodorants, vaginal sprays, shampoos, air fresheners,
and other scented chemicals, the unspeakable filth
of the mudhole, the biological stain, the ring around the
collar, and the other horrors of life in this most imperfect
world.  Maybe we ought to keep quiet, control ourselves,
and not squeeze the Charmin.  Perhaps we can be consoled
in the knowledge that our children won't grow up
thinking that the &ldquo;quicker picker-upper&rdquo; is the rou&eacute; at
the local bar.

Several years ago, TV was anticipating financial doldrums
(if not disaster) when cigarette commercials were
forbidden, but the detergent, pet food, toothpaste, patent
medicine (What's a &ldquo;nasograph&rdquo;?), and deodorant manufacturers
have appeared to fill the gap to overflowing.
Writing to the FCC, to local and network TV stations, to
our congressmen, and to our senators ought to have _some_
effect.  The problem is really _our_ problem, and it will continue
as long as we allow it to.  With a few exceptions, the
programs are still better than the commercials, but it won't
be long before the commercials start crowding the programs
off the air.  Weigh it for yourself, honey!


#### EPISTOLAE {Arnold M. Zwicky}

The discussion of -_oon_ words (VERBATIM Vol. I, No.
3)  reminded me of a family word game that began years
ago when a teacher of my wife's, Olive Cahoon, married a
man named Cahoon and became Olive Cahoon Cahoon, a
name so melodious we have set about constructing an entire
rhyming Cahoon family.  The culmination of this is a
fine family tree drawn up by a friend, Mary Lycan.  It shows
the stock beginning with Baboon Cahoon, properly separated
from his modern descendants by a long dotted line.
These start with Patroon Cahoon, the New Amsterdam
colonist, and his four sons, Tycoon Cahoon (the New
York banker), Walloon Cahoon (the Brussels merchant),
Dragoon Cahoon (militiaman, grandfather of Quadroon
Cahoon, and great-grandfather of Octoroon Cahoon), and
Triune Cahoon (the Trinitarian divine).

As you can see, we are not afraid to stoop to rhyme.
Lycan's family tree, as a matter of fact, includes ringers
like High Noon Cahoon (a sheriff), Clair de Lune Cahoon
(the interpreter of Debussy), and my favorite, the child of
love, Too Soon Cahoon.

Although it is perhaps wicked to inflict word games on
your readers, some might be able to bear two others.  The
first is Conjugated Nouns, on the models

_I steal the keel_.
_I stole the coal_.
_I have stolen the colon_.

_They choose the hues_.
_They chose the hose_.
_They have chosen the hosen_.

_They mow the banks of the row_.
_They mowed the banks of the road_.
_They have mown the banks of the Rhone_.

_I do it with the buoys_.
_I did it with the biddies_.
_I have done it with the bunnies_.

The second is, strictly speaking, more like collecting
bizarre sorts of rocks than like playing a game; it involves
finding examples of phrases that are bilingually redundant,
like Mount Fujiyama (literally, 'Mount Fuji-mount').  Roast
beef with _au jus_ (literally, 'with with juice') is offered by
many restaurants these days, but the ultimate was attained
by a waitress in a local steak house who asked a friend of
mine if he wanted his prime rib _with au jus sauce_ ('with
with juice sauce').  My favorite, however, is the California
tourist attraction, the _La Brea tar pits_ ('the the tar tar
pits').  Anglo-Saxon/Norman French couplings like _without
let or hindrance_ do not count.


_Arnold M. Zwicky, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio_


#### EPISTOLAE {Norman R. Shapiro}

&square;  As a postscript to the late Professor Hughes' note on the
English suffix -_oon_ [VERBATIM Vol. I, No. 3], it should
be pointed out that, insofar as the corresponding Romance
suffixes are concerned, while the Spanish -_&oacute;n_ and the
Italian -_one_ are, indeed, generally used with augmentative
meaning, as he says, the French equivalent -_on_ is much
more often used as a diminutive.  W.D. Elcock, in _The
Romance Languages_ (London, 1959, p. 160), cites the
example of _vallon_, a small _val_ ('valley').  To this may be
added _peloton_, a small _pelote_ ('ball of string,' etc.), _dindon_
'turkey,' originally the diminutive of _dinde_ (though now its
masculine), and doubtless many more, both common and
not-so-common.  It is hard to say why this linguistic turnabout
took place, much as one might be tempted to see
it as an example of ornery Gallic contrariness, even 'way
back then.

_Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut


#### EPISTOLAE {Eric P. Hamp}

The additional examples supplied in the Editor's comment
appended to John Hughes's note on -_oon_ teach us a little
lesson in brief scope.  We are of course familiar with the
fact that in language an element, e.g., a suffix, may productively
spread beyond its original range both in distribution
and in value or function.  Here, however, we may
observe how narrow the surviving base may be and how
tenuous the connections become.

Of the formations mentioned, the source of only one
seems to be unclear—_gadroon_; here the French origins are
ambiguous, but Proven&ccedil;al &lt; Latin _guttus_ seems less than
likely.  Setting this one aside, the remaining sources seem
reasonable and agreed.

Now of all these only _buffon_ (-_e_), _marron_(-_e_), _feston_
(-_e_), _maccaron-e, poltron-e, carton-e, vinagr&oacute;n_, and
_cuarter&oacute;n_ seem to qualify as Romance items with the
suffix and value mentioned by Hughes.  _Dragoon_ &lt; French
_dragon_ has superficially the same phonetics, but really involves
the old underived stem form with a changed meaning,
and hence strictly not this suffix.  Presumably, _cocon,
harpon, peloton_, and _rigaudon_ contain a diminutive and
therefore do not show the same original value.  The rhyming
of _laguna_ &lt; _lac&umacr;na_ is simply accidental, and the
semantics is really inverse in origin.  And _patr&omacr;nus_ contains
a somewhat similar but totally separate suffix.

We may now turn to the sheer chance convergences,
where folk etymology (contamination) may have worked
in part: _lampons_ (if a verb form), _babouin_ (what relation
to _babiller?_), Japanese _taikun_, Chinese _tai fung_, Arabic
_sem&umacr;m_, the Algonquian original of _raccoon_.  The case of
_Pantal(e)one_ is particularly interesting.  Not only is the
suffix fortuitous, but the semantics would be virtually untraceable
without a long history of proper name documentation:
the costume _from_ the comic character _from_ a type
of person _from_ the term for a Venetian _from_ a saint's name.
Consider then the difference in meaning between Britain
and the US for a pair of pants!  And, finally, observe the
quaint grammatical peculiarity of the modern plurale
tantum _pants_.

_Eric P. Hamp, University of Chicago_


#### EPISTOLAE {Richard J. Williams}

I enjoyed my first issue of VERBATIM, especially &ldquo;An
Intolerant View of Intolerance.&rdquo;  I have become totally
impatient with the smug—if not bitchy—prescriptiveness
of a number of recent crabs who are wholly ignorant of
the dynamics of language and unable to distinguish between
imaginative usage and illiterate aberration.

_Richard J. Williams, Fresno, Calif._


#### EPISTOLAE {Jean Stafford}
_We received a critical letter from Miss Jean Stafford in
response to our article, &ldquo;An Intolerant View of Intolerance,&rdquo;
but she declined permission to publish it_.  —Editor

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v1n4_1975-02)