---
title: "Vol II, No 1 [May 1975]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Irish Bulls in Sundry China Shops

_Robert A. Fowkes, Professor of Germanic Languages, New York University_

What is an Irish bull?  According to some, it is
the product of a kind of unconscious humor,
vaguely akin to a malapropism, allegedy endemic to
the Emerald Isle.  Others have dismissed it as a pure
blunder.  One definition calls it &ldquo;the saying that contradicts
itself, in a manner palpably absurd to listeners
but unperceived by the person who makes it.&rdquo;  This is
cited by Sean McCann, _The Wit of the Irish_, London
(Leslie Frewin) 1968, p. 9, a book that includes half
a hundred Irish bulls, mostly very good ones indeed.
Perhaps the most sagacious definition is that attributed
to Professor Mahaffy, Provost of Dublin University.
When asked by a lady seated beside him, what the
difference was between an Irish bull and another bull.
he replied, &ldquo;An Irish bull is always pregnant.&rdquo;  (McCann,
9, also Padraic Colum, _A Treasury of Irish Folklore_,
New York [Crown] 1954, p. 35).  This definition
is reminiscent of certain practices of the Sanskrit grammarians,
in that the definition is itself an example of
the phenomenon defined.

Sydney Smith said a century ago that a bull was
an apparent congruity and a real incongruity of ideas,
suddenly discovered--which partly contradicts any notion
of unconscious humor, unless the discovery is by
somebody else, or is the nature of a &ldquo;double-take&rdquo; by
the perpetrator.  There are doubtless several sub-varieties
of bulls, some inspired, some contrived; some
learned, others illiterate.

The origin of the word _bull_ seems unknown.  Attempts
to connect it with _papal bull_ or with Icelandic
_bull_ 'nonsense,' _bulla_ 'to talk nonsense' are certainly
wide of the mark.  Perhaps Irish _buile_ 'madness' has
something to do with the source--probably not.

The implication of an Irish monopoly of the
phenomenon is unwarranted.  Nevertheless, many bulls
_are_ of Irish origin, and of not so naive a character as
some proffered definitions might lead us to believe.
Parnell once said at a meeting, &ldquo;Gentlemen, it appears
to be unanimous that we cannot agree.&rdquo;  And the chap
who asserted in a Dublin court, &ldquo;Your banner, I was
sober enough to know I was dhroonk,&rdquo; was perhaps
no great fool (McCann 14).  A beggar woman who
asked for alms with the plea, &ldquo;Help me, kind sir!  I'm
the mother of five children and a sick husband&rdquo; (McCann
15), blessed a charitable donor with the bullish
wish, &ldquo;May you never live to see your wife a widow!&rdquo;
(In Friedrich Hebbel's play _Agnes Bernauer_, the murdered
Agnes is called &ldquo;widow&rdquo; by her father-in-law;
one hardly dares to call that a _Hebbull_.)

Three bulls in McCann's book have been known
to me since long before the appearance of that work.
They betoken a far lesser degree of innocence than
those given above: &ldquo;He lay at death's door, and the
doctor pulled him through&rdquo;; &ldquo;We find the man who
stole the horse not guilty&rdquo;; and &ldquo;Half the lies people
tell about me aren't true!&rdquo;

Sometimes the bull gives utterance to deep despair
at the wretched state of the world: &ldquo;Such is the
corruption of the age that little children, too young
to walk or talk, are rushing through the streets cursing
their Maker.&rdquo;  A similar complaint of more subjective
application is, &ldquo;The trouble with you, my son, is you've
no respect for the father that gave you birth!&rdquo;  Or a
bull may express with taurine eloquence the feeling
of apprehension at impending disaster or the recollection
of a menacing fate: &ldquo;There I stood, thinking every
moment would be the next!&rdquo;

Sometimes doctrinal wrangles are mildly reflected
in bulls.  A perplexed Dublin woman, on hearing an
Anglican priest referred to as &ldquo;father,&rdquo; exclaimed in
non-protestant protest, &ldquo;Imagine calling the loikes of
him father--a married man with foive children!&rdquo;  Perhaps
that could be called a papist bull, though hardly
with impunity.

The bull can also be employed in making extravagant
comparisons or concocting confused similes:
&ldquo;Talk about thin!  Well, you're thin, and I'm thin, but
he's as thin as the pair of us put together!&rdquo;  A bull that
is heard in several versions has to do with an Irish
wake.  A prominent figure--political or theatrical or
ecclesiastical--has died, and, for some reason, very few
people appear at his wake.  This prompts one bitterly
disillusioned adherent to remark, &ldquo;Ah, if this had happened
during his lifetime, the place would be packed.&rdquo;

The above are of Irish origin, or are said to be.
But I have heard bulls from the lips of fellow-Celts
across the Irish Sea.  It was a Welshman who said,
&ldquo;Why, man, you'll die before I do, if you live long
enough!&rdquo;  And a relative of mine from Glamorganshire,
South Wales, replied to an American who asked him
whether it was true that Welsh houses are cold, and,
if so, why, &ldquo;Well, I suppose they are; they build them
out of doors over here, you see.&rdquo;  It was also in Wales
that I heard this one about a man charged or credited
with the traits of a Don Juan, &ldquo;Why he's a happily
married man, and his wife is too!&rdquo;

Even England is the source of an occasional bull;
for example, &ldquo;The late Mr. Chambers went to an early
grave,&rdquo; which might possibly be termed a John Bull.
The Latin class in British public schools was once a
source of bulls in the guise of translations, some
spurious, some perhaps spontaneous.  It is hard to decide
how to classify this schoolboy effort, &ldquo;They fought
so hard they lost their arms, and then they used their
hands.&rdquo;  In a German class in my own college this side
of the herring pond a student rendition, &ldquo;the sweet,
timid, yellow-haired face of the maiden,&rdquo; may lack
some of the pre-requisites for bullishness and may belong
rather in the category of classroom boners, but it
has some resemblance to genuine bulls too; perhaps
it qualifies as a tauroidal.

For bulls are not lacking in this country either.
An American bull of venerable vintage is, &ldquo;One of
these days you're gonna wake up and find yourself
dead!&rdquo;  And another candidate for bulldom is, &ldquo;You'll
be a man before you're mother,&rdquo; which, if not a bull,
is at least a calf.  Still another American one is the dire
threat, &ldquo;I'll cut off your head and throw it in your
face!&rdquo;  Which reminds me of another one in the form of
a complaint, &ldquo;He kicked me in the belly when my back
was turned.&rdquo;  There's a modicum of violence in our
bulls.

Not long ago the radio brought a report of a
police department in a New Jersey town that had decided
to embrace the tenets of affirmative action with
the announcement, &ldquo;From now on we shall offer police
jobs to qualified women regardless of sex.&rdquo;  And a law
was supposedly once on the books of that state which
required that, &ldquo;if two cars approach at right angles
at an intersection where there is no traffic light, each
shall make a full stop and wait until the other has
passed by.&rdquo;

Deans I have known have been capable of exhorting
faculty the way an apocryphal dean did at a
reception for new members, &ldquo;I want all of you old-timers
to go around and shake hands with every unfamiliar
face,&rdquo; which belongs to the type of the Irish
podiatrist's bull, &ldquo;I've extracted corns from most of the
crowned heads of Europe.&rdquo;  Another feeble faculty bull
was the professor's remark to a colleague, &ldquo;Your book
is undoubtedly one of the best I've never read.&rdquo;

A schoolteacher of mine in Pittsburgh remarked,
&ldquo;Some of you children have been absent five times in
three days.&rdquo;  And the American vaudeville team of
Mack and Moran, whose records sold better than hot
cakes in the twenties, utilized bulls of a sort in their
patter: &ldquo;Yeah.  I'll be there.  But how'll I know whether
you've been there?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Well, if I get there first, I'll make
a blue chalk mark, and if you get there first, you rub
it out.&rdquo;

I once thought I'd detected a bull at a children's
concert, when I heard the M.C. introduce a singing
trio thus, &ldquo;Perhaps I should tell you that these three
are twins.&rdquo;  Then I found out they were.  For the third
was from a second set of twins in a prolific family.  The
bull concerning the wealthy but stingy uncle writing
to his nephew away at college has, to my knowledge,
appeared in print in three countries, none of them Ireland:
&ldquo;P.S. I had intended, my dear nephew, to enclose
a check for 10 dollars [or a cheque for five
pounds], but as I had already sealed the envelope
before doing so, it will have to wait until next time.&rdquo;
That is surely as spurious a bull as the old chestnut of
the note written to explain the absence of little Joe,
&ldquo;Dear Teacher: Please excuse my son Joseph's absence
on Friday, as it was Ash Wednesday.  Signed, My
Mother.&rdquo;

Humor of the &ldquo;little-man-who-wasn't-there&rdquo; type
probably belongs in the same pasture as exhausted
bulls, as do riddles like, &ldquo;What's the difference between
a duck?&rdquo;  and its bovine answer.  Our gag-writers
and comedians do not seem to resort to the device
of the bull very often.  Perhaps it is difficult to make
bulls to order.  The Marx brothers may have used a
bull or two, but I try in vain to recall one, unless
Groucho was the author of the following pessimistically
timely pronouncement, &ldquo;Even the future ain't
what it was in the past!&rdquo;  That's no bull.
</article>


#### INTER ALIA: II.1.1

Pursuing the problem of language and misrepresentation,
attention is called to an article in _The New York Times_
[February 2, 1975] by Boyce Rensberger, &ldquo;Scientists Find
Public Is Often Misled by Faulty Research Data.&rdquo;  It
begins:

<quote>
The quality of scientific information being produced
by researchers, accepted in scientific journals and
disseminated publicly by science reporters is often
unacceptably sloppy or misleading, at least a dozen
researchers asserted during last week's meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
</quote>

Scientists, like others, have an ax to grind; to secure support
for their projects, they frequently rely on sensationalism
as much as others do.  It is up to us to assess the
validity of what we read and hear; that is particularly true
of subjects of which we cannot be expected to have a
detailed, technical understanding.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA 

&square;  We frequently assume with names that seem to describe
a feature in an obvious and appropriate manner
that the feature is the direct source of the name.  Here is
an item from _The New York Times_, 10 August, 1963, p.
5: &ldquo;And Mr. and Mrs. Sanford have mailed engraved and
crested invitations for cocktails at Ideal View.  They named
their Saratoga house for a horse rather than the view of
the golf course nearby.&rdquo;  [_Eric P. Hamp, Univ. of Chicago_]

&square;  &ldquo;In the eighteen-fifties... a man named Henry Yesler
built a lumber mill at the bottom of the steep slopes running
down to Elliott Bay [in Seattle].  From the top, the
settlers and their oxen dragged logs down to Yesler's Mill,
and the path they followed became known as 'Skid Road.'
...Taverns, bawdy houses and cheap hostelries clustered
in the area to cater to the lumberjacks and sailors....  The
name Skid Road... is generally considered the origin of
the term 'Skid Row,' which is applied to derelict districts
across the land despite Seattle's continued protests that it
is a base corruption.&rdquo;  [Douglas E. Kneeland, _The N. Y.
Times_, 23 Mar. 1975]
</error>


## The Art and Technique of Citation Reading

_Laurence Urdang, Editor, VERBATIM_

The uninitiated often wonder where lexicographers
find the words they list and describe in the dictionaries
they compile, edit, and revise.  Nonprofessional
and unprofessional dictionary compilers may
often get them from secondary sources, but &ldquo;creative&rdquo;
lexicographers, bent on basing their work on original
research, rely on the accumulation of large quantities
of _citations_ that illustrate the occurrence of words and
expressions with enough context for the researcher to
determine the meaning and use of a given word.

Earlier lexicographers, particularly Johnson and
the original editors of the _Oxford English Dictionary_,
devised and perfected the practice of gathering citations.
But the _OED_ is a historical dictionary and its
editors were generally satisfied with any citation that
provided evidence for the earliest use of a word; if
meaning and usage were also illustrated, so much the
better.

The purposes of the modern lexicographer are usually
quite different.  In many cases, he may require that
a word be embedded in sufficient explanatory text to
reveal as much of its meaning as possible.  Some words
have transparent meanings, occasioning little difficulty
for the definer.  For instance, the neologisms _stagflation_
(an obvious blend of _stagnation_ and _inflation_) and
_neonatology_ (the study of neonates, or new-born infants)
have obvious meanings.  But what of _disintermediation_?
To be sure, it has something to do with
'eliminating an intermediate,' but its application in the
field of finance is far from obvious, and the definer
must seek the aid of a specialist, in this case someone
familiar with finance.

Many periodicals, when introducing a neologism,
are careful to give it a gloss.  _The New York Times_ is
to be commended for its efforts in this respect, and it
goes even further by providing explanatory comments
(if not outright definitions) for most of the terms, new
or old, that may be unfamiliar to its readers.

The _OED_, which, as we said, is a historical dictionary,
was based on something like six million citation
slips.  However, many of its citations yield little
semantic information.  For example, without the definition,
&ldquo;Unconformable to the common order; deviating
from rule; irregular; abnormal,&rdquo; it would be almost
impossible to derive from the following citations the
meaning of _anomalous_:

<quote>
<emph>1655</emph> LESTRANGE _Chas.  I_, 137 These things... being
anomalous, innovations and so severely urged,
many ... separated themselves into factious sidings.
<emph>1667</emph> _Phil.  Trans_.  II.  601 Some anomalous Feavers.
<emph>1789</emph> BENTHAM _Princ.  Legisl_. xviii. &sect; 10 Offences
of this description may well be called anomalous.
<emph>1872</emph> HOLMES _Poet Breakf. T._ xi 347 Peculiar
and anomalous in her likes and dislikes.
</quote>

Contrast the citations given in _Merriam-Webster Third
International_ (1961):

<quote>
&lt;an &tilde; verb&gt; &lt;in nature, the &tilde; or lawless
systems often are most interesting and instructive
--Otto Glasser&gt; &lt;any hereditary perculiarity--as
a supernumerary finger, or an &tilde; shape of
feature --Nathaniel Hawthorne&lt;
</quote>

Citations for names of ostensive objects, e.g., _apple,
dog, microbe_, are worthless for defining purposes,
though they may provide vital evidence for the existence
of a term.

Both dictionaries give workable _definitions_, but
we are discussing citations here, and the point is that
unless either the definer already &ldquo;knows&rdquo; the meaning(s)
of the word or determines its meaning(s) from
some other source, it is highly unlikely that the
sense(s) could be derived from the citations.  (Because
the _OED_ sometimes uses definitions from other dictionaries
as citations, those citations are generally more
useful for deriving meanings, though they may offer
little in the way of context for purposes of determining
syntax and grammar.)

The _OED_ citations were gathered by thousands
of readers recruited from the ranks of the general public.
Needless to say, some readers were more adept
than others at ferreting out valuable citations.  Also,
some read a great deal more than others, and the
quantities of citations produced varied greatly from
reader to reader.  My experience with citation readers
has shown that those who use English as a second language--that
is, those who are not native speakers--are
sometimes more adroit at identifying new or unfamiliar
senses of common English words than are native
speakers.  Neologisms, on the other hand, are more
readily identified by the native speakers, perhaps because
nonnative speakers seem to lack the security of
being able to admit they are ignorant of a word,
which, for all they know, might be a common word
in the language.

If a given neologism or new sense for an old
word (e.g., the slang sense of _dig_ 'understand') appears
only once, it may be a nonce coinage or use,
and, if so, it is important to know that fact.  Therefore,
once a citation has been prepared, it is not enough
to stop there, for the _frequency_ of use of the word or
phrase becomes a matter of equal importance.  For example,
if the engineers at Bell Laboratories had coined
the word _transistor_ and used it only in their original research
reports, that would be interesting, but scarcely as
important as the word's subsequent extraordinary frequency
in the language, evidenced by its widespread
use.  In using a citation file, the lexicographer pays close
attention not only to the fact that a word or phrase occurs
at all but also the number of citations gathered for
it and to the variety of publications from which they
were culled.  Another factor to be reckoned with is the
&ldquo;exposure&rdquo; of the work from which the citation is taken,
for a technical term appearing ten times in a highly
specialized monograph dealing with computer circuits
is less important to the general-dictionary lexicographer
than its one-time appearance in _The New Yorker_
or _The New York Times_.  By the same token, the
regional distribution of a term is of importance to the
lexicographer: it is more likely that words dealing
with, say, oil drilling will have a higher frequency in
the U.S. southwest than in the northeast.

The modern citation reader is not, necessarily, just
an intelligent speaker of English, though that, obviously,
constitutes one of the criteria.  A more basic requirement
is a familiarity with the language sufficient to
be able to guess whether a new word selected for
citation is already in the dictionary without having
to waste time looking it up.

It is essential that the citation-reader include
enough surrounding context from the original material
to make the clipping meaningful, for the collection of
citations is not merely the compilation of a word list.

A more-or-less standard form for citations is a
4" &times; 6" slip of paper (slips are usually used because
cards take up very much more room in filing cabinets)
to which is fastened the clipping (using _only_ &ldquo;Scotch
Magic Tape&rdquo;--the frosted, not the transparent kind)
and on which the cited word is written in the upper
left-hand corner with the source and date marked in
the lower left-hand corner.  Here is a typical citation
form:

One splendid effort in 1971 featured districts that
looked like giant chickens, districts that looked like
coiled snakes, and districts with remarkable pimples
in their boundary lines, zits that popped up to
include the home of one liberal incumbent in the
district of another liberal incumbent.

The individual citation-reader collects these and sorts
them into alphabetical order.

All sources of language, written or oral, are grist
for the citation mill.  Needless to say, the early citation-readers
for the _OED_ had no access to radio, television,
and recordings; but that has changed, and
citations from broadcast material are today quite as
important as those from printed matter, especially
when it comes to pronunciations, though those require
an expert phonetician for their accurate transcription.
The form used would be the same, the difference being
that the text would have to be written out longhand
(or typed) in the space usually devoted to the
printed citation.

If any of our readers are interested in conducting
their own citation research and in accumulating files,
the principles laid out in this article should be sufficient
to make a beginning.  We at VERBATIM are
interested in such collections and those with the time
and inclination to become involved should write to us
for further information at VERBATIM, Essex, Ct.
06426.

#### Bureaucratic Possessives

_Elbridge Colby, Charlotte, Vermont_

In the 1890s a board of scientifically-minded men declared
hostilities against the possessive form of American
place names.  In one twelve-month period, the apostrophe
disappeared from 1,665 town names in the U.S. Postal
Guide.  The &ldquo;Board on Geographic Names&rdquo; contained no
linguist, no American historian, not even a hillbilly.  The
geologists and geographers on the Board have steadfastly
maintained that they give full consideration to local usage.
I suppose they would have us believe that over a thousand
towns dropped their apostrophes in a single year!

Included in the discard was the apostrophe in _Martha's
Vineyard_.  Her people launched a year-long campaign
for its return and, with the aid of the governor of Massachusetts,
got back their prized apostrophe.  Theirs was
the only victory.

Up in Vermont, the residents of _Thompson's Pond_
were not so lucky.  Local citizens, the town selectmen, and
the State Library, which by law has jurisdiction over place
names, tried to restore the apostrophe, citing usage as
their defense.  Across the state is _Joe's Pond_, named after
an Indian of Revolutionary times who lived on _Joe's Island_
in the middle of the little lake.  In both instances, in spite
of the protests of citizens, town government, and the Library,
the Board on Geographic Names in Washington
continues to drop the apostrophe on Geological Survey
maps.  No Vermont governor has been willing to intervene.

The &ldquo;most unkindest cut of all&rdquo; came when a mountain
above the Winooski River, called _Camel's Hump_, had
its name adopted for a new middle school.  Architects and
school officials (not teachers) did their &ldquo;research&rdquo; and
placed on the outside wall in huge lettering &ldquo;CAMELS
HUMP MIDDLE SCHOOL.&rdquo;  Future generations of
young scholars will pass under that nonapostrophic label
every morning for years until they pass on to the high
school, where their English teachers will have to work to
undo years of subconscious training in bad spelling.

Nor is Vermont the only state to suffer.  Down in
Mencken's &ldquo;Free State&rdquo; of Maryland, you can find _St.
Mary's City, St. Mary's River, St. Mary's County_, and _St.
Mary's College_ on federal maps, all lacking their proper
apostrophes.  However, residents include them on their stationery,
the county commissioners use them officially, and
the English Department of the college still teaches the use
of apostrophes with proper names, in spite of the bureaucrats
upriver.


### INTER ALIA II.1.2

_Many Cinqs_

To the Editor:

Apropos of David Alpern's problems with French in
Canada,...I am reminded of the experience of a friend
of mine visiting in northern Quebec.  He ordered Sanka
in place of coffee--and got five cups of coffee.

Bro. Francis Huethler
_Christian Brothers Novitiate_
_Providence, R. I._

[from _The N.Y. Times_, May 13, 1975]


### INTER ALIA II.1.3

We were struck by the incongruity of the spelling
of _consensual_ vs. \?\_consentual_ or _consentaneous_ or _consentient_
in a _N.Y. Times_ article [3 Feb. 1975] the headline
of which reads &ldquo;Judge Supports 'Consensual Sodomy.'
&rdquo;  The proper legalism is _consensual_, notwithstanding
its sensual over (or under) tones....  _The N.Y. Times_
[27 Feb. 1975] published an article by William Safire &ldquo;On
Political Similes,&rdquo; in which the author suggests replacing
the old cliches (e.g., _happy as a lark, snug as a bug in a
rug,_ etc.) with some refreshing new expressions, modeled
on a comment made by Birenda Bir Bikram Shah Dev, at
his coronation as the new ruler of Katmandu: &ldquo;I will be
popular like the raindrop.  I will be friendly like the sun.&rdquo;
Safire suggests (among others) these types: (rhyming)
_cheeky as a chic sheik;_ (personal characteristic) _unassailable
as Nader;_ (categorical) _leaky as a Senate committee;_
(situational) _as greasy as a public opinion poll_....  _The
Times,_ which is, obviously, read with some regularity
around here, discussed [27 Feb. 1975] the legalities concerning
the information required by the U.S.  Treasury
Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
of all vintners and distillers marketing their products in
America.  It is legal, it appears, to conceal the name of the
manufacturer of a wine or spirit by using a registered
trade name in its place.  All of which explains why the
United Farmworkers, who are in dispute with Gallo over
representation of grapepickers, have filed a complaint with
the Federal Trade Commission charging that the commercials
for Madria Madria Sangria, made by Gallo, are misleading
because they don't say so.  Legal or not, of course
they are misleading....  We wish we could reproduce the
exchange that appeared in _The Los Angeles Times_ [16
Dec. 1974 and 25 Dec. 1974] &ldquo;Letters to the Times&rdquo; concerning
Alfred Connor Bowman's consternation at &ldquo;...the
growing predilection of men whose prime business is the
use of words for using in place of the right word another
of totally foreign meaning which merely happens to sound
or look like the right one.&rdquo;  Mr. Bowman takes to task such
pairs as _cohort/companion, allay/alleviate, assuage/appease,
aura/era, avid/acid_ [criticisms], _blatant/flagrant,
foment/ferment, impute/impugn,_ etc., all of which were
represented at some time in _The L.A. Times_.  The replies
by readers (apparently _The Times_ didn't want to risk a
rejoinder of its own) are amusing....  Dr. H.M. Truby
reports that _pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis_,
with 45 letters, is outranked by _aequeosalinocalcalinoceraceoaluminosocupreovitriolic_,
with 52 letters.  And it
can hardly be called the &ldquo;latest&rdquo; contender for the longest
word in English: it is attributed to Dr. Edward Strother,
who coined it to describe the spa waters in Bristol, England.
When?  In 1700!....  _The New York Times Magazine_
[9 Mar. 1975] published Theodore M. Bernstein's
&ldquo;I Favor the Doom of Whom,&rdquo; an attempt to give its
quietus the (_New Yorker's_) &ldquo;Omnipotent Whom.&rdquo;...  We
are ineluctably drawn to the conclusion that the so-called
Creative Directors of the Madison Avenue ad agencies are
bent on Creative Logic, Creative Grammar, and Creative
Syntax.  Note our recent gleanings: &ldquo;Nobody cares as much
about you as Schraffts&rdquo;; &ldquo;Coffee Brandy ice cream--a refreshing
after-dinner ap&eacute;ritif&rdquo;; Datsun offers a &ldquo;39 miles-per-gallon&rdquo;
model....  Leo Rosten's &ldquo;Diversions,&rdquo; a regular
feature of _Saturday Review/World_, records the following
(among others) from his memory bank of trivia: &ldquo;In
Africa, when the natives tell their young the story of
Hansel and Gretel, the witch's house is not made of cake
but of--salt; for salt is much more highly prized in Africa
than cake ever was.' &rdquo;


### Mr. Przybysz and the Czech O'Shaunnessy
_Leonard R. N. Ashley, Professor of English, Brooklyn College of the C.U.N.Y._

&ldquo;I'm not mentioned at all,&rdquo; says a character in John
Osborne's play, _Look Back in Anger_, &ldquo;because my
name is a dirty word.&rdquo;  But most people's names are used
a lot, and much to their pleasure.  As Byron wrote, &ldquo; 'Tis
pleasant, sure, to see one's name in print.&rdquo;  If a man hears
his name used, he's interested.  If he overhears it, his ears
prick up.  Even if it used in an unflattering connection, he
generally feels it is better to be singled out than not
noticed at all, and the publicity-hungry say they don't
care what you say about them as long as their names are
spelled right.

There is legal property in a name--and magical property,
too.  God Himself wouldn't give his name (He just
said, &ldquo;I am&rdquo;), lest it give the hearers magical power over
him; for a name can be used, the superstitious believe, just
like hair, or fingernail parings, or other bits for voodoo
dolls.  Your name is _you_.  Genealogy (even when derided
as &ldquo;the science of fools with long memories&rdquo;) uses your
name to explain your ancestry.  Modern psychologists use
your name to explain your personality.  You may have a
name to live down or a name to live up to.  Your name
affects the way others treat you and the way you think of
yourself.  In the Old Religion (witchcraft) or the new one
(psychology), names are power.

In Mencken's _The American Mercury_, in June 1932,
Howard F. Barker reported that one in every 85 Americans
was then named _Smith_ and that the next most common
American surnames were _Johnson, Brown, Williams, Jones,
Miller, Davis, Anderson, Wilson_, and _Moore_, but that the
_Smiths_ included many _Schmidts, Smeds, Haddads_, and _Kowalczyks;_
the _Johnsons_ many _Johanssons, Jansons_, and
_McShanes;_ the _Browns_ many _Brauns, Braunsteins,_ and so
on.  In New York City, it was reported, the most common
names then ran: _Smith, Cohen, Miller_ (some formerly
_Muller, Muhler, M&ouml;ller, Millar_, etc.), _Brown, and Schwartz_.
Mencken was quick to point out that many &ldquo;American&rdquo;
names were of German origin: _Waldo_ from _Waldow, Poe_
from _Pau, Armistead_ from _Armst&auml;dt, Custer_ from _K&ouml;ster,
Pershing_ from _Pfoersching,_ and _Hoover_ from _Huber_.  The
so-called &ldquo;Teutonic plagues,&rdquo; which at one time saw _Eisenhower_
in America, _Diefenbaker_ in Canada, the _Battenbergs_
in Britain, etc., or (to bring us up to date) the days of
_Haldemann, Erlichman_, et al., are nothing new.

In a country where the Czech name _Ocen&aacute;sek_ (diminutive
of &ldquo;Our Father&rdquo;) was changed to _O'Shaunnessy_
and where a terrified arrival at Ellis Island said (in Yiddish),
&ldquo;I don't remember,&rdquo; only to be given the name
_Fergusson_, the history of surnames can be colorful.  A
Swedish immigrant named _Esbj&ouml;rn_ entered the Union
Army in the Civil War as _Esbyorn_ and was mustered out
as _Osborn_.  Mencken notes that many new Americans translated
their names into English--_Podelsnik_ into _Underwood,
Alessandro Smiraglia_ into _Sandy Smash_--or altered them--
_Moiseyev_ to _Macy, Blumenthal_ to _Bloomingdale_--in the
same way that elsewhere the _Blumbergs_ had become the
_Montefiores_.

More recently, the change has been in the other direction:
_LeRoi Jones_ has become _Imamu Baraka; Cassius
Clay, Muhammad Ali; Lew Alcindor, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar_.
I recall the television interviewer who, trying hard
to be polite to the late Malcolm X, kept calling him &ldquo;Mr.
X.&rdquo;  Today, probably nothing is more &ldquo;American&rdquo; than the
combination of an African given name with, say, _Johnson_
or _Washington_ to exhibit a mix of cultures in a full name.
At Brooklyn College, for instance, it seems as if Jews bear
the forenames _Scott, Brian, Stuart, Bruce, Norman, Seymour,
Sidney, Morton, Morris,_ and _Milton_ more often than
do those with Anglo-Saxon surnames.

What's your name?  What does it mean?  Where did
it come from?

The study of names--onomastics--is a fascinating one.
Of course, you may come up with facts you don't like or
didn't expect (as might happen when you start to trace
your ancestors): _Calvin_ means 'bald'; the surname _Best_
once was _Beast_; if your name is _Bradley_, you may be related
to the Chickahominy Indians of Virginia (all of
whom bear the name and seem to be descended from a
very prolific early colonist); if you are named _Esposito,
Benedetti, de Angelo, della Chiesa_, or _della Croce_, one of
your ancestors was probably abandoned on the steps of an
Italian church as an unwanted baby.  If your name is _Marlowe_,
you may be (very distantly) related to the Elizabethan
dramatist _Christopher Marlowe_ (who never spelled
it that way) or, possibly, to some Finns (_M&auml;&auml;r&auml;l&auml;_) who
adopted the name.  If your name is _Macgregor_ or _Ruthven_,
you may or may not be pleased to learn that your name
was once illegal.  If your name should be _Grugno_, you have
a story to tell about Cardinal Grugno, who became Pope
Sergius IV in 1909 and who is said to have introduced the
custom of pontiffs assuming a new name on accession to
the throne of St. Peter: since his name meant 'swine-snout,'
a change was felt to be in order.  On the other hand, in
1940, when Albert Przybysz of Detroit legally changed
his name, he changed it to Clinton Przybysz.

You may become a collector of other people's names,
treasuring _Ima Hogg_ (&ldquo;Houston social and cultural leader,&rdquo;
according to _The New York Times_), _Conway Twitty_
(country singer), and the man named Uren who changed
his name to _Wren_ (1897)--not to mention ecdysiasts who
invent such wonderful names as _Rachel Prejudice, Sybil
Rights, Candy Barr, and Norma Vincent Peel_.  Many a
serious onomastician has begun by collecting odd names
for fun, together with the stories that go with them.  Just
one here: Robert Graves gives us the epitaph for a man
named _Longbottam_ who died young: &ldquo;_Ars longa, vita
brevis_....&rdquo;
</article>

### Reviews: MACMILLAN DICTIONARY FOR CHILDREN
_William D. Halsey, Editorial Director,Christopher G. Morris, Editor._
_Macmillan, 1975_

Let the dictionary first define itself: &ldquo;A book that has
words of a language arranged in alphabetical order, together
with information about them.  This dictionary tells
what words mean, how they are spelled, how they are
used, how they are pronounced, and where they come
from.&rdquo;  And how does this one measure up?  Very well, on
the whole.  It gives more than this quiet definition promises,
not only in what it presents, but in how.

Assuming age 12 as the limit of &ldquo;child&rdquo; is easier for
the child than for the elders (it makes _us_ all that much
older); but some of the _MDC_ definitions are hardly childlike.
For example, _diaphragm_, 2: 'A disk used to change
sound into electrical signals, or to change electrical signals
into sound.  It is used in telephones and microphones.'
Thus the &ldquo;for children&rdquo; in the title might well deprive this
book of some of its most responsive and needful readers.
Oh, for the day when the stuffier world of letters breaks
down and owns in print the best word we have, the one
we all use: This is a _kids'_ dictionary--and _kids_ is a word
_they_ use, accept, and are reluctant to part with.

_MDC_ is a pretty good book, with information on
etymology and pronunciation and definitions that don't
depend on the well-done illustrations.  The definitions are,
on the whole, well-said, concise, and helpful, and not condescending.
They make the way to an intermediate dictionary
easy and natural.  The definition is given first, immediately
after the headword which--praises be!--doesn't
bother with the traditional and usually unetymological syllable
breaks.  Then come verbal illustrations, which are
generous, and then the headword again, followed by pronunciations,
parts of speech, and plurals or past tenses.
Etymologies are not provided for every entry, but are
given for some of the interesting and simple ones, e.g.
_pasteurize, kindergarten_.  Also helpful is a note occurring
at homophones, e.g. _knight_ says: &ldquo;another word that
sounds like this is _night_.&rdquo;

The definitions and the words selected for entry are
basically sound; but limiting a _plumber_ to water pipes is
pretty narrow, and defining _Nazi_ in terms that make one
sound no worse than a Whig or a Tory seems odd; so does
restricting the definition of _Jew_ to 'A person whose religion
is Judaism.'  The definition of _reservation_ won't delight Indians;
and defining middle age as 40-60 without specifying
old or young is amusing.

Kids sometimes go to a dictionary to look up words
that scare or puzzle them and that they instinctively don't
ask adults.  _MDC_ does quite well here with the likes of
_cancer, divorce_, and _alcoholism;_ it is less helpful on sex.
Though _male, female, mammal_, and _breast_ are well said,
_pregnant_ is not even entered--a ridiculous omission in a
book that defines _tetanus, overture_, and _marsupial_.  Religious
bias, if any, seems Christian.  _Crucifixion, Mass,
Christmas_, and _Easter_ are all in; _Passover_ is, but not _seder,
menorah, Purim, Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah_--and _Israel_
and _Israeli_ are defined with no mention of Jews.

A happy forward-looking note is the inclusion of
metric definitions, e.g. at _kilometer, meter, gram, liter_.
Some headwords are followed not by definitions but simply
by a series of verbal illustrations: _the, and, to, yet, but,
is_ are handled thus.  Some of the verbal illustrations are less
than helpful.  At _calico:_ &ldquo;Sara has a calico cat.&rdquo;

Pronunciations try to be fair, but essentially represent
eastern U.S. Praises to the realistic &ldquo;poinsetta&rdquo; in the
same moment of bewilderment over the pedantic 3-syllable
notation of _licorice_, though both the -_iss_ and the -_ish_ forms
are given.

A brief practical test, based on ten words chosen at
random from Charles M. Schulz's _Snoopy Come Home_
(1962) and _The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe_
(1973 printing of the first of C.S. Lewis's Narnia Chronicles),
shows _MDC_ doing fairly well by both authors.
Narnia's _reindeer, enormous, pillar, hatchet, exclaim,
shrug_, and _larch_ are in; _sledge_ (a vehicle), _Turkish De-light_,
and _rampant_ are not.  From _Snoopy_..., the notorious
_mad punter_ is covered at _mad_ but not at _punt_ or _punter_;
and when the question is, &ldquo;Is there no stopping that
_fiend?_&rdquo;, _MDC_ omits _fiend_.  The definition at _vulture_, on the
other hand, is excellent; _stew, burglar, ancestor_, and _frustrated_
are all right; _loathe_ is left out; and though the word
doesn't occur in this book, Linus's friends will miss the
_ophthalmologist_.

...which brings us to the pictures, where kids are
presented in various shapes and colors, and several are
wearing glasses.  The sizes of the pictures are often out of
proportion, especially in the natural history area where
_trout_ and _whale_ are both 2&frac12;&rdquo; long; some illustrations are
too cluttered--the _stoop_ is barely visible, since it is filled
by six people of various colors plus a dog and a cat, and
for good measure there's a white man and a caged bird
looking out the window.

But by and large, _MDC_ is a good dictionary for
young readers.  It is less helpful for young _hearers_, since
profanity, obscenity, and ethnic slurs are all absent.  Perhaps
it's about time we aired these and said point blank
that they are offensive?

_Audrey R. Duckert, University of Massachusetts_

### Reviews: APES, MEN, AND LANGUAGES
_Eugene Linden, Saturday Review Press/E. P. Dutton &amp; Co., Inc., 1974

In 1966 R. Allen and Beatrice Gardner, behavioral
psychologists at the University of Nevada at Reno, began
teaching a young female chimpanzee, named by them
Washoe, how to communicate with them via the American
Sign Language, or Ameslan, one of the sign languages used
by the deaf in North America.  Five years later, when
Washoe could use 160 words singly and in combination,
she moved with Dr. Roger Fouts, who had been the Gardners'
chief assistant, to the Institute for Primate Studies at
Norman, Oklahoma.  There she joined a colony of chimps
who were being taught Ameslan.  They live in part with
human teacher-families and in part on their own island.
They can communicate with both humans and with each
other using Ameslan.  As far as their teachers, certain behavioral
scientists, and author Eugene Linden are concerned,
they have language.  This, in summary, is the content
of part one of _Apes, Men, and Language_.

It has been known for years that, intelligent as they
are, chimps are not apt students of human speech.  The
Gardners rightly guessed that their experiment might have
better results if they made use not of the chimps' vocal but of
their motor and gestural skills.  In spite of their success with
Washoe they did not push the idea that Washoe now had
language.  For what she could do didn't seem to them at
first to match what linguists have called language.  In fact,
a number of linguists and psycholinguists were quick to
deny that Washoe had language, only to have to backtrack
eventually on their nonacceptance of the high level of her
talents.

Now it is no secret among professional linguists that
no one has defined human language in such a universal
way that one can say to everyone's satisfaction that this is
language and that is not.  So to this reviewer disputes and
hard feelings have been both unfortunate and, in the long
view, unnecessary.  Linguists will simply have to re-emphasize
the requirement that speech enter into the definition
of language as they study it.  For the major difference between
humans and chimps as far as communication is
concerned is that the chimps just don't have the proper
equipment (supralaryngeal tract, to be technical) to speak
as humans do.

As an anthropocentric linguist, I want to put in a
word for man.  It is humans who have taught chimps a
new way to communicate, not vice versa.  And they have
used as the medium for this communication a gestural language,
which, as far as I can see, is a surrogate for English.
(Traditionally linguists do not devote their primary energies
to speech-surrogates.)  To Linden I would say that
some of the communication between man and chimp he
describes is what has been going on between pets and
their owners through the ages.  And to the researchers in
this significant area I would say that it is a pity that the
gestural system of chimpanzees in their native habitat,
noted by some observers, has not yet been studied.  We
may learn more about chimps from seeing how they communicate
naturally than how they handle human sign-language.

To me the second part of the book falls below the
level of the first when Linden presents himself as an evaluator
of historical trends and social critic.  He sees a revolution
in the behavioral sciences wherein the Platonic view
of man as separate from nature is being replaced by the
Darwinian view of man as part of it.  He thinks that the
Platonic view has allowed man to exploit nature and is
heartened by the Darwinian philosophy that has led to the
founding of the Animal Behavioral Society, whose members
he characterizes as young and vigorous, with a propensity
for life and research in the wilderness.  Perhaps I
am a bit hard on him here, but the current back-to-nature
movement of the young that thrills him may be more of a
fad than his youth leads him to believe.  In any case I am
certainly sympathetic to the aims of this new Society.

It is only youngsters that have been taught to &ldquo;sign.&rdquo;
They are an interesting group, each with its own personality
and intelligence.  Charming drawings of them by
Madelaine Gill Linden, the author's wife, add to the attractiveness
of this volume, which, I daresay, will have a
major impact.

_Karl Rosen, University of Kansas_


### Reviews: NEW ACRONYMS AND INITIALISMS 1975
_Edited by Ellen T. Crowley, Gale Research Co., 1975


As some of our readers may know, since 1953 Gale
Research Company has published a series of valuable reference
books, like the _Encylopedia of Associations_ (9th
edition, 1975), a _Directory of Special Libraries and Information
Centers_ (3rd edition, 1974), _Contemporary Authors_
(containing bio-bibliographical information on more
than 38,000 current authors), and others.  The volume under
review here is a 1975 supplement to _The Acronyms
and Initialisms Dictionary_ (4th edition, 1973) that includes
a 1974 supplement.

We usually define an acronym as a pronounceable
word made up of the first letters or syllables of the name
of an organization, product, etc.  Thus, familiar acronyms
as _Jeep_ (_GP_ vehicle = General _Purpose_ vehicle), _Nabisco_
(_National Biscuit Company_), _radar_ (_radio detecting and
ranging_), _laser_ (_light a_mplification by stimulated _e_mission
of _r_adiation), etc.  We are not quite certain what the editor
of _NAI_ means by 'acronym' for, in the Foreword to
_NAI_ she refers to _MFSB_ (Mother, Father, Sister, Brother)
as an acronym, and it's bevond us how one pronounces
_MFSB_ as a word ([\?\]?).  She also identifies
_WFL_ and _WTT_ as acronyms, though we couldn't
imagine pronunciations other than [\ill\] and
[\ill\].  Those, to us, are abbreviations.  Abbreviations
are distinguished from acronyms in that
they consist of only the initial letters of a title name
and are usually unpronounceable (except as a sequence
of names of alphabetical characters), like _NBC_, _CBS_,
and _ABC_.  There is, it must be acknowledged, an area
where the two overlap as in _SNCC_, normally an unpronounceable
sequence, which is actually pronounced
[snIk], and in _AID_ (American Institute of Decorators) and
_ACTH_ (_a_drenocorticotropic _hor_mone), which though quite
pronounceable, never are in practice.  This overlap, however,
can be resolved by proper linguistic research that
would determine whether a given item is, in fact, pronounced
as a word or as a sequence of names of alphabetical
characters.  Unfortunately, _NAI_ doesn't resolve this
question, for it simply lists the entry and follows the listing
with the fully spelled-out form, offering no further
information.

As a reference book, its value is thereby undiminished;
but as anything but an unedited list of acronyms and abbreviations
its usefulness to the linguist and lexicographer
is limited by the paucity of attendant information.

This Gale book is expensive if the purchaser considers
only such factors as composition, paper, printing, and
binding.  But when consideration is given to the fact that
Gale's is the only game in town, the price must be evaluated
in terms of how badly one needs the information it
contains: if you cannot do without it, _New Acronyms and
Initialisms_ is not too expensive at $30 for a 131-page,
large-format, softcover book.  (Incidentally, _NAI_, at $30,
contains 19,000 terms, while the _Acronyms and Initialisms
Dictionary_, at $27.50, contains 103,000.)

Turning to the entries themselves, little can be added
to this review save to comment on the amusement and
speculation raised by some of them.  One would think that
an abbreviation or acronym comes about not only because
the original term is too long but because it is very frequently
used in conversation, or writing, or both.  Therefore,
we were somewhat mystified by the circumstances
requiring shortening of terms like _Amicale des Anciens
Volontaires Fran&ccedil;ais en Espagne Republicaine_ (_AVER_),
_Business Office Must_ (_BOM_), _Flat-Tile Roof_ (_FTR_),
_Mean Time Between Unscheduled Removal_ (_MTBUR_),
and _Stealing Takes Everyone's Money_ (_STEM_)--the last
of which we can imagine no context for even when freeassociating.

There is no doubt that English and other languages
have added to their lexicons through the use of acronyms,
and _New Acronyms and Initialisms_, together with its predecessor,
can provide a valuable collection for study of
this aspect of word-building.


### Reviews: A CONCORDANCE TO THE POEMS OF ALEXANDER POPE
_compiled by Emmett G. Bedford and
Robert J. Dilligan, Gale Research Company,
1974_

A concordance is a detailed index of all or most of
the words in a literary work or in the collected works of
an author.  In an earlier issue of VERBATIM [I, 3, 6],
we had occasion to offer a brief review of _The Harvard
Concordance to Shakespeare_, compiled by Marvin Spevack
and published by The Belknap Press.  Of course, everyone
is familiar with the many concordances of the Bible
that have been published.  Before us is a concordance to
the poems of Alexander Pope, including his translations of
the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_.  Why this seeming preoccupation
with concordances?

To the linguist the values of concordances are manifold.
Since most concordances are prepared for classic
works of literature--that is, works read by an enormous
number of people at some time during their lives--the lexicographer
seeks the concordance as a source list for words
to which a substantial number of speakers of the language
are exposed.  These words may not be in the speakers'
speaking vocabulary, but they are very likely part of their
reading vocabulary, hence form an important base for the
selection of entries for a dictionary.

Linguists interested in style in language have developed
techniques for analyzing the lexicon and syntax of
writers to determine the authorship of anonymous or disputed
works of literature; they use concordances as an aid
in identifying individual authors.  To some extent, those
familiar with the writings of certain authors may be able
to say, &ldquo;That sounds like Milton,&rdquo; or, &ldquo;I can't imagine
that Swift wrote anything like that!&rdquo;  The use of computer-generated
concordances coupled with grammatical and
syntactic analyses developed by linguists concerned with
stylistics provides a systematized procedure for doing much
the same thing.

Again, the linguist specializing in the history of the
language can easily trace a given lexical item with the
help of a concordance or a series of concordances, for the
compared rank frequency of a word in a variety of concordances
can yield considerable information about its
history.

The work at hand, an impressive, two-volume concordance
based on the Twickenham edition of Pope's
poems, lists 20,892 words that are illustrated by 269,625
lines of text.  In the Appendix are set forth a clear statistical
summary derived from the analysis of the completed
concordance, a list of words in (descending) order of frequency,
and the distribution and type/token ratios in the
entire work.  [_Type_ means an individual word; _token_ means
the total number of occurrences of that word.  The ratios
between them (_type/token ratios_) reveal important information
about the way the language is used by a given
author.]  The first volume contains an alphabetical list
showing the frequency of each word in the poems of Pope,
followed by the main concordance, which lists under each
of the alphabetized headwords the lines (indexed) illustrating
all of the instances of the use of the headword.  In
keeping with common practice, the words of extraordinarily
high frequency (like _a, and, but, the_, etc.), although
counted, are not illustrated.

All this is more or less standard among modern concordances,
but that in no way diminishes the value of the
present work.  In fact, the more concordances made available
to scholars, the more useful comparisons among them
become, adding immeasurably to our continually expanding
knowledge of something we all use in all our activities
almost every day of our lives but of which we still know
so little--language.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA

&square;  &ldquo;Captain [Hazelton] Seaman's design [in 1836, for a
round-bottomed, kayaklike duckboat to be used in the bays
of southern New Jersey]...[was] originally called...
'The Devil's Coffin.'  Baymen using them to sneak up on
waterfowl quickly amended this to 'sneak boat' and probably
because sink boxes--boxes sunk under the water--were
popular, the name finally settled on _sneakbox_.&rdquo;  [Zack
Taylor, _The N.Y. Times_, 23 Mar. 1975]

&square;  A couple of comments on VERBATIM I, 4: The royal
family word &ldquo;hoosh-mi&rdquo; (p. 7) for the nursery mixture of
chopped meat, potato, and gravy is obviously from _hoosh_
(_OED_: slang, 1905, 'thick soup').  My Scots-New England
grandmother used the word in the thirties to mean oatmeal
with meat or vegetables added.  I've used the phrase &ldquo;Pas
de lieu Rh&ocirc;ne que nous&rdquo; as a reverse shibboleth.  The better
your French, the longer it takes to get it.  [Dan Lufkin,
Ph.D., _Frederick, Md_.]

#### Letters {F.W. Doolittle, Jr.}

VERBATIM [I, 3, 4] gives examples of words with
senses that are antonyms.  One is _inflammable_, used in the
senses of 'not flammable' and 'highly flammable.'

Two solutions for avoiding the confusion between the
two _in-s_ come readily to mind: 1.  Where the negative is
intended, trade the ambiguous _in-_ for _non-_ or _un-_ (e.g.,
&ldquo;...that all men...are endowed by their Creator with
certain unalienable rights&rdquo;).  This is probably nonpracticable,
since the present usage is widespread.  Many would
consider such a trade nonelegant or unept (though perhaps
not unseemly).  2. Where _in_- is merely for intensification,
drop it altogether (_flammable_ is a perfectly respectable
word) or substitute _highly_.  But this latter usage is
also deeply grained in the language, and my suggested
solutions might be thought not to provide sufficiently high
tensification.

The prospect, therefore, is of nonaction, continued confusion,
and further fun for all.

Incidentally, what is your source for the use of _impregnable_
in the sense 'pregnable'?  It's easy to sense the &ldquo;action&rdquo;
(cf. _in medias res_), but I don't find the usage in the
_OED_.  Perhaps I need an &ldquo;American&rdquo; English dictionary.
_F.W. Doolittle, Jr., Towson, Maryland

_Mr. Burchfield replies:_

_impregnable_

The usual adjective in the _OED_, 1. Of a fortress or
stronghold: that cannot be taken by arms (illustrated by
quotations from 1430 to 1885); 2. _fig_.  That cannot be
overcome or vanquished (1582-1862), 'we are impregnable
in our furs,' 'A man politely impregnable to the intrusion
of human curiosity,' is not being joined in the forthcoming
second volume of _A Supplement to the OED_ by
the etymologically unrelated _impregnable_ 'able to be impregnated.'

When we dealt with words in _impr_- we had no examples
of this new use and the position remains unchanged.
My scientific colleagues looked at the 1970-73 KWIC indexes
of the _Biological Abstracts_, the decennial and quinquennial
indexes of the _Chemical Abstracts_, and various
textbooks on embryology, including avian embryology, and
have not found the word used in print.  It looks as if it
is not commonly used though printed evidence of its currency
presumably exists somewhere as the word is treated
in _Webster's Third_ and in most other American dictionaries.

The feeling here is that if anyone ever needed such a
word, _impregnatable_ would be the obvious form--as Fowler
suggested in _Modern English Usage_ in 1926.

We must be behind the times since the only comments
on the word in our files are anecdotal.  One of our
readers (she is in her seventies) still laments the use of
_impregnable_ at all because of the presence of the unetymological
-_g_-, and went so far as to suggest that the
writer of the following example was 'illiterate':

<quote>
<emph>1974</emph> B. HAMILTON _Albigensian Crusade_ (Historical
Association) 27 This castle, built on a virtually impregnable
mountain near Foix, was used as a refuge by
Cathars from the beginning of the Crusade.
</quote>

And another wrote 'And how!'  at the bottom of the slip
containing the following example:

<quote>
<emph>1972</emph> _Times Lit. Suppl_. 15 Sept. 1070/1 Eight children
by a wife of impregnable virtue.
</quote>
</text>

_R.W. Burchfield, Editor, Oxford English Dictionary Supplement_

#### Letters {Frank B. Moorman}

In your remarks in Ex Cathedra of VERBATIM [I, 4, 2],
I think you are too easy in your dismissal of the role of
radio in selling.  Along with that, you seem to be underestimating
the damage to language caused by listening to
the radio.  I earn my living from this broadcasting medium,
and the problem worries me as I work at my job and
listen to other radio stations.

Radio is more a part of people's lives than many probably
expect.  How many automatically turn on the radio as
they get up and get ready to go to work?  How many turn
on the radio in the car?  And how often is the radio on
just to provide some background noise?  It is a subliminal
communication, less direct than television, so it might seem
less obnoxious; but I am willing to bet that it has its own
brand of effect on people's attitude toward language and
their use of words.

One suburban radio station in the New York area, considered
even by its competitors as one of the best of its
size, referred to a gift store in its area as &ldquo;the most unique
shop of its kind.&rdquo;  This error was compounded by a second
use of the same expression to advertise a similar gift
shop about fifteen minutes later.  In another advertisement,
the same writer referred to a line of swimming pools as
being &ldquo;at a price competitive with pools that are far less
superior.&rdquo;

Nor should the newscaster be left uncriticized; I include
myself in this not only because I am one, but also because
I am not as semantically pure as I would like to be.  The
reporters of the business are the ones who repeat the expressions
and misuses invented by politicians, bureaucrats,
lawyers, and others (such expressions as _Vietnamization_).
They also make their own mistakes, since they are not
necessarily educated above the average (whatever that
might be).  Indeed, education does not have all that much
to do with their mistakes, because I know broadcasters
who did not get beyond high school who have a greater
respect for language than many of those who have been
to college.  The mistakes of the newscasters are compounded
by the general attitude toward them that they are authorities,
not only on the subject they are reporting, but
also on anything they happen to touch, including language.

Let me offer a few insider's comments about what the
individual can do about this.  First, find some others who
feel as you do: nothing will work unless there are several
people pressing the same point.  I suggest there is little
hope in writing the FCC: it moves very slowly, and
usually only in response to heavy, well-organized pressure.
Don't expect too much from letters to senators, congressmen,
or the networks: they are far removed from such
things and also respond only to heavy pressure.  Chances
are much better with the local TV and radio stations,
particularly outside of New York: they need the local audience
much more than the larger networks, and tend to
be a little more responsive.  But don't forget the local advertiser
himself: dealing with the national companies can
be hopeless, but local dealers need the business.  If one
advertiser gets the idea he is going to lose customers because
of his obnoxious commercials, he might be inclined
to ask for a change.  Never forget that the profit motive
can sometimes be used to a customer's advantage.
_Frank B. Moorman, Bedford Hills, N. Y._

#### Letters {G. J. Grieshaber}

...Anent &ldquo;Family Words in English&rdquo; [VERBATIM
I, 4], my wife formed her own word for too much hustle
and bustle: _hecticity_, an almost natural word formation
and better than _hecticness_.  Everyone uses _FHB_, but only
our family uses _KB_!  When we are served a drink consisting
of one small jigger of bourbon plus 10 to 12 ounces of
water and ice, that, to us, is a _KB_.  So obvious--a 'Kidney
Buster'!
_G. J. Grieshaber, Lackland, Ohio_

#### Letters {Michele W. Fletcher}
Allen Walker Read's enjoyable article on family words
forced me to concentrate for a bit to think of my family's
coinages.  Out of a possible list of ten or so, I'm offering
one to the larger language community.

One Sunday morning, shortly after my family had
moved from Boston to Knoxville, Tennessee, my mother
announced to us that, according to the newspaper article
she was reading, there were more _phee-dees_ in Knoxville
than there were in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  When my
father asked what on earth a _phee-dee_ was, she was
stumped, finally saying, &ldquo;You know, a phee-aitch-dee.&rdquo;
Needless to say, as a family that boasts three college professors,
including my mother, we found this slightly foolish
word uniquely appropriate and have adopted it as our
own.
_Michele W. Fletcher, New Haven, Ct._

#### Letters {James J. Storrow, Jr.}
Why does the British sovereign identify her/himself
as &ldquo;Dear Edmond Wright&rdquo;?

Why did those leaders nod to Penn Station?

What economic group was Abe Lincoln addressing
at Gettysburg?  Was he telling farmers: &ldquo;Force corn, save
into ears to go&rdquo;?  Or, as I suspect, was he addressing the
financial analysts: &ldquo;For scorn, savings to your escrow!&rdquo;?  Of
course there are those who hold Lincoln was a closet
podiatrist: &ldquo;For his corns eventually has to go.&rdquo;  (Remember
his syntax occasionally slipped.)

You--or someone you know--have invented a challenging
new and semantic indoor sport that deserves a name
less sick than &ldquo;phonatics.&rdquo;  Perhaps the Persian Gulch,
Wadi Dhesai would do.

Seriously, I am enjoying VERBATIM very much indeed;
best wishes for success from your fellow publisher.
_James J. Storrow, Jr., Publisher, The Nation_

#### Letters {Evelyn M Perdue}
Of course we'll subscribe again! VERBATIM is the
most delightful item the mailman delivers.  Continued success
to all concerned.

How do you like this [&ldquo;phonatic&rdquo;] effort?:
Un petit d'un petit s'attend du alle,
Un petit d'un petit &agrave; degr&eacute; val.
A le quinze sources
A le quinze main
Coup dent peut un petit d'un petit
D&eacute;gat de regain.

_Evelyn M Perdue, Peterborough, Ont., Canada_



## This Peculiar Boston Accent

_Mary Louise Gilman, Boston, Massachusetts_

Can a small-town girl from Kansas and Indiana make
good as a reporter in the wilds of Greater Boston,
with its strange welter of pronunciation and idiom?  Well,
she _can_, but it's not easy.

&ldquo;Pray your Honor's judgment,&rdquo; said the lawyer.

&ldquo;Mavvit,&rdquo; ruled the judge.

This curious exchange struck my ears in the first few
minutes of my first court case in Massachusetts; in Middle-sex
Probate, to be exact.  (It was in 1955; we were up here
while my husband attended Harvard Business School.  I
was an experienced reporter--but only in the American
language.)

Dazed, I kept my mouth shut and continued writing.
But after the same thing recurred a time or two, I hit
on the translation:

&ldquo;I object.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Objection overruled.&rdquo;

Courtroom language tends to be rather formal around
here, and a lawyer often objects by praying his honor's
judgment.  But either his honor's enunciation was a bit informal
that day or I wasn't tuned in.  He was simply saying,
&ldquo;He may have it,&rdquo; that is, that counsel might have his
question answered.

I got out of _that_ one without showing my ignorance.
But other and more dangerous linguistic pitfalls lay ahead.

Besides the Harvard interlude, I now have nearly
twelve years' full-time residence in the area to my credit,
so I feel equipped to analyze Boston's baffling language.
It's the marriage of the misplaced _r_ and the unpredictable
_a_, I have decided, that gives Bostonese its peculiar flavor
and so frequently bewilders us auslanders.  Down South
they drop their _r_'s, but they don't pick them up and use
them later to link words (or syllables) containing two consecutive
vowel sounds: Yeste'day ahfte'noon we sawr a
man drawring cahtoons.

Does the witness mean Dr. Brancha (pronounced
Branker) or Dr. Branker (pronounced Brancha)?

There doesn't seem to be much inclination in these
parts to pay even lip service to the lowly _r_ when it precedes
a strong consonant.  Perhaps it's considered uncouth
to give _r_ its full value in combination like _rd, rk, rl, rn_, and
_rt_.  Well, the lost _r_ may one day ruin my professional
reputation--by converting the word that's meant into an
unrelated sound-alike--but it doesn't offend my ear as does
the gratuitous _r_ found in the practice of lawr in Boston!
(I suppose it would sound like anarchy to say I could do
without lawr-and-awder.)

I started out with the common misconception that the
Boston _a_ is always broad.  In truth it's often down-right
narrow.  Sure, Bostonians say cahn't and tomahto; that's no
bother.  But when the unbroad _a_ teams up with the elided
_r_, a real teaser can result.  Many people--more women than
men, it seem to me--pronounce _park_ almost like _pack_.
Thus if your hostess suggests you pa'k your bags, you'd
better know whether you're coming or going.  Speaking
of bags, my face must have gone blank the first time I
met a Boston _baggin_.  The divorce-case libelant (as they're
called here) was tearfully testifying that, from being accustomed
to buying her clothes in the most exclusive
shops, she was now reduced to grubbing for baggins at the
Baggin Shop.  Who would expect _bargain_ to rhyme with
_wagon?_

Just to confound the confusion, people around here
aren't necessarily consistent among themselves.  (Incidentally,
I'm talking about native citizens, not those whose
speech patterns are modified by Irish, Italian, or other influences.)
Some of them _pock_ their cars.  I was saddened
when a neighbor told me that a man down the street had
&ldquo;taken a hat attack.&rdquo;  Another friend confirmed the report:
it was indeed a serious hot attack.

Take patent cases.  Besides coping with the technical
terms, a Boston reporter is forever having to decide
whether counsel or witness is saying _patent_ or _pattern_,
since there is seldom any difference in pronunciation.  I'm
waiting for the day when Mr. Patton sues for patent infringement
of his die pattern.  Things will get snarled up
like a nest of wire clotheshangers when they start talking
about the Patton patte'n paten'!

I don't dare be too smug about it, but I can now
usually tell whether the witness comes from Waban or
Woburn.  But who can distinguish whether he lives on
Western or Weston Avenue, when there is no distinction?
Of the ninety cities and towns street-indexed in the _Atlas
of Metropolitan Boston_, twenty-four have either a Western
or a Weston, and two have both: Boston lists Western
Avenue, Western Place, Weston Place, and Weston Street;
Hull has a Western Avenue and a Weston Street.  My only
recourse: Spell it, please.

One thing mystifies me.  I'll swear Bostonians always
pronounce famed Faneuil Hall as Thannel Hall.  And my
ears are as good as the next woman's; probably better.

I am now used to the fact that many people, mostly
female, make two syllables out of _yes_.  But I'm still startled
when I hear the word _on_ used as a shorthand form for
(as near as I can make out) the phrase to _Massachusetts_.
My first encounter with it was embarrassing.  I cornered a
lawyer at recess and said, &ldquo;I must have missed something
in your opening statement.  I understood you to say the
plaintiff's parents came on from California.  On _what?_&rdquo;  He
looked puzzled.  &ldquo;What's your problem?  As I said, they
came on.  Drove, as a matter of fact.&rdquo;

I had an unsettling experience back in the early days.
In the manner of the foreigner who thinks he understands
the Japanese people in a few weeks or months of living
among them, I was confident, after six months in the Boston
area, that I knew all the nuances of the language.  Besides,
wasn't I married to a native?

The witness was a fisherman, and he was talking
about what sounded like the _cod_ end of the net.  But
you couldn't fool me--I was too smart to fall for that one.
Asked to read back an answer, my voice was loud and
clear as I began, in my no-nonsense Midwestern accent,
&ldquo;When we hauled in the cord end of the net....&rdquo;  &ldquo;No,
no,&rdquo; yelled the witness and at least two lawyers, almost in
chorus, &ldquo;_cod_, c-o-d!&rdquo;

I am wiser now.  At least, I hope so.  And I know
that, while I still don't always understand this strange
tongue I live and work with, and probably never will, I'm
not alone.  The other day, walking to the elevator with a
longshoreman whose deposition I had just taken, I complained,
&ldquo;You fellows have a language all your own, and
it isn't easy for us landlubbers.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;I can see how it might throw you.
But it's nothing compared to the _Boston_ accent, I tell you.
I come from Pennsylvania, been here twenty years, and I
still can't get used to it.  Like when I was pretty new here,
I got a call from union hall to report to pier such-and-such.
The guy said, 'We shot a man.'  Well, I was kinda
scared, but I needed the work so I went down.  Come to
find out, what he'd said was, 'We're _short_ a man.'  So it
was all right.&rdquo;
</article>

NOTE: This article appeared originally in _The National Shorthand Reporter_,
May 1973, and is reprinted by permission.  Mrs. Gilman, still a resident
of Massachusetts, is now Editor of _NSR_.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v2n1_1975-05)