---
title: "Vol II, No 2 [September 1975]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Portmanteaus, Telescopes, Jumbles
_John Algeo, Professor of English, University of Georgia_


Blending is a favorite device for making new
words, doubtless because it is easy to do, yet
gives scope to an impulse for play.  Many blends, including
most of those reported here, are nonce creations
that never achieve the immortality of a lexicographical
record.  Although they are of little importance
as words, they are noteworthy as examples of a
kind of word-making and as artifacts of homo loquens
et jocans.

Perhaps the simplest kind of blend is one that
combines two synonyms, such as _chopter_, spoken by a
television announcer, who might have said either
_chopper_ or _copter_, but who in fact succeeded in saying
both more or less simultaneously.  Similar is _bonk_
(_bang_ + _conk_) in &ldquo;A door nearly bonked her in the
face.&rdquo;  This kind of blend, dubbed a 'portmaneau&rdquo; by
Lewis Carroll, is often a deliberate creation rather
than a lapsus linguae.  It may also combine, not synonyms,
but words of contrastive meaning; the resulting
word unites both the forms and the senses of the
sources into a hermaphroditic tertiun quid.  The following
are examples: _beautility_ (_beauty_ + _utility_),
_dat_ (_dog_ + _cat_, a crossbred hoax), _Demopublican_
(_Democrat_ + _Republican_, another crossbreed, though
no hoax), _diplonomics_ (_diplomacy_ + _economics_, use
of economic power for diplomatic ends), _frarority_
(_fraternity_ + _sorority_, a college social organization
that admits both sexes), _gasit indigestion_ (_gas_ + _acid
indigestion_, a minor medical complaint which, if television
advertisements are to be believed, afflicts most
of the population), _glommentary_ (_glossary_ + _commentary_,
such as the present remarks), _Hinglish_
(_Hindi_ + _English_), _Hungarican_ (_Hungarian_ +
_American_), _Italish_ (_Italian_ + _English_), _ninny_ (_nickel_
+ _penny_, a proposed 2&frac12;&cent; coin), _pickel_ (_penny_ +
_nickel_, the same; according to Mr. Bert Casper of
White Bear Lake, Minnesota, who proposed the terms,
the second commemorates the present economic situation,
and the first those who are responsible for it),
_slumpflation_ (_slump_ + _inflation_, the economic situation
itself).

A quite different sort of blend is that made by shortening
the parts of an expression and collapsing them into
a single word.  This kind of blend, appropriately called a
&ldquo;telescope,&rdquo; may be a lapse, such as _darly_ in &ldquo;This time of
year, its gets darly...I mean, dark early.&rdquo;  Or it may be
deliberate, such as the motion picture title _Zardoz_ (_Wizard
of Oz_).  Other examples, based on more or less set phrases,
are _adflation_ (_advertising inflation_, the high cost of ads),
_administrivia_ (_administrative trivia_, what most administrators
do most of the time), _bitini_ (_bitsy bikini_), _ecotecture_
(_ecological architecture_, the practice of amateurs who build
their own houses), _feminar_ (_feminine seminar_, a meeting for
women), _femsymp_ (_feminine movement sympathizer_, by
analogy with _comsymp_), _flextime_ (_flexible time_, an arrangement
that permits workers to set their own schedules),
_medevac_ (_medical evacuation_, as from a battlefield
or a rock concert—the sense 'military helicopter,' which has
been lexicographically recorded, is probably a metaphorical
extension of this more basic, but unrecorded sense),
_thmink_ (_think mink_, sign in a fur shop window, a purely
graphic blend perhaps inspired by a burlesque of the <emph>IBM</emph>
motto: <emph>THIMK</emph>), _vodkatini_ (_vodka martini_).

Halfway between the pure portmanteau and the pure
telescope is a kind of blend that combines words which
collocate together, though not in a set phrase.  They seem
to be always self-conscious linguistic stunts (to use Louise
Pound's happy term).  Such blends, which may be called
&ldquo;jumbles,&rdquo; are the following: _bibulography_ (the biography
of a bibulous person), _Californication_ (unplanned and uncontrolled
development of a region, such as the way California
has been fornicated up), _econodations_ (a lemma in
the yellow pages for accommodations at an Econo-Travel
Motor Hotel), _hashaholic_ (one addicted to hashish as an
alcoholic is to alcohol), _hymnenanny_ (a religiously oriented
hootenanny), _imagineer_ (a monthly award for an
engineer with imaginative ideas), _McGovernment_ (governmental
policies advocated by George McGovern), _Nixnik_
(a member of the White House staff under Richard
Nixon), _Nova Scotiable_ (sociable, in a manner characteristic
of Nova Scotia, with thanks to A. M. Kinloch for the
term), _plotboiler_ (a literary work with a trite, improbable
plot), _pornicator_ (a producer, performer, or purveyor of
vicarious libidinous stimulation), _rumortism_ (a chronic inflammation
of the body politic), _sextrovert_ (one in no need
of the services of a pornicator), _tripewriter_ (a typewriter
used exclusively for political speeches), _Vietgate_ (a view
of political morality that equates the sins of Vietniks with
those of Nixniks), _Vietnik_ (one who publicly opposed the
government's Vietnam policy), _watergaffe_ (a bungled effort
to suppress a French humor magazine), _wordsical_ (a
theatrical performance that blends music with the recitation
of Ogden Nash's verse).

In popular use, the term _blend_ is used for any word
formed by shortening one word and combining what is left
with all or part of another.  There are, however, three distinct
subspecies: portmanteaus, which combine words that
might substitute for one another; telescopes, which combine
words that occur side by side in an expression; and
jumbles, which combine words between which there is
some association, although they are neither properly substitutes
nor the sequential elements of a structure.  All three
subspecies are favored by present-day wordsters, as the
examples cited clearly show.


#### INTER ALIA: II.2.1

&ldquo;Long usage has built gender distinctions and sex
discrimination into the very titles of many occupations,
effectively reserving some for men (busboy, foreman, fisherman)
and others for women (seamstress, maid, stewardess).
As part of the continuing movement to neuter the
native tongue, the Labor Department's list of approved job
designations has been revised: cloakroom personnel of
either sex will henceforth be called 'hatcheck attendants,'
vaudeville performers will be billed as 'song-and-dance
persons,' and the pedagogues who used to be known in
fact and fiction as governesses will be officially known as
'child mentors.'  The agency responsible for perpetrating
this linguistic revision is still, however, to be designated
as the Manpower Administration.&rdquo;

—Anthony Wolff [From <emph>SATURDAY REVIEW</emph> 5/3/75.]

#### Letters {Lawrence M. Friedman}

A letter from Arnold Zwicky [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> I, 4] mentions
phrases that are bilingually redundant.

Here at Stanford, we have a small lake called by one
and all _Lake Lagunita_ ('Lake Lake-ling').  Also, people
generally ignore the meaning of _el_ in Spanish names and
say _the El Morroco_ or _the El Capitan_ (the train).  Other
common examples are _the La Valencia Hotel_ and _the
Eldorado_.

In Spanish, many words contain the Arabic article _al_
but take the Spanish article also; for example, _el alcalde_
'the judge.'  This _al_ is found in our _alcohol_ and _algebra_,
among others.  Consider, too, an example of bilingual inconsistency:
_handkerchief_ contains the word _hand_, and
_kerchief_ is etymologically 'cover-head'; hence, 'hand head-cover,'
_chief_ being from Latin _caput_ via French _chef_.
There must be many others.
_—Lawrence M. Friedman, Stanford University Stanford, California_

[_We don't approve of anything in our alcohol except for
an occasional olive or pickled onion.  —Ed_.]



## Caustic Causatives and Lowest Common Denominatives

_Robert A. Fowkes, Professor of Linguistics and Germanic Languages, New York University_

The neighborhood, the job, the local newspaper, and
the car radio serve as perpetual sources of deliciously
irritating (_pace_ your learned review of Edwin Newman's
book) aberrations, which may be facetiously designated
as Caustic Causatives and Lowest Common Denominatives.
Under that regrettable rubric (regrettable
particularly because some of the causatives are in fact
factitives!), I impart the following:

(1)  We _water-repel any garment_.  This was long the
modest boast of a North Bronx tailor.  (I recall an Esther
Williams film in which somebody _romanced_ her in the
pool.  For a while she _water-repelled_ him—until boy got
soggy girl).

(2)  _Leash, Gutter and Pick Up After Your Dog Please_.
This quasi-denominatival admonition (presumably _pickup-after_
is one word) is found on signs in Greenwich Village
and other parts of New York City.

(3)  _They totaled my car!_  So complained a colleague,
who had to explain to me the meaning of that all-inclusive
treatment in an unreliable parking garage.

(4)  _Our party will proc&eacute;ss promptly at_ 9:45 was the
pompous pronouncement of a faculty marshal at our recent
commencement.  A friend's son _commenced_ on that occasion,
and it was about time.

(5)  _They refused to scholarship my son!_  complained
a disgruntled father.  He needn't have worried.  By now
they have open-admissioned him somewhere else.

(6)  _We haven't bulletined that course this term_, said
a department chairman; fewer eyebrows would have raised
if he had failed to catalogue it.

(7)  A restaurant near NYU has _fruited jello_, plainly
with overtones of &ldquo;America the Beautiful&rdquo;.

(8)  A woman who had never been X-rayed allegedly
had been _ultraviolated_ in Bellevue Hospital.

(9)  Various works were _Englished_ centuries ago, but
only things like shoes and apples have been Polished, and
we haven't Basqued, save in the Iberian sun.  Out of ethnic
modesty I Welsh not.

(10)  Layamon _Bruted_ abroad the legend of Arthur;
perhaps he Arthured the book in large part, too.

(11)  A certain basketball team needed to learn how
to _d&eacute;fense_; but it was the most offensive team in the NBA.

(12)  After Nolan Ryan's no-hitter, a player on another
team said, &ldquo;No team goes into a game thinking they're
going to get no-hit.&rdquo;

(13)  _Pele then walked to the center of the field and
footed a token kick into a corner_.  He will subsequently no
doubt be praised for his ball _handling_.

(14)  _Mike Marshall wild-pitched Rusty Staub into scoring
position_.

(15)  But Joe Ferguson did something much more drastic
than that: _He sacrificed Garvey home!_

(16)  _Two young residents were arrested on misdemeanor
loitering_.

(17)  _We custom-make matching pillows_ seems to have
been written by a cousin of the water-repellent tailor.

(18)  _Reduced rates for neutering in poor areas_ was the
proposal of an animal lover (?).

(19)  _The silverware set is guaranteed as dishwasher
proof_.

(20)  _We'll give your child a Funner Summer_ is the
promise of a Day Camp.

(21)  A response to _Help Murder Police_ during one
spell of violence: _Gladly_.

(22)  _An analysis of the tapes will show exactly how
stressed he was_, stated the author of a book on certain
intelligence methods.

(23)  _We intelligenced the case for months_, said the
same person.

(24)  Of a somewhat different type was the verbal plea
of a school janitor trying to avert chaos at times of class
changes: &ldquo;Please don't conjugate in the halls!&rdquo;  Conjugation
could, to be sure, be causative.

(25)  And there is obviously something fundamentally
wrong here: _But anything done to hep the anals I'm in
favor of_, which is from the same article as (18) above, in
our local paper.


## Clicks Are Very Common

_John F. Gummere, Philadelphia, Pa._

Dictionaries do little to indicate how common are the
clicks in our speech.  Indeed, some simply talk
about the Hottentots, whose clicks are very highly developed.
They might examine our limited number and conclude
that English is an underdeveloped or &ldquo;primitive&rdquo; language.
Consider the following in our speech:

(1)  Click of disapproval or admonition made by pursing
the lips and pushing the tongue forward from the hard
palate or the alveolar ridge.  Often written as &ldquo;Tch, tch.&rdquo;

(2)  Click of deprecation or sympathy made by pushing the
tongue against the hard palate, but with no liprounding.

(a)  If a child does something for which he has been
admonished, the click is slower, lips are slightly rounded,
and with this there is a head-shaking, all as if to say, &ldquo;Are
you stupid!&rdquo;  Written as &ldquo;Tsk, tsk.&rdquo;

(3)  Click of exhortation or secondary greeting or &ldquo;wolf.&rdquo;
Made with the side of the tongue against the soft palate
or against the back teeth (a lateral click) and drawn back
rapidly.  Used to start a horse, but heard when two persons
meet who have already spoken to one another, but
who don't want to pass without any recognition.  It means,
&ldquo;I have already said 'Hello,' and need not say it again.  But
I don't mean to ignore you.&rdquo;  With lip drawn back on
either side of the mouth, it is the &ldquo;wolf&rdquo; click, saluting a
female.

(4)  The click of wistfulness, made by a single tongue-flap,
as when admiring a beautiful dress which is also very expensive:
&ldquo;My I wish I had a dress like that.&rdquo;  (Tongue-flap
follows).  Also used for sympathy.  &ldquo;They say Mrs. X
is back in the hospital again.&rdquo;  One who hears this replies
with the single tongue-flap.

(5)  The click of osculation, made with the lips pursed
and short puffs of breath.  Note, also, the quadrilabial click!

If we include the standard variations of clicks, we
can claim eight, used only separately and vastly inferior
to the Hottentots.


#### Letters {Harry Sharp}

The discussion of Goetz von Berlichingen [VERBATIM
I, 2] has its almost exact counterpart in French history—
or had it when I was young.  Like our own language,
French has been liberated from such picturesque euphemisms,
my younger friends inform me.

At any rate, when Napoleon I's General Cambronne
was surrounded and fighting hopelessly on the field of
Waterloo, the English invited this hero to surrender.  Some
romantic journalist improved his reply, &ldquo;Merde!&rdquo;  by quoting
him to the effect: &ldquo;La garde meurt et ne se rend pas.&rdquo;

Nice French people in my early years refrained from
saying &ldquo;Merde!&rdquo;  They achieved the result by saying, &ldquo;Le
mot de Cambronne &agrave; vous!&rdquo;

American ballet corps members wish one another the
traditional stage good-luck charm, &ldquo;Break a leg!&rdquo;  But the
British ballet people tell each other &ldquo;Merde!&rdquo;  This exemplifies
two things: the usage of French to imply coarse language
(as in all the instances in the first volume of the
_OED Supplement_ see _French_); and the tendency to wish
on other nations or ethnic groups the negatives of our
lives.

And you knew that David Copperfield's stepfather was
rotten to the core as soon as you saw or heard his name:
Edward Murdstone.
_Harry Sharp, Encylopaedia Britannica_

[_In our experience, &ldquo;Merde!&rdquo; is slang for 'Good luck!' in
French....And how about Dostoyevsky's villain, Smerdyakov,
in_ The Brothers Karamazov? —_Ed_.]

#### Letters {Edward Mayo}

Here is a blend for <emph>VERBATIM:</emph> An acquaintance, in
his eagerness to describe a home he had visited, called
the house _palacious_, a portmanteau of _palatial_ and _spacious_,
although he was not conscious of his accomplishment
until it was pointed out to him.
_Edward Mayo, Kennebunkport, Maine_

[_For more on blends and portmanteaus (portmanteaux?)
see John Algeo's article in this issue. —Ed_.]


## The Languishing Art

_Stanford L. Luce, Department of French, Miami University (Ohio)_

In his article, &ldquo;Phonatics (sic[k]),&rdquo; in the February issue
of <emph>VERBATIM,</emph> Robert Fowkes made a reference
to Howard L. Chace—Horrid Lee Chaste, as he might
refer to himself—the author of _Anguish Languish_.  I feel
compelled to add some items of interest about this man
and the linguistic limbo he created, for I shared his office,
and in a sense his gestation, as he labored mightly to
bring forth the &ldquo;Fey-mouse Tells.&rdquo;

Actually, the stories he recast in Anguish were not so
much the goal as the by-product of his affair with words.
As in all greater and lesser inventions, happenstance often
proves more fruitful than plan.

Howard Chace had become fascinated, as a linguist,
in how many liberties could be taken with pronunciation
before the words themselves became unrecognizable.  He
had discovered that consonants, written or spoken, were
the prime ingredients.  The word &ldquo;television&rdquo; for instance
could be retrieved from &ldquo;toil-evasion,&rdquo; but not at all from
&ldquo;bell-emission.&rdquo;  Perhaps that explains why abbreviations
more frequently drop vowels than consonants, indeed why
wrds wth thr vwls rmvd cn stll b ndrstd.  On the other
hand, vowel changes could be accommodated with relative
ease by a willing listener.  &ldquo;Singer sunny sex pants&rdquo; still
emerged as &ldquo;Sing a song of six pence.&rdquo;

The consonants and vowels alone, however, will not
suffice without a tonic accent on the right syllable.  That
stress can make or break English communication.  Anguish
owes its vitality, its clarity—as Howard well realized—to
the observance of this principle.  A stressed syllable in the
substitute word had to correspond in position to that of
the target word.  &ldquo;Guilty Looks enter Tree Beers&rdquo; can be
recognized as a child's story, whereas &ldquo;Goal Dye-lux in
Tetra Buyers&rdquo; makes no sense whatsoever.  If a new acquaintance
were to greet you with &ldquo;Placed a matcher&rdquo;
you might cope with it more gracefully than if he had
said: &ldquo;Policed termite chew.&rdquo;  The sounds clearly resemble
English, but that accented &ldquo;ter-&rdquo; destroys the natural intonation.

The experiments that Howard conducted were by
no means limited to the French classroom at Miami.  For
years he had served as part of a Public Relations team to
interest and entertain alumni groups throughout the state.
Speaking to people from a wide range of backgrounds and
professions, he tried projecting his stories on a screen, but
always in the form of word lists to be read vertically, such
as:

<quote>
_heresy_    _warts_      _firmer_
_ladle_     _warts_      _once_
_furry_     _welcher_    _inner_
_starry_    _altar_      _regional_
_toiling_   _girdle_     _virgin_
_udder_     _deferent_
</quote>

Reading these words as isolated entities seldom produced
any audience reaction.  Even having the audience repeat
them after him roused little response.  But then, as he
speeded up the reading, linking one word with another,
pausing where necessary, individuals would begin to hear
a phrase or a whole sentence emerge.  &ldquo;Here is a little fairy
story told in other words, words which are altogether different
from the ones in the original version.&rdquo;

Like the sound of pop corn, here and there, a person
would clap a hand to his head and squeal or groan &ldquo;Oh,
no!&rdquo;  Thus encouraged, Howard would then flash on new
lists and the drama of &ldquo;Center Alley&rdquo; or &ldquo;Ladle Rat Rotten
Hut&rdquo; would begin to unfold.  &ldquo;Wants pawn term dare
worsted ladle gull hoe left wetter groin-murder honor itch
offer lodging dock florist,&rdquo; and so forth and so on to
greater glory.

Interestingly enough, women were generally the first
to respond.  Men came up ponderously in the rear.  Businessmen
frequently never did understand, and perhaps
justifiably put the whole evening down as proof of the
absurdity of alumni meetings.  Just a bunch of nonsense.
Impractical, at that.  And so perhaps it is, but from one
impracticality to another we stumble along our way
through life.  There is some comfort in knowing that at
least in this instance no serious matters are at stake.


## Do Conferees Photograph Well?
_Roger W. Wescott, Professor of Linguistics, Drew University_

The other day I listened to a news broadcast in
which what I would have called _conferents_ were
referred to as _conferees_ and what I would call _being
photogenic_ was referred to as _photographing well_.

This double discrepancy set me to wondering if I
am living in the linguistic past.  So I started to check
both types of usage.  While the second is hard to run
down, the first is not—thanks to the availability of such
lexical tomes as Martin Lehnert's _Reverse Dictionary
of Present-Day English_ (Veb Verlag, Leipzig, 1971:
for a really thorough investigation of English, one
must go not to England but to Germany!)

Lehnert revealed that about 60% of all participial
nouns ending in -_ee_ (such as _employee, trustee_,
and _deportee_) are wholly passive in sense, while only
about 10% (like _escapee_) are wholly active.  So far, I
felt confirmed in my prejudices.  But then, searching
further, I found that a surprising 30% have various
intermediate senses, some strikingly close in function
to Classical Greek &ldquo;middle voice&rdquo; participles.  Examples
follow, in order of decreasing passivity.

_amputee:_ one who has had a limb or limbs amputated
(voluntarily or involuntarily)

_referee:_ one to whom disputes are referred

_mortgagee:_ one who has mortgaged his assets or whose
assets have been mortgaged for him

_divorcee:_ one who has divorced a spouse or been divorced
by a spouse

_absentee:_ one who is absent, whether self-absented or not

_standee:_ one who is compelled to stand (either by an
usher or by lack of seats)

_refugee:_ one who has taken flight or found refuge

My assessment of -_ee_ participials seemed not to
have been far off the mark.  However, when it came
time to check my more active term _conferent_ (modeled,
I suppose, on words like _adherent_ or _celebrant_),
I got a shock.  For even the prestigiously unabridged
_Oxford English Dictionary_ declined to admit _conferent_
as a noun and cited it adjectivally only, with the
meaning 'appropriate' (as in the case of a remedy for
a disease).  Then, to compound my chagrin, the _OED_
added that _conferent_ was obsolete—and had been
since the 16th century!

I conclude that, as a teacher, I should stick to
Chaucer and the Venerable Bede.  In matters of current
usage, I am clearly a learnee.

#### Letters {Pat Solotaire}

Is there anybody in the punctuation field that shares
my confusion about what is happening to quotation marks?
There has been an obvious progression from their simple
use to indicate direct discourse to their use as disclaimer
markers, as in &ldquo;Rogers, the political 'liberal.'...&rdquo;  But now
it seems to show up, especially on signs, for no discernible
reason.  Random examples include:

_No &ldquo;bare feet&rdquo; allowed &ldquo;Stop&rdquo; before entering driveway
Roast Beef with &ldquo;gravy&rdquo; Native Blueberries &ldquo;For Sale&rdquo;_

I can't figure out what they intend to convey by the &ldquo;—&rdquo;,
and the few times I have had the opportunity to ask, nobody
could tell me.

While I am asking miscellaneous questions, does
anybody know the origin of the very common Maine usage
I term the Gratuitous Negative?  Examples:

&ldquo;I'm going to _Jaws_ Saturday night.&rdquo;  / &ldquo;Really?  So aren't I.&rdquo;
&ldquo;George really got schnockered at Judy's
party.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;Well so didn't she.&rdquo;

The _so_ seems necessary, and no confusion is generated by
the formation—it is accepted without doubt as a positive
statement.
_Pat Solotaire, South Harpswell, Me.


## The Expanded Modifier
_Margaret M. Bryant, Professor Emeritus of English, The City University of New York_

Ordinarily when one thinks of a modifier, a simple
adjective or adverb—one word—comes to mind,
as in &ldquo;The blue dress is beautiful,&rdquo; where one finds
two adjectives, _blue_, modifying _dress_, which is compared
by adding -_er_ or -_est_, and _beautiful_, also modifying
_dress_, but because of three syllables is compared
by adding _more_ and _most_.  But as the field of advertising
has expanded and had more and more influence
in the modern world, new creative forces have been
released in the language describing the many products
put on the market for sale or in making comparisons
with other products, new and not so new.  For example,
_Glamour Magazine_ (Dec., 1964, 112) describes
the way separates multiply and make &ldquo;very different,
very complete _day-into-evening_ looks&rdquo; (noun + preposition
+ noun).  Earlier (_Glamour_, Sept., 1963, 190),
one finds this phrase expanded by the addition of _all_,
an adjective, in &ldquo;the trusted _all-day-into-evening_
coat.&rdquo;  These began, no doubt, with compounds like
the adjective _bed-and-breakfast_ (noun + conjunction
+ noun), in &ldquo;Trimming and lace add charm to these
_bed-and-breakfast beauties_&rdquo; (_N. Y. Times_, Oct. 25,
1964, 61) or the adjective _coast-to-coast_ (noun +
preposition + noun) in &ldquo;Today the..._Coast-to-Coast_
chain will wind up fiscal 1964 with sales 'in excess of
$1.2 billion' &rdquo; (_Women's Wear Daily_, Dec. 15, 1964,
II, 4/1).  Now one finds all kinds of syntactical combinations,
phrase oddities of various types, even to
complete sentences used as modifiers, employed not
only in advertising, but in other forms of writing, as
will be illustrated in the following list (cited in alphabetical
order):

<quote>
_all-night_ [adj. + n.] &ldquo;all-night delicatessen&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
Dec., 1964, 104)

_antique-in-feeling_ [adj. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;antique-in-feeling
pressed glass&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Nov., 1964, 177)

_balance-a-plate-on-your-lap_ [(sentence) v. (imper.) + art.
+ n. + prep. + pron. + n.] &ldquo;For her sit-down
buffet—more in keeping with the mood of this party
than the balance-a-plate-on-your-lap kind—&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
Dec., 1964, 110)

_ban-the-bomb_ [(sentence) v. (imper.) + art. + n.] &ldquo;2000
demonstrators began an annual three-day ban-the-bomb
walk&rdquo; (_N.Y. Herald Tribune_, Apr. 18, 1965, 3)

_big-and-the-small-of-it_ [adj. + conj. + art. + adj. + prep.
+ pron.] &ldquo;...in the big-and-the-small-of-it photographs&rdquo;
(_Glamour_, Sept., 1963, 176)

_couldn't-be-simpler_ [v. (aux.) + adv. + v. + adj.] &ldquo;The
couldn't-be-simpler menu&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Dec., 1964, 104)

_easy-to-launder_ [adj. + prep. + v.] &ldquo;She'll love their
cool comfort in easy-to-launder, no-iron cotton terry&rdquo;

(_N.Y. Sunday News_, May 2, 1965, 30)

_easy-to-wear_ [adj. + prep. + v.] &ldquo;Casual...prints with
an easy-to-wear simplicity....&rdquo;  (_N.Y. Herald Tribune_,
Sec. 2, Apr. 11, 1965, 11)

_fast-moving_ [adv. + pres. part.] &ldquo;fast-moving fabrics
by Greenwood&rdquo; (_N.Y. Times Mag_., Dec. 6, 1964, 20)

_feed-them-fast_ [v. (imper.) + pron. + adv.] &ldquo;a feed-them-fast
lunch&rdquo; (_Family Circle_, May, 1965, 92)

_guess-grab-and-go_ [v. + v. + conj. + v.] &ldquo;...bought at
random by 'guess-grab-and-go' methods&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
May, 1964, 108)

_his-and-hers_ [pron. + conj. + pron.] &ldquo;His-And-Hers
Umbrellas&rdquo; (_N. Y. Herald Tribune_, Apr. 11, 1965, 25)

_knife-and-fork_ [n + conj. + n.] &ldquo;Knife-and-fork whoppers&rdquo;
(_Family Circle_, May, 1965, 54)

_less-than-moon-like_ [adj. + conj. + n. + adj.-forming
suffix] &ldquo;Your finances are apt to shift around with
less-than-moon-like predictability this month&rdquo;
(_Glamour_, Jan., 1965, 7)

_moderate-to-better-price_ [adj. + prep. + adj. + n.] &ldquo;a
moderate-to-better-price women's specialty store...&rdquo;

(_Women's Wear Daily_, Dec. 17, 1964, 7)

_never-left-home_ [adv. + v. + adv.] &ldquo;... out of the suitcase
with a never-left-home look&rdquo; (_Women's Wear
Daily_, Dec. 15, 1964, II, 27)

_no-iron_ [adj. + n.] &ldquo;no-iron cotton terry&rdquo; (_N.Y. Sunday
News_, May 2, 1965, 30)

_no-quarters-required_ [adj. + n. + past part.] &ldquo;...you
can rent a no-quarters-required juke box&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
Dec., 1964, 104)

_off-the-beach_ [prep. + art. + n.] &ldquo;...they share off-the-beach
apartments&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Jan. 1965, 32)

_one-of-a-kind_ [n. + prep. + art. + n.] &ldquo;The shop carries
one-of-a-kind bridal gowns&rdquo; (_Women's Wear Daily_,
Dec. 15, 1964, I, 24)

_over-the-elbow_ [prep. + art. + n.] &ldquo;Wear-Right's over-the-elbow
Mousquetaires of rayon s-t-r-e-t-c-h satin
fit perfectly&rdquo; (_N.Y. Times_, Dec. 9, 1965, 5)

_pure-line_ [adj. + n.] &ldquo;pure-line clear crystal&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
Nov., 1964, 177)

_realer-than-reptile_ [adj. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;It's the most
amazing, ingenious, incredible, realer-than-reptile spray:
Lady Esquire Instant Reptile&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Nov.
1964, 13)

_smooth-as-cream_ [adj. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;[Lipstick] it's
long-lasting, luscious, smooth-as-cream&rdquo; (_Glamour_,
Sept., 1964, 56)

_soft-as-butter_ [adj. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;a soft-as-butter
knit cardigan&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Sept. 1963, 1)

_summer-fresh_ [n. + adj.] &ldquo;summer-fresh prints&rdquo; (_N. Y.
Herald-Tribune_, Sec. 2, Apr. 11, 1965, 11)

_sweet-young-thing_ [adj. + adj. + n.] &ldquo;Misty pink, faint
peach, pale rose—once these were sweet-young-thing lip
shades&rdquo; (_Glamour_, Sept. 1963, 59)

_talk-of-the-town_ [n. + prep. + art. + n.] &ldquo;Fresh, talk-of-the-town
colors&rdquo; (_N. Y. Herald-Tribune_, Apr. 11,
1965, 15)

_three-day_ [adj. + n.] &ldquo;an annual three-day...walk&rdquo;
(_N. Y. Herald Tribune_, Apr. 18, 1965, 3)

_walk-on-air_ [v. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;go everywhere in the
walk-on-air comfort of our Italian-inspired sandal&rdquo;
(_N. Y. Sunday Times_, May 2, 1965, 117)

_woman-to-woman_ [n. + prep. + n.] &ldquo;—solid, practical
woman-to-woman editing that has built deep trust&rdquo;
(_N.Y. Times_, Oct. 23, 1964, 80)

_wool-and-mohair_ [n. + conj. + n.] &ldquo;...it's a...loden
jacket...in a plush wool-and-mohair blend&rdquo;
_Glamour_, Sept. 1964, 7)
</quote>

From this limited number of examples, one can see
how the modifier is being expanded.
</article>

#### INTER ALIA: II.2.1

TVulgarity Prize of the Quarter: To Mennen [Stick]
Deodorant for one-minute spot commercial that starts and
ends with the exhortation, &ldquo;Get off the can; get on the
stick.&rdquo;


### EX CATHEDRA

Generally, we try to avoid wasting space in EPISTOLAE,
INTER ALIA, or elsewhere in VERBATIM by
publishing the kudos we receive—and there is much—on
the principle that readers are already subscribers whose
enthusiasm for <emph>VERBATIM</emph> should be reinforced by the
articles, reviews, and other items we publish and not by
what other readers might say.  Moreover, it seems redundant
to &ldquo;feed bait to a fish after it's been caught.&rdquo;

However, an occasional word of explanation seems to
be in order, particularly when we might appear to be
straying from what might be construed as our central purpose.
In this issue, for example, you will find a review of
Iris Murdoch's new novel, _The Word Child_, by the famous
poet Richard Armour, who is, more than incidentally, a
very active educator and who holds a doctorate in English
Philology from Harvard.  Also, Syrell Rogovin Leahy, linguist
and author of _The Book of Ruth_, a 1974-75 bestseller,
reviews Ian Watson's _The Embedding_, a science
fiction novel.  Clearly, these are not the ordinary run of
works dealing with language, _per se_, but because they are
_good_ books that hang their central themes on language,
we felt that our readers would like to know about them.
Besides, their reviews in <emph>VERBATIM</emph> are likely to be
written from a point of view completely different from that
taken by the reviewers in the daily press and other periodicals
not oriented, primarily, to language.  It is not our intention
to publish scholarly articles in <emph>VERBATIM,</emph> and
readers should not be frightened away by Professor Bolinger's
review of Steiner's _After Babel_.  Dr. Bolinger had
prepared an alternate, somewhat more laymanlike version
of his review, but we selected the one published here because
we feel that _After Babel_ merits the &ldquo;full treatment.&rdquo;


### Reviews: AFTER BABEL
_George Steiner, Oxford University Press, 1975_

The Song of Babel was never so well sung as in this
book.  It is eloquent, disturbingly persuasive, concise and
overblown, scientific and scientistic, a mine of rich imagery,
a dazzling display of scholarship on a dozen fronts
from music to biology, a summary no less of the whole
of culture as seen by a poet and translator and revealed
through language.  It is also a supremely biased book,
which brings it down a level or two below greatness.  Even
so, it is probably destined to become some kind of classic.

Two themes recur.  First, all communication by whatever
means, in art, science, or language, but most of all
in language, is translation.  Second, the motive of translation
is the easing of otherness or &ldquo;alternity.&rdquo;  The riddle
that Steiner would solve is that of the apparent oneness of
humanity amidst a multiplicity of tongues, not just of languages
but of idiolects that prevent us from fully sharing
with one another.  We cannot transmit directly but can
only interpret, ourselves to others, or others to others as
we try to mediate between minds.  &ldquo;Inside or between languages,
human communication equals translation&rdquo; (47;
similary 429).  The historian must constantly update history;
it is not merely that new discoveries are made about
the past, but that the idiom into which the past must be
interpreted has itself changed.  The same is true of the
artist, who reworks the legacy of his art.  &ldquo;Picasso's variations
on Vel&aacute;zquez have a somewhat different aesthetic
from Manet's uses of Goya,&rdquo; but both exemplify &ldquo;a process
of translation&rdquo; along with &ldquo;the continuum of reciprocal
transformation and decipherment that it ensures&rdquo; which
lays down &ldquo;the code of inheritance in our civilization&rdquo;
(461).  In a passage of great delicacy Steiner points out
the datedness of a conversation from Noel Coward's _Private
Lives_ (15-17); even reaching back no farther than
1930, one reads from &ldquo;a text out of the past of one's own
language and literature,&rdquo; which requires &ldquo;a manifold act
of interpretation.&rdquo;

Alternity is the obstacle to understanding, yet itself
a force that must be respected and understood.  A translator
will make his rendition as intelligible as he can to
an audience whose time- and culture-bound conditionings
he knows; but if he is true to his craft he will not erase the
uniqueness of his text, for part of his task is to &ldquo;import
new and alternative options of being&rdquo; (353) which have
been realized in another culture.

Alternity is Steiner's rejoinder to a static linguistics.
The chapters that deal explicitly with language (2 and 3)
might be titled &ldquo;The Litterateur Strikes Back&rdquo;; to attempts
on the part of linguists to subsume style, a stylist opposes
his own scheme of subsuming language.  It is a well-informed
attack on hermeticism and reductionism.  Steiner
has read more of the antecedents of modern linguistics
than most linguists have, he knows logic and philosophy
at least as well, and he is familiar with the controversies
and cross-currents of structuralism and its successors.  To
the die-hard formalist who meets an objection with &ldquo;We've
heard all those arguments before,&rdquo; he can reply &ldquo;I've heard
all those claims before too.&rdquo;  The Sapir-Whorf theory, for
example, is traced beyond Humboldt to Leibniz, Vico, and
Hamann (74-77).

The linguist's commitment makes him want to see all
the problems of analyzing language as ultimately soluble.
If he encounters something that escapes his net he either
postpones it or dismisses it as trivial or irrelevant.  A nonprofessional
like Steiner has no ax to grind and nothing to
lose by declaring an unresolved fact to be an unresolvable
one.  Alternity he regards as the unyielding forward thrust,
the impulse in language to be something other than what
it is and therefore not subject to arrest and examination.
&ldquo;The 'messiness' of language, its fundamental difference
from the ordered, closed systematization of mathematics or
formal logic, the polysemy of individual words, are neither
a defect nor a surface feature which can be cleared up by
the analysis of deep structures.  The fundamental 'looseness'
of natural language is crucial to the creative function
of internalized and outward speech.  A 'closed' syntax, a
formally exhaustible semantics, would be a closed world&rdquo;
(228).  Language is what gives us our tomorrows; it is &ldquo;the
main instrument of man's refusal to accept the world as it
is&rdquo; (217); it may well be &ldquo;the only area of 'free will', of
assertion outside direct neuro-chemical causation or programming&rdquo;
(227).

This of course echoes what a number of linguists have
been saying, though Steiner's merit is that he lifts it off the
ground and brandishes it in our faces.  Babel was caused
by the emancipation of meaning from form.  This is what
has made language creative—we are not bound by symbols
that tie a horse to earth, but can say (and think) &ldquo;Horses
fly.&rdquo;  But the bad goes with the good: if language can
separate itself from reality, language can separate itself
from language.  The full force of Steiner's image is in language
as man's response to the &ldquo;alternity&rdquo; of evolution.  A
species is kept alive by becoming different from what it
was as conditions change.  The vicarious change in language,
its previsioning power, gives man a measure of
control over the conditions.

Steiner is impatient of theory.  Speaking of translation,
he says that &ldquo;there is a body of _praxis_ so large and differentiated
as to resist inclusion in any unitary scheme&rdquo;
(272).  His remarks are aimed mostly at the theory of
translation, but since all communication (in his view) is
translation, the same skepticism extends to language.  He is
unsparing with transformational deep structures and (bitter
pill) wields Robert A. Hall, Jr. against Noam Chomsky
(107).  The study of language very likely &ldquo;never will be
a science&rdquo; (294).  The evidence on which a systematic
theory of language would have to build its axioms &ldquo;is far
from being in any stable, statistical comprehensive, or experimentally
controllable state.  In the main it consists of
fragmentary data, rival hypotheses, intuitive conjectures,
and bundles of images&rdquo; (280).  The solution of a given
problem does not imply a systematic method of solving
it—metatheory remains speculative—here Steiner follows
Wittgenstein (275).  One could take this argument a step
farther, I suspect, and say that human beings are born
problem-solvers and _are_, themselves, the metatheory.

Where Steiner meets speculation with speculation of
his own, there is much with which a linguist has to disagree.
Errors of fact are rare (the speech of women is not
more archaic in general than that of men—40; man is not
the only animal with a lateralized brain—evidence of lateralization
has been found in rhesus monkeys and in some
species of birds, so the fabric built on this assumption,
281, comes apart), but there is much guesswork and no
small amount of doubtful logic.  A child does not &ldquo;refuse&rdquo;
to accept the rules of adult speech (35); he ignores them.
The speaker who uses the word _Kindergarten_ does not
visualize a childish Eden (35)—this is the fallacy of etymological
transparency, to which word-scholars are naturally
prone.  The fallacy builds to confusion in the discussion
of _J'aime la natation_ and _I like to go swimming_ (303):
from a linguistic standpoint all the wrong things are
emphasized.<ftnote>First, the etymologies are irrelevant; we cannot assume transparency
for _nager_ (what speaker relates it to _navigate?_  —even in
Latin, _navigo_ had developed the sense 'swim'), nor for _want_
(that 'desire' comes fifth among the definitions in the _OED_ is
neither here nor there), nor for _swim_ (and here the presumed
difference turns out to be a resemblance, since _nato_, as well as
_swim_, had the meaning 'not to stand still').  Second, the immediate
relationship of _natatio_ is to _nato_, not _navigo_.  Third, if a
gloss is to be used as illustration it should be as accurate as
possible, and _I like to go swimming_ calls for some comment
about the retained subject of the complement verb: both the
French and the alternate English phrase _I like swimming_ can
be said by someone observing others swim as well as by someone
engaging in swimming.</ftnote>  And how many speakers of English sense a
difference in moral judgment between _The little boy was
run over by a car_ and _The little boy got run over by a
car?_ If anything, the first is more impersonal and less sympathetic,
in spite of the fact that _got run over_ is basically
_got himself run over_, which, like the French _s'est fait
&eacute;craser_, puts the responsibility on the child; the situation
is the reverse of the &ldquo;nuance of indictment&rdquo; (305) that
Steiner would infer from the etymology of the French expression.
This kind of reasoning is fanciful.  The distance
between languages is not to be measured by lost memories.

More than once the artistic statement of a point seems
to outweigh its cogency; the writer is carried away by his
vision.  In a passage like the following, one is beguiled by
the words but bewildered by the sense: &ldquo;It is banal but
necessary to insist on a manifold reciprocity between
grammar and concept, between speech form and cultural
pressure.  Intricate grooves of possibility and of limitation,
neurophysiological potentialities of many-branched but not
unbounded realization, prepare, in ways we can only guess
at schematically, for anything as complex as a grammar
and system of symbolic reference.  Presumably the dialectic
of interaction is persistent, between linguistic 'spaces' and
the trajectories of thought and feeling within them, between
such trajectories and the unfolding or mapping of
new spaces.  Hebrew syntax informs and is equally informed
by the sovereign tautologies of the axiom of an
immeasurable, inconceivable yet omnipresent God&rdquo; (158).
Over-intellectualization is rampant: if the Old Believers in
Russia avoided the use of the future tense (152), the only
effect would have been to create a new future of some
kind, to refer to tomorrow's planting of potatoes, with the
old future relegated to taboo—no deep change in speech
habits would have resulted.

The linguist with an eye to his trade finds this book
about language a fascinating study _in_ language.  The author
is trilingual in French, German, and English; he is so
at ease in all of them that he is sure he has no &ldquo;first&rdquo;
language, and I find this believable, though such perfect
balance must be rare.  One expects that when a speaker has
to draw on a triple mass of vocabulary, he will tend to
favor the items that are shared and the meanings that enjoy
the highest frequency.  The former almost certainly accounts
for Steiner's fondness for the word _misprision_
(_m&eacute;prise_).  But it is only in the mass that one can feel the
depth of this unconscious calquing.  Steiner's prose lacks
the earthiness of a monolingual (while still soaring above
the unearthiness of the monolingual sociologist or bureaucrat),
and despite the many dazzling passages<ftnote>The imagery is rich: &ldquo;A user of language is like Cyrano's
moon-voyager, throwing the magnet of his motion before him&rdquo;
(123); &ldquo;There is a Kabbalistic speculation...about a day on
which words will shake off 'the burden of having to mean' and
will be only themselves, blank and replete as stone&rdquo; (297);
&ldquo;_Tombeaux antiques_ and _froides reliques_ are marmoreal words,
counters of total repose in calculated contrast to the heat and
tumult of the preceding action.  The effect is exactly that of a
Poussin landscape under a retreating storm&rdquo; (435).  I cite one
extended passage to show the expressiveness of his orchestrations
(362): &ldquo;The frontiers between languages are 'alive'; they
are a dynamic constant which defines either side in relation to
the other but no less to itself.  This is the enormously complex
topology which lies behind the old tag that knowledge of a
second language will help clarify or deepen mastery of one's
own.  To experience difference, to feel the characteristic resistance
and 'materiality' of that which differs, is to re-experience
identity.  One's own space is mapped by what lies outside; it
derives coherence, tactile configuration, from the pressure of
the external.  'Otherness,' particularly when it has the wealth and
penetration of language, compels 'presentness' to stand clear.&rdquo;
</ftnote> much of the text is heavy going.  I am afraid that part of this is
the result of striving for effect, but part is also probably
due to being caught between three systems.  The choice of
a word such as _edulcoration_ (417) is merely sophomoric.
The repeated' _of_'s in &ldquo;The work of Panofsky, of F. Saxl,
of Edgard Wind, of E. H. Gombrich...has taught
us...&rdquo; (426) are the lecturer's trick to impress a class.
And _venue_ (36), _miming injury_ (222, for _pretending injury_—or,
better, just _pretending to be hurt_—of a mother
bird), and the constant sprinkling of French words in the
text, sound like affectations.  Steiner often seems to shun
&ldquo;the ready stamp of verbal convention&rdquo; (129) for the sake
of shunning it.  On the other hand, such things as &ldquo;the
instigation of heuristic malaise&rdquo; (162, for 'stimulating
curiosity' or 'raising questions'), &ldquo;Their own singular use&rdquo;
(191, for 'their personal use'), and similar phrases reveal
a choice of words somehow dislodged from their native
bases.  The monolingual reader who encounters _concision_
(10) instead of _conciseness_ does not feel quite at home
with the text.  And this is aggravated by what in another
respect is a quality: the artist's attempt at total effect, at
the creating of an impression by the accumulation of
words and locutions, rather than the artisan's minute care
to have everything in its place: profusion swamps precision.
The dramatic effects are there, and many of them
are powerful; it is not amiss that the reader is forced to
&ldquo;listen totally,&rdquo; as Steiner recommends for all reading of
any major text to grasp the meaning beyond paraphrase
(375), because the reward is usually commensurate with
the effort.  But too often it is necessary to extricate meaning
not from profundity but from obscurity.

I claimed in the beginning that _After Babel_ is heavily
biased.  What it does it does splendidly.  It is the scholarpoet
on life and language.  But of the two defenses against
mortality that humanity has invented, myth and laughter,
Steiner concentrates on the first.  &ldquo;A poem is maximal
speech,&rdquo; he says (233) —and poems, though they may be
astutely witty, are seldom written to provoke laughter
(even music does a better job here).  Mark Twain is mentioned
only for his insight into childhood (36-37); absurdity
is mentioned two or three times, but as something to
be admired, not laughed at.  Laughter is the antagonist of
myth; it is reality obtruding itself on the solemnities of
ritual and pretense through which we hide from death instead
of confronting it.  As poet, Steiner is unflaggingly
sober.

And as a scholar likewise.  The signs of erudition are
everywhere, and become obtrusive at times—how, for example,
is a reader to grasp the symbology of a Moebius
strip (117) or the topology of Banach spaces (122)?  The
clear statement of Steiner's intellectual elitism comes only
in the closing pages (especially 467, with its lament for
the elite's loss of its former commanding position), but it
is manifest throughout in the handling of a number of
topics.

For all its loftiness, involution, and oftentimes resistant
prose, _After Babel_ is a marvelous book.  For a linguist
it carries the lesson that language cannot escape from literature,
a corrective to the notion that literature needs
only or mainly linguistic analysis for its interpretation.
And for the general reader it is a stunning reminder of the
mediateness of almost all knowledge.

_—Dwight Bolinger, Harvard University_

### Reviews: YOUR PET'S SECRET LANGUAGE: How To Understand and Speak It
_Jhan Robbins, Wyden, 1975_

In the first place, your pet's language is not so secret
after all.  It just takes a tremendous amount of patient
observation to know what he or she is trying to communicate
to you, and more patient practice in getting your
messages across.  In the second, the term _language_ is used
in the general sense of &ldquo;communication system&rdquo;: both pet
and owner express themselves with voice and body.

With this exegesis of a very catchy title out of the
way, let's look at the book.  It is reportorial in style and
provides clear, easy reading.  Robbins gets right to the
heart of the matter in a brief discussion of current research
on chimps and dolphins by behavioral scientists; one
couldn't ask for a better treatment.

The bulk of the volume is about communicating with
less exotic pets: dogs, cats, birds, and horses.  The first two
of these get three chapters apiece, the last two one apiece.
The experiences of real owners and pets who communicate
well are detailed both to show how successful communication
has arisen and been maintained and to show readers
how they may go about communicating with their own
pets.  The final chapters give some do's and don't's and
then a repertory of verbal and bodily signals with which
the four species communicate (each has its own set), with
a corresponding repertory of verbal and bodily signals for
people to use.

It is clear from this book that communications training
is not the same as obedience training.  The latter teaches
an animal to respond instantly to a very few short commands
given with no special emotion or extraneous messages.
The former requires not only patience, plus a reward
for successful performance, but also the expression
of affection for the animal.  For its aim is that both animal
and person say how they feel, what they have been doing,
and what they may want to do next; in short, that
they have a real two-way conversation.  The author is confident
that such communication can and does exist, and
gives many cases to document his belief.

It appears that trained cats and dogs can understand
75 to 100 words.  Whether they can understand the syntax
of connected speech is a question that Robbins does not
address.  On the other hand, animals do understand the
tone of your voice.  Interestingly, they seem to grasp what
you are saying better if you speak in a high voice, which
is, I suggest, the way lots of us just naturally talk to our
pets.

As the title indicates, this is a &ldquo;how to&rdquo; book.  Therefore
its final measure of success can be determined only
after readers have tried its suggestions with their own animals.
It certainly has made me more observant of what
the two poodles and two cats in our house have to say.
They haven't really been keeping secrets, but it does take
patience to learn how to distinguish the different messages
they have for one in the course of 24 hours.

_—Karl Rosen, University of Kansas_


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: The Celtic Element in English

In his book Word _Play_, Bantam Books, Inc., New York
(1974), p. 337, Peter Farb dismisses the Celtic contribution
to the English language in these brief terms: &ldquo;Aside
from some British place names (_Thames, Avon, London,
York,_ and so on) little more than a dozen Celtic words
(such as _curse, crag, cross_ and _ass_) survive in today's
vocabulary.&rdquo;

We must take issue with this statement, which is a clear
distortion of the actual facts.  In addition to _ass_ from Old
Irish _asan_ 'ass,' _crag_ from Celtic \?\_carn_, Irish and Gaelic
_creag_ 'heap of stones,' _cross_ from Old Irish _croch_ 'cross,'
_curse_ from Old English _cursian_ through Old Irish _c&uacute;rsagim_
'I chastize,&rdquo; we are happy to cite the following: _asthore_
from Irish a _st&oacute;ir_ 'O treasure,' _bannock_ from Irish _bannach_
'oat or barley cake baked on a griddle,' _banshee_ from Old
Irish _ben side_, Modern Irish _bean sidhe_ 'fairy,' literally
'fairy woman,' _bard_ from Irish _bard_ 'poet' through Old
Celtic \?\_bardos, bin_ from Gaulish _benna_ recorded by Festus
in the meaning of 'cart,' which by semantic change became
'container,' _blarney_ from the Blarney Stone, which is
said to grant a flattering tongue to anyone who succeeds in
kissing it, (hence the English meaning 'smooth, wheedling
talk'), _bodkin_ from Gaelic _biodach_ 'dagger,' _bog_ from Irish
and Gaelic _bogach_ 'marsh,' _brat_ from Irish brat 'ragged
garment,' used contemptuously for 'child,' _brock_ from
Irish _broc_ 'badger,' _brogue_ from Irish _barrog_ 'tight hold,'
'dialect pronunciation,' _bushel_ from Irish _buiseal_ through
Gaulish \?\_bastia_ 'handful,' _cairn_ from Irish _carn_ 'heap of
stones,' _car_ from Old Celtic \?\_karrom_, Old Irish _carr_ 'car,'
_carpenter_ from Old Celtic \?\_carpentos_, Old Irish _carpat_
'carpenter,' _cateran_ from Gaelic _ceathairne_ 'peasantry' (English
uses the word in the sense of 'Highland marauder')
_clan_ from Irish _clann_ 'stock,' _claymore_ from Gaelic _claidheamh_
'sword' + _m&oacute;r_ 'great,' 'a two-handed sword, _colleen_
from Irish _cal&iacute;n_ 'girl,' _coronach_ from Gaelic _corranach_
'funeral dirge,' _crannog_ from Irish _crannog_ 'lake dwelling,'
_cromlech_ from Welsh _cromlech_ from _crom_ 'arched' + _llech_
'flat stone,' _dolmen_ from Cornish _tolmen_ 'hole of stone,'
_down_ from Gaulish \?\_dunom_, whence Old Irish _dun_ 'fort'
(cf. place-name _Augustodunum_ 'Autun') _druid_ from Old
Celtic \?\_derw&iacute;jes_, \?\_derwos_ 'true,' apparently in sense of
'soothsayer,'_galloglass_, Irish and Gaelic _galloglach_ 'foreign
youth,' which took on the meaning of 'soldier,' _glen_ from
Irish and Gaelic _gleann_, earlier _glenn_ 'mountain-valley,'
_kern_ from Old Irish _ceitern_ 'band of foot-soldiers,' _leprechaun_
from Irish _lupracan_ 'sprite,' _loch_ from Irish _loch_
'lake,' _macushla_ from Irish and Gaelic _mo cushle_ 'my
blood' = 'my darling,' _mavourneen_ from Irish _mo mhuirn&iacute;n_
'my darling,' _menhir_ from Breton _men hir_ from _mean_
'stone' + _hir_ 'long,' _ogham_ from Old Irish _ogam_ Gaelic
_oghum_ (cf. Gaulish _Ogmios_, god of eloquence), _peat_ from
Celtic \?\_pett_ 'piece' (by semantic change the word has assumed
the meaning of 'broken pieces' of decayed vegetable
matter found in bogs); _pibroch_ from Gaelic _piobaireachd_
'Highland air,' _shamrock_ from Irish _seamrog_ 'clover,'
_shebeen_ from Irish _sibin_ 'liquid measure,' 'mug' (in
English it has come to mean an 'illicit public house),
_shillelagh_ from Irish _Shillelagh_, a town in County Wicklow
known for its oaks or blackthorns which were converted
into cudgels, _skene_ from Irish _skian_, Gaelic _sgian_ 'dagger,'
_slogan_ from a contraction of Irish _sluagh-ghairm_ 'a warcry'
from _sluag_ 'army' + _gairm_ 'cry,' _smithereens_ from
Irish _smidir&iacute;n_ 'small fragment,' _spalpeen_ from Irish _spailpin_
'scamp,' _vassal_ from Old Celtic _vassos_ 'man,' 'householder'
(cf. Gaulish _vassus_ in personal name _Dagovassus_
'the good servant') _whiskey_ from Celtic _visgebeatha_ 'water
of life.'

As far as place-names are concerned, the Celtic influence
is apparent all over the British Isles.  In England
they are quite abundant and show clear traces of tribal
names, hills, rivers and valleys.  Thus _Cornwall_, Old English
_Cornwealas_ derives from Old Celtic \?\_Kornovjos_ and
means 'Cornubian Welsh.'  _Cumberland_ from Old Welsh
\?\_kombrogi_, plural of \?\_kombrogos_ 'fellow countryman' is
the 'land of the Cymry,' and _Devonshire_ contains in its
first element a corruption of the tribal name _Dumnonii_.
_Bernicia_ and _Deira_, the two ancient kingdoms of Northumbria,
are also offshoots of Celtic tribal names.

_Kent_, which Caesar calls _Cantium_, comes from Old Celtic
\?\_kanto_, which has two meanings 'rim' or 'white.'  The
original name of Canterbury was Celtic _Durovernum_.  Examples
of Celtic riverine survivals are seen in _Avon,
Dover, Exe, Esk, Usk, Ouse, Stour_ and _Wye_.  The meaning
'hill' is preserved in place-names like _Barr_ from Welsh
_bar_ 'summit,' _Bredon_ from Welsh _bre_ 'hill,' _Bryn Mawr_
from Welsh _bryn_ 'hill' + _mawr_ 'great,' _Pendle_ from Welsh
_pen_ 'top.'  The Celtic element _cumb_ 'deep valley' is obvious
in _Duncombe, Holcombe_ and _Winchcombre_.  _Torr_ 'peak'
occurs in _Torr, Torcross, Torhill, Brockholes_ and _Brockhall_
call to mind Old Irish _brocc_ 'badger.'

Prime examples for Scotland and Ireland are _Aberdeen_
'mouth of the Dee,' _Aberfeldie, Abergeldie_, all of which
contain the element _aber_ 'mouth'; _Bally_ from _ball_ 'place'
occurs in _Ballangleich, Ballanmahon; caer_ 'castle' is evident
in _Caercolon, Caerleon_ 'Castle of the legion'; _dun_
from Gaulish _dunon_ 'a protected place' appears in _Dunbar,
Dumbarton, Dundee; inch_ 'island' is seen in _Inchcape,
Inchcolon; inver_ 'river-mouth' is found in _Inverary, Inverness;
kill_ 'church' stands out in _Kildare, Kilkenny, Kilmarnoch;
llan_ 'holy' in _Llandaff_ and _Llanfair._

Lastly we must not fail to mention the Celtic onomastical
contribution to English, instanced by the _O_ and _Mac_
(_Mc_) names such as _O'Brien, O'Curry, O'Kennedy_ and
_MacClellan, MacLeish, McCarthy, McCormack_.  _O_ and
_Mac_ (_Mc_), represent etymologically Irish _&oacute;_ 'descendant'
and _mac_ 'son' from Gaulish _mapo_ (cf. Welsh _map_ 'son').

Clearly, then, the Celtic contribution to English should
not be minimized and glossed over as something trivial
and unimportant.  Works that purport to present accurate
linguistic facts about the Celtic role in English would do
well to keep this in mind.  [Cornelius Joseph Crowley _Saint
Louis University_]

#### Letters {Kathleen Adamson}
...Let me take Mr. Urdang to task for doubting, according
to Thomas H. Middleton [_Saturday Review_, June
28, 1975], Euell Gibbons' hickory nuts.  Hickory nuts are
so special that people who know where there are good
trees keep the location as secret as the morel lover does
his hidden bed.  More specifically, I think the only regrets
my father's family had about the flooding of the old homestead
in southern Iowa were for the hickory trees that had
provided the yearly blessing.  So watch it!  Don't knock one
of the rare commercials that doesn't appeal to the lowest
common denominator.
_—Kathleen Adamson, Columbus, Ohio_

#### Letters {Edmund S. Meltzer}

In his note on &ldquo;Homonymous Antonyms&rdquo; [VERBATIM
I, 4], Harvey Minkoff discusses &ldquo;The contrast between
_KoDeS_ 'holy' and _KeDeSah_ 'prostitute,' &rdquo; noting that &ldquo;In
all likelihood the original meaning of _KDS_ was 'taboo,'
and the two descendants represent different taboos&rdquo; and
pointing out that Latin _meretrix_ 'harlot' is derived from
an &ldquo;ethically neutral base.&rdquo;  (First, it should be pointed out
that _KDS_ is actually _QDS_: the phonemic distinction between
_K_ and _Q_, or _K_, has often become obscured in the
pronunciation of Hebrew.)

An additional factor in this semantic shift manifested by
the root _QDS_ is the prevalence of sacred prostitution
among the Israelites' Canaanite neighbors.  Most philologists
consider that Hebrew _QeDeSah_ referred originally to
these sacred prostitutes, as in _Deuteronomy_ 23:17, where
the _Oxford Annotated Bible_ translates:

<quote>
There shall be no cult prostitute of the daughters
of Israel, neither shall there be a cult prostitute of the
sons of Irsael.  You shall not bring the hire of a harlot,
or the wages of a dog, into the house of the LORD
your God....
</quote>

In this connection, it is worth noting that there was a
Canaanite goddess whose name is derived from _QDS_
(variously vocalized _Qudshu, Qodsha, Qadshu_), whose
natures seems to partake of both senses of the root.  In
Egypt, where her cult became popular,

<quote>
she is shown as a voluptuous, nude female, in frontal
position....  While in Egypt she was undoubtedly
taken as the symbol of sexual attractiveness par
excellence, in Western Asia, where her person is much
more elusive, she took her origin in a hypostasis of
the &ldquo;Sanctity&rdquo; of the mother-goddess Asherah.
[D. B. Redford, in the _Bulletin of the American
Schools of Oriental Research_ #211, October 1973: 45-6]

_—Edmund S. Meltzer, University of Toronto_

#### Letters {Robert L. Bates}
_Addenda to &ldquo;Homonymous Antonyms&rdquo;_ [VERBATIM I,
4]: _Let_ means not only 'allow' but also 'hinder' or 'interfere
with,' as in the tennis term let ball....
_—Robert L. Bates, Columbus, Ohio_

### Reviews: A WORD CHILD
_Iris Murdoch, The Viking Press, Inc., 1975_

In the title of this new novel by Iris Murdoch, her
seventeenth, the word that will catch the attention of readers
of _Verbatim_ is of course &ldquo;word.&rdquo;  But before I come
to the significance of words in this book, let me digress
for a moment, or for several moments.

Whether or not a book has anything to do with words
as its subject matter, and the range in this regard would
seem to be from a dictionary to poetry (in which each
word must be chosen with special care), to a long work
of fiction, words are essential.  A writer must choose words
and fit them together as a stonemason chooses and fits together
stones.  Words are, or can be, as important to a
book of whatever kind as the idea or the treatment of the
idea—treated in words.

I have mentioned poetry as a form of writing in
which words are especially important.  Coleridge, who
wrote far more prose than poetry but is remembered
chiefly for his poems, once made a succinct statement
about the different between prose and poetry.  &ldquo;Prose,&rdquo;
he said, &ldquo;is words in the best order.  Poetry is the best
words in the best order.&rdquo;  There may be a little more to it
than that, but this is a definition that appeals to the word
lover.

One more remark about words before I come to _A
Word Child_.  This has to do with the relation of words to
thought.  In his _Poets at Work_, W.H. Auden asks this
provocative question: &ldquo;How can I know what I think till
I see what I say?&rdquo;  Years ago, his question led me to write
these lines, entitled &ldquo;Disclosure&rdquo;:

<quote>
How could the poet
possibly know
till the very last word
in the very last row?

For a poem's a word
plus a word, plus a word,
added, subtracted,
and thoroughly stirred.

And thought makes the word
and the word makes thought,
and some things come
that were never sought.

At what he has said
when his say is done,
the poet's surprised
as anyone.
</quote>

My excuse for this long introduction to a rather short
review of Iris Murdoch's novel is that the author herself
does not mention the effect of words on her central character,
Hilary Burde, until well into the second chapter.  It
comes in a flashback to Hilary's youth, when he was
orphaned early, became a delinquent, and was headed
toward a life of crime.  Suddenly, at age fourteen, he was
rescued by Mr. Osmond, a teacher of French and Latin
in a ratty little English school.

Here is the &ldquo;word child&rdquo; part of the book.  Here also
is a tribute to what one gifted teacher can do when turning
full attention to a receptive pupil.  &ldquo;I suspect that many
children are saved by saints and geniuses,&rdquo; says Hilary,
reflecting on this miracle of his childhood.  He learned
more than Latin and Greek from that inspired and inspirational
schoolmaster.  &ldquo;I also learnt,&rdquo; he tells us, &ldquo;my own
language, hitherto something of a foreign tongue.  I learnt
from Mr. Osmond how to write the best language in the
world accurately and clearly and, ultimately, with a hard,
careful elegance.  I discovered words and words were my
salvation.  I was not, except in some very broken down
sense of that ambiguous term, a love child.  I was a word
child.&rdquo;

Thanks to this gifted teacher, Hilary gave up violence
and immorality, as well as virtual illiteracy.  He went on
to Oxford and read all the &ldquo;greats.&rdquo;  He also won every
literary contest in which he entered.  He made a great leap
into the world of words and ideas and the two intertwined
and affecting one another, as I have already indicated in
my quotation from Auden.

As the story progresses, there are some other flashbacks
in which Hilary remembers Oxford and study and
fellowships and the intellectual life.  But the &ldquo;word&rdquo; part is
past.  What follows is a novel set in Hilary's rooming house in
London, in the office in which he works, in the homes of
friends, and in pubs.  It is Hilary's own story, told in the
first person, sometimes in the form of letters, and divided
into chapters headed by the day of the week.  The first
chapter is &ldquo;Thursday,&rdquo; the second &ldquo;Friday,&rdquo; and so on
through several weeks.  Curiously, &ldquo;Sunday&rdquo; is omitted all
but twice.  Either nothing worth mentioning happens on
Sunday or there is some religious significance about this.

And there are, throughout, flashes of the religious, the
philosophical, and the moral, though only flashes—with
seemingly purposeful casualness.  For the most part this is
a novel set in the poor and decadent parts of London, almost
Dickensian in description: all the sights and smells
and sounds and feels.  Along with the place are the people:
the long-haired, flower-child Christopher, the unfathomable
girl called Biscuit, the aristocratic Lady Kitty, and others.
At times one is reminded of the characters in a P. G.
Wodehouse novel.

But the main thread of the story concerns Hilary's
devotion to his often pitiful younger sister, Crystal, who
rose more slowly from the orphanage years and was not
transformed by the gift of words given her brother by that
master teacher, Mr. Osmond.

As for the gift of words, the one who really has it is
Iris Murdoch, the author of this sensitive, many-layered
novel.  Her choice of words is impeccable.  In her use of
short sentences or beautifully organized longer sentences,
she could be studied as a model of English expression.

Yes, Hilary is a word child, but we learn this, after
all, from a word person.  Here is an author who, though
writing prose, lives up to Coleridge's definition of poetry:
&ldquo;The best words in the best order.&rdquo;

_—Richard Armour, Claremont, California_

#### Letters {Noami Russell}

The last issue of VERBATIM [II, 1] has provided such
a lift for this ho-hum day that I feel I owe you some
chuckles in return.  During my 30 years of editing I've
made a collection of &ldquo;danglers&rdquo; that have crossed my desk.
Here is a sample:

<quote>
The bride wore a long white lace dress which fell to
the floor.

Mrs. Johnson can prepare mashed potatoes as fluffy
and delicious as any of my acquaintance.

The women included their husbands and children
in their potluck suppers.

In Germany a person cannot slaughter any animal
unless rendered unconscious first.

There was a tea party for the children, and after they
were tucked in bed a banquet for the parents.

The summary of information contains totals of the
numbers of students broken down by sex, marital
status, and age.

Even more astonishing was our saving the lives of little
babies who formerly died from sheer ignorance.

I can't blame you for wanting to go outside and
sit on your ten-minute break.

At the age of eleven my father took me to the south.

For those of you who have small children and don't
know it we have a nursery downstairs.

He spent his early life on the back of a horse
with a pipe in his mouth.
_—Noami Russell, Herald House Independence, Missouri_

[_Yes.  A Couple of our favorites are:_ Plunging 1,000 feet
into the gorge, we saw Yosemite Falls.  Breaking into the
window of the girls' dorm the dean of men surprised two
members of the football team.  When a small boy, a girl is
of little interest.  —_Ed_.]

#### Letters {Harry Nuessle}

In re &ldquo;Phonatics&rdquo; [VERBATIM I, 4]—over 40 years ago
the following was introduced into our high school Latin II
class.  Regretfully, the teacher was not amused:

<quote>
O civili, sed ergo
Fortibus es in ero;
O nobili, deus trux,
Indem ars sum causen dux.
</quote>

Viva VERBATIM!


_—Harry Nuessle, Bernards High School, Bernardsville, New Jersey

[_That reminds us of some grammar-school macaronics.
Can any of our readers provide a translation of either (or
both) of the following?:_ Malo, Malo, Malo, Malo.  Pater
mea in silvam; lupus filium est. —_Ed_.]

### Reviews: THE EMBEDDING
_Ian Watson, Scribners_

_The Embedding_ by Ian Watson is a book in which
three extraordinary tales are woven into one novel by
means of a linguistic theme.  Linguist Chris Sole is a researcher
at a hospital in an English village where, it is
rumored, children are taught &ldquo;bad language.&rdquo;  In fact, the
hospital's work with brain damaged children provides a
cover for the secret experimentation that Sole and other
linguists, logicians, and psychologists are engaged in.

Captives in controlled, surrealistic environments,
groups of orphan children under the influence of a drug
described as &ldquo;a unique lever for the improving brain performance...
a sort of...superintelligencer,&rdquo; are spoken
to in an embedded language.  &ldquo;The speech computer had
taken apart [the voices of the experimenters] and put them
together again.  Otherwise their words wouldn't have
flowed naturally.  Sole couldn't have framed the sentences
he heard his own recorded voice saying, without a great
deal of hesitation.  They were English sentences, yet so unEnglish.
It was the arrangement of those strings of words
that caused the confusion.  The words themselves were
simple enough....  Yet organized as no kids' talk before,
so that adults couldn't for the life of them follow it without
a printout of the speech with a maze of brackets breaking
it up to re-establish patterns the mind was used to
processing.&rdquo;

At the same time as Sole's experimentation is going
on in England, his friend and colleague Pierre, has discovered
a curiously analogical situation in Brazil.  The
Xemahoa, a tribe of Indians in the Amazon, are on the
verge of extinction as their land is slowly flooded as the
result of the building of a dam.  What is linguistically and
sociologically interesting and unique about the Xemahoa
is their &ldquo;two-tier&rdquo; language.  Under the influence of a certain
drug, the Bruxo, a leader of the tribe, becomes able
to speak an embedded form of the Xemahoa language.
And under the influence of the same drug, the male members
of the tribe are able to understand the embedded language.
&ldquo; 'This embedded speech keeps the soul of the tribe,
their myths, secret....  The daily vernacular (Xemahoa
A) passes through an extremely sophisticated recoding
process, which breaks down the linear features of normal
language and returns the Xemahoa people to the space-time
unity which we other human beings have blinded
ourselves to.' &rdquo;  Hence, Xemahoa B is to Xemahoa A as the
language Chris Sole speaks to his children is to English.

Into the world at this moment enter the Sp'thra, an
extra-terrestrial people whose interest in earth is largely
linguistic.  Sole is elected to speak to the one alien who
leaves the ship.  The aliens, in Sole's words, are &ldquo;exploring
the syntax of reality.&rdquo;  &ldquo;The rules of reality can only be
understood,&rdquo; the alien explains, &ldquo;by superimposing the
widest range of languages from different worlds upon one
another.  _There_ is the one and only key to This-Reality.&rdquo;

In return for information valuable to earth, the alien
wants six &ldquo;working brains competent in six linguistically
diverse languages,&rdquo; by which he means living brains sans
bodies.  One of the &ldquo;working brains&rdquo; absolutely essential to
the aliens is that of the Xemahoa Bruxo.

From this point on, a sequence of depressingly inevitable
failures occur.  The United States and the Soviet
Union acting in unison function as shamefully as each
might suspect the other of functioning alone.  In Brazil, the
drug which has enlarged the intellectual capabilities of its
users now destroys grotesquely.  And in England, Chris
Sole returns to his children to find them bursting—almost
literally—from the effects of the embedded language, the
only one they have ever known, and the drug they have
been given to help them master it.

What we can never know is what the aliens might
have accomplished if they had been able to continue their
experiments.  Perhaps they, too, would have been doomed
in some analogous way.

It would seem a shame for readers who are not drawn
to the science fiction genre to elect not to read so fine a
book and one so appealing to linguists.

_—Syrell Rogovin Leahy, Old Tappan, New Jersey_

### Reviews: LANGUAGE AND PUBLIC POLICY
Edited by Hugh Rank, NCTE Committee on Public Double-Speak, National
Council of Teachers of English, 1974

Complaints about the &ldquo;corruption&rdquo; of language must
have begun with the Tower of Babel, or even earlier, if
what Dante has Adam say (_Paradiso_ 26. 124-126) is right:
&ldquo;The language which I spoke was wholly extinct before
Nimrod's people were busy on their unfinishable task.&rdquo;
Linguists have, in general, been inclined to pooh-pooh such
complaints, since their attention is normally focused only
on the slow, almost imperceptible shift in sound, form,
function, or meaning which takes generations to complete.
Linguists are also often inclined to regard all linguistic
systems as essentially equal in merit; and they distinguish
sharply between a linguistic system and the use made of it.

The general public, however, is not aware of either
the nature of linguistic systems (including their own) or
gradual linguistic change.  They usually think of language
as consisting only of words, and of words as made up of
letters.  An ordinary naive speaker is aware of only one
kind of language-change: a relatively sudden innovation
in the spelling or the meaning of a word, or the introduction
of a new word.  Since, both in and out of school, he
has been taught to believe in the fixed, absolute meaning
of words, he considers any change to be for the worse, a
&ldquo;corruption&rdquo; of the &ldquo;true&rdquo; meaning or use of language.
Protests of this kind concerning the semantic field of government
and public life are associated especially with
George Orwell's essay, &ldquo;Politics and the English Language,&rdquo;
which has been widely quoted and anthologized.

The writers represented in this anthology are concerned
almost wholly with this superficial kind of &ldquo;corruption.&rdquo;
A brief introduction by its editor (pp. xi-xvi) is followed
by three main sections: &ldquo;Watergate as watershed&rdquo;
(pp. 1-38), &ldquo;In and out of the classroom&rdquo; (pp. 39-142),
and &ldquo;A call to action and some responses&rdquo; (pp. 143-188).
A fourth section, &ldquo;The NCTE Committee on Public
Doublespeak&rdquo; (pp. 189-213), deals with the establishment
of this committee.  Each of these sections contains
a number of articles, ranging from three to fifteen pages,
dealing with the use of words by politicians and advertisers.
The volume concludes with an article by the editor,
&ldquo;Conclusion: The Teacher-heal-thyself myth&rdquo; (pp. 215-224)
and &ldquo;Public doublespeak: a personal reading list&rdquo;
chosen by Rank (pp. 235-248).

For many centuries, it has been customary to train
school-children to identify efforts at deliberate use of
ordinary words in unusual senses for the purpose of deceiving
hearers or readers (&ldquo;semantic wrenching,&rdquo; as I
have termed it).  Such wrenching has undoubtedly become
more common than earlier, especially in modern
advertising and in propaganda related to controversial
social issues.  Thus, for instance, any effort to relieve working
mothers of the burden of bearing unwanted children
is termed &ldquo;genocide&rdquo;; a police guard's calm refusal to allow
rioting parents to enter a school is met with shouts
of &ldquo;police brutality!&rdquo;  Whether politicians are any more
given to such intentional distortions than were their predecessors,
we may doubt—but there are more politicians
than formerly, and their channels of communications are
more numerous and extensive.

There could, therefore, be no _a priori_ objection to another
book aimed at teaching students semantic wrenching
objectively, and to identify and counter it, no matter
from what direction it comes.  This book cannot, however,
be recommended for such a purpose.  It is heavily slanted
politically, with a great preponderance of leftist-leaning
authors.  The only clearly identifiable non-political writers
are S. I. Hayakawa in his &ldquo;General Semantics: where is it
now?&rdquo; (pp. 150-156) and Jean Stafford with her &ldquo;Plight
of the American language&rdquo; (pp. 91-99).  A disaproportionate
number of the articles deal with the Watergate affair:
42 pages (about 17% of the total) are wholly devoted to
it, and most of the rest bring it in to a greater or lesser
extent.  This is an excessive proportion to assign to what is
bound to diminish in importance, retrospectively, as the
decades pass.  Most of the writers are strongly partisan,
especially in their obsessive, implacable hostility to ex-President
Nixon.  (They nearly succeeded in converting
me from a Nixon-despiser to a Nixon-pitier, merely by
the violence and irrationality of their attacks.)

Most of the writers take a holier-than-thou stance,
setting themselves up, at least implicitly, as knights in
shining armor, breaking a lance for honesty and uprightness
in the use of language.  This self-righteousness is especially
evident in such articles as D. L. Bolinger's &ldquo;Truth is
a linguistic question&rdquo; (pp. 161-175).  As in other instances,
however, most of these defenders of &ldquo;truth&rdquo; are quite
ready to do plenty of semantic wrenching themselves,
when it suits their purposes.  Richard Ohman, in the resolution
on &ldquo;public lying&rdquo; presented to the NCTE in 1971
and passed by them, did not hesitate to use _inhumane_
(which normally refers to unkind treatment of animals)
with reference to language (p. 191); he is echoed in
Rank's comment on Sydney Harris' &ldquo;Watergate forked
tongues&rdquo; (p. 16) and elsewhere.  Emotionally loaded metaphors
abound, as when Richard Gambino states &ldquo;Critical
meanings are barred from the beginning in a form of conceptual
contraception&rdquo; (p. 20).  When it suits their book,
however, the same writers can be wholly literalistic, as in
Gambino's objection to the use of _develop_ in the sense of
'bring to light' (p. 21).  It's all a question of whose semantics
are gored.

Confusion among style, usage, and language is almost
universal in these articles.  The only author to make a clear
distinction in this matter is Hayakawa (not surprising,
since he and Bolinger are the only authors with any extensive
competence in linguistics).  Many of the writers
combine their emotionalism with regard to semantic
wrenching (but only of the kind they dislike) with an old-fashioned,
Miss-Fidditch-type purism, exemplified at its
worst in Jean Stafford's narrow, uninformed belief in the
degeneration of our language.  On occasion, though, the
sensitive reader is taken aback by such inelegant, stylistically
jarring terms as _antsy_ (p. 89), _bullshit_ (p. 190), or
_crap_ (pp. xv, 89).

Clearly, Rank's statement (p. xv) &ldquo;there is no orthodoxy
presented here&rdquo; is false.  Almost the entire book is
pervaded by a politically slanted leftist orthodoxy.  It cannot
be recommended to anyone who wishes to learn or
teach an objective, unbiased approach to the analysis of
semantics or of the use of language.  On the contrary, it
should be held up for what it is, a prize example of bias
and distortion—political propaganda masquerading under
the false colors of a search for honesty and truth.

_—Robert A. Hall, Jr., Cornell University_


### Reviews: A DESK-BOOK OF ERRORS IN ENGLISH
Frank H. Vizetelly, revised edition 1920, republished by Gale
Research Co., 1974

If you want to know how clothing fashions have
changed in the last half century, place some ads of the
early 1920's beside some ads of today.  If you want to
know how styles of popular music have changed, play
a record of Rudy Vallee's and follow it with one of Mick
Jagger's.  And if you want to know how language has
changed, examine this 1920 handbook by the late editor
of the _Funk &amp; Wagnalls Standard Dictionary_.

The most conspicuous changes are in the area of
slang, but that is to be expected; most slang terms have a
half-life of no more than about five years, though some
endure for centuries.  It is not surprising therefore to learn
that _daisy_ was a &ldquo;slang intensive&rdquo; meaning 'charming,'
that _dippy_ was an &ldquo;extreme vulgarism&rdquo; for 'mentally unbalanced,&rdquo;
that to be _jiggered_ was a &ldquo;minced oath,&rdquo; that
_nifty_ was a vulgarism for 'stylish,' that _pipe-off_ was a vulgarism
for 'take in at a glance,' that _sass_ was a vulgar term
for 'impertinence,&rdquo; that _sirree Bob_ was a vulgar and silly
intensive of affirmation and that _skidoo_ was recent slang
for 'get out.'  None of those slang terms are current today,
but enough others have come out of the soil and the pavements
to replace them.

Changes in word meanings and usage may be less
conspicuous, but they are more important.  In these areas
Vizetelly does not always seem to be a man of his word.
His word, as it appears in the introduction to this handbook,
goes as follows:

Usage has made our language what it is; grammatical
rules strive to limit it to what it ought to be.  In
many instances usage has supplanted grammatical
rules....  It is to the people, not to the purists that
one must look for the enriching of our mother tongue.

Most authorities would subscribe to that declaration.
But it raises two questions.  The first is, Who are &ldquo;the people&rdquo;?
Are they the saleswomen, the filling station attendants,
the taxi drivers, the coal miners, the rock musicians
or who?  The second question is, Who are &ldquo;the purists&rdquo;?
At the extreme right wing of this group are a few the
like of Ambrose Bierce (if there are any the like of him),
who in his introduction to &ldquo;Write It Right&rdquo; (which probably
should have been entitled &ldquo;Write by Rite&rdquo;) declared:
&ldquo;Few words have more than one literal and serviceable
meaning, however many metaphorical, derivative, relative
or even unrelated meanings lexicographers may think it
worth while to gather from all sorts and conditions of men,
with which to bloat their absurd and misleading dictionaries.&rdquo;
Vizetelly certainly does not fall into Bierce's class,
yet this book, written a decade later than Bierce's, bears
some similarities of approach.

As an example, both writers asserted firmly that _demean_
meant 'to behave' and did not mean 'to debase or
degrade.'  Obviously, &ldquo;the people&rdquo; were at work on that
one because the 'degrade' meaning today not only is fully
acceptable but also is far more often used than the 'behave'
meaning.  As another example, both writers condemned
_pants_ for _pantaloons_ as vulgar, but, vulgar or no,
&ldquo;the people&rdquo; have changed to _pants_ and changed the
language.

Vizetelly was correct in saying that in many instances
usage has supplanted grammatical rules and not a few of
the entries in his 1920 book, viewed in the light of 1975
acceptability, ironically bear out his statement.  The phrase
_all of them_, said he in one entry, is an example of common
carelessness because _of_ signifies _from_ and when one
subtracts a quantity _from_ an entire number one cannot
refer to that number as still existing.  Logical as that may
be, no one thinks twice today about saying _all of them_.
In another entry he terms _at best_ an erroneous form for
_at the best_, but that judgment has now been reversed.  And
here, in paraphrase, are a few more of Vizetelly's condemnations
that have become pass&eacute;: _mad_ used for _angry_
is a colloquialism not in vogue among persons who use
refined diction; _make_ is often used incorrectly for _earn_, as
in &ldquo;How much does he _make_ a week?&rdquo;; _over_ is sometimes
improperly used for _across_, as in &ldquo;go _over_ the bridge&rdquo; instead
of _across_ it; _patrons_ should not be used for _customers;
quit_ is sometimes incorrectly substituted for _cease;
raise_ for an increase in salary should be avoided, and _sideways_
should not be used for _sidewise_.

Vizetelly's book has a plenitude of sound advice on English
that is still up to date, yet because of the number of outmoded
guides and prohibitions it is hardly a suitable text
to put in the hands of today's students.  They would find
a great deal of it puzzling and much of it superfluous.  The
puzzlement would lie in the type of entries already cited
here.  The superfluity would lie in a host of entries advising
the reader to &ldquo;discriminate carefully between these
words&rdquo;—such words as _berth_ and _birth, always_ and _all
ways, base_ and _bass, ceiling_ and _sealing, celery_ and _salary,
cereal and serial_.  Who needs dozens of entries like that?

In effect, Vizetelly emerges from this book as an almost
paradoxical figure.  What he practices here is in
large part pedantic purism, but what he preaches in the
book and preached elsewhere is restrained liberalism.

&ldquo;If virility of language is to be preserved,&rdquo; he wrote in
1931, &ldquo;we must continue to embrace the best that there is in
speech.  The caldron of usage is the refining pot into which
all words must go for purification.  There they may bob up
and down, as the mass seethes or simmers, or even boil
over and out of the pot, to become outcasts of the linguistic
family.&rdquo;

_—Theodore M. Bernstein, Consulting Editor, The New York Times_

#### Letters {Alfred Connor Bowman}

I am familiar with the phenomenon which Professor
Fowkes refers to as the Irish Bull, but I think this is a
misnomer.  I would associate this weirdity rather with
Bronx/Brooklyn Jewish tradition—perhaps because most of
them I have heard came to me through a head janitor of
that extraction who always had one when he caught me
working late in my office on Governor's Island.  My favorites
include:

<quote>
I'd give my last dollar to be a millionaire.
Better be well for three years than sick for one day.
Better to have a hundred friends than one enemy.
</quote>

_—Alfred Connor Bowman, Hermosa Beach, California_

#### Letters {Helene Shomer}

I am the delighted recipient of my first VERBATIM
issue and was immediately entranced with the &ldquo;Irish Bulls&rdquo;
article [II, 1].

I am impelled and emboldened to forward some &ldquo;Jewish
Bulls&rdquo;—very kosher—coming from H. Leopold Spitalny,
who was associated with Toscanini during the NBC Symphony
years, authenticated by Kolman Smit, a violinist in
that orchestra.

[_Noting an absence_] Who's sitting in the empty chair?
[_Restoring a deletion_] Erase it back in!
[_After a less than perfect interpretation_] If Schubert
[Mozart, Beethoven, etc.] were alive, he would
turn over in his grave!

_—Helene Shomer, River Edge, New Jersey_

#### Letters {Victor H. Borsodi}

In connection with the article, &ldquo;Irish Bulls...&rdquo;
[VERBATIM II, 1], you may find of interest the following
excerpt from a letter to Father John O'Connor from
G.K. Chesterton, _ca_. 1904 (Chesterton seldom dated letters),
regarding Mrs. Chesterton's health.  Father O'Connor
was later Monsignor O'Connor and Privy Chamberlain
to Pope Pius XI.

The two may be just a bit too much for her and I want
to be with her every night for a few days—there's an
Irish bull for you!  One of the mysteries of Marriage
(which must be a sacrament and an extraordinary one)
is that a man like me can yet become at certain
instances indispensable.

There is no further mention of &ldquo;Irish bull&rdquo; in that letter,
and I have never seen it in any of Chesterton's other
works.
_—Victor H. Borsodi, New York, N.Y._

#### Letters {Ruby S. Jung}

Irish bulls are certainly not confined to Ireland.  In the
1972 Pelican Classics edition of St. Augustine's _City of
God_, Book XI, Chapter 1, Augustine speaks of the &ldquo;impious
and arrogant gods who are deprived of His changeless
light which is shed upon all alike.&rdquo;

But maybe that's not a bull at all, but a hippopotamus.
_—Ruby S. Jung, Carbondale, Illinois_

#### Letters {Norman R. Shapiro}

A few remarks about three eye-catching items in the
most recent number of VERBATIM (I, 4).

Concerning Donald A. Sears' article &ldquo;Ameritalian,&rdquo; I
would certainly not contest his thesis that English (or
Anglo-American) is spreading its tentacles the length and
breadth of The Boot, and especially in Tuscany.  But he
may be going overboard a little in insisting that it is doing
so at the expense of French, when, ironically, French itself
may be partially to blame.  (One of his examples, by the
way—_frigo_—is probably not from the English at all; though
if it is, it may, conceivably, be a direct borrowing of the
French _frigo_, short for _frigorifique_.  More likely, however,
it is just a native abbreviation of the perfectly good Italian
noun _frigorifero_.)  French influence may be largely responsible
for spreading, if not necessarily introducing, such
Anglo-Americanisms as _club, leader, standard, sexy, cocktail,
relax, pullover_, etc., all with greater or lesser histories
as chic Franglais.  Even _after-shave_ and _d&eacute;odorant_ are preferred
by many an up-to-date Frenchman to the native
_apr&eacute;s-rasage_ and _d&eacute;sodorisant_.  So, too, the profusion of
_-ing_ nouns (_touring, dancing, camping_, et al.), all of which
enjoy special prestige in modern French.  The French are
so addicted to this feature of English grammar, in fact,
that they have even invented a few _-ing_ nouns of their
own (e.g., _le footing_ 'hiking'), and have modified others
into curious existence (e.g., _le living_ 'livingroom,' _le shampooing_
'shampoo').  French could be as responsible as English
for introducing _lo stereo_ into Italian—N.B. the definite
article: _lo_, not _il_, at least not in Tuscany!—though
there's really no reason to attribute it to any external
source at all.  _Stereo-_ is not an uncommon prefix in technical
Italian.  As for _WC_ versus _toilette_, the former Briticism
is, and has long been, a favorite euphemism in
French, pronounced in a variety of ways (thanks to the
ambiguity of the letter _w_), ranging from the concise _v&eacute;c&eacute;_
to the more elegant _ouat&eacute;re-closette_.  By now, in fact, it is
almost pan-European.

In short, while Anglo-American is indisputably leaving
its mark on modern Italian, let's not forget to credit (or
condemn) French for at least a share in the process.

The second item that caught my eye was the delightful
folk etymology suggested by Graham S. Mitchell, attributing
_ballbuster_ to the Yiddish _baleboosteh_.  It certainly
wouldn't be the only Yiddish contribution to the American
language, as any schlemiel familiar with _Mencken_ and
others will attest.  But a few opposing arguments do present
themselves.  First of all, a _ballbuster_ isn't necessarily
a woman (Freud notwithstanding), or even, necessarily,
a human being.  Nor need it originally have been so.  Went-worth
and Flexner (_Dictionary of American Slang_, T.Y.
Crowell, 1967) list the nonpersonal meaning first ('A job,
task, activity, or goal that is extremely difficult to accomplish'),
and derive the personal meaning from it ('The
person who assigns, demands, or supervises such arduous
tasks').  I've often heard my students apply the term to an
exam, for instance, or to any crushing problem of the moment.
Furthermore, the syntactic variant to _bust my_ (_his,
your_, etc.) _balls_ is particularly common, and implies no
female agency: e.g., _I had to bust my balls to get a C
minus!_  (I'm not sure what the co-eds say—even the most
liberated, verbally and otherwise.)  Of course, this doesn't
have to invalidate the _baleboosteh_ hypothesis ipso facto—
it's a case of chicken versus egg—but it casts at least a
shadow of doubt.  More telling, perhaps, is the fact that the
expression in question, like the figurative phenomenon it
denotes, is hardly restricted to English.  More or less exact
equivalents are found in the slang of many other languages,
old and new.  Didn't Catullus call Lesbia an _ilia
rumpens_ (XI, 20)?  (Literally, a 'groin-buster,' but the implication
is clear.)  French has its _casse-couilles_; Italian, its
_rompecoglioni_; Spanish, its _rompebolas, rompehuevos_ (and
probably several more, depending on the regional variety
typical of the Hispanic world); German, its _Hodenbrecher_
(more &ldquo;elegant&rdquo; than the soldier-slang _Eierschleifer_);
Dutch, its _ballenbreker_; Hebrew, its _shovair beitzim_; Modern
Greek, its _spastarchidis_.  And it wouldn't surprise me
in the least to hear _pilkrompanto_ on the lips of an outraged
Esperantist.

But what tends to discredit the hypothesis the most, I
think, is the fact that _baleboosteh_, in Yiddish, is almost
exclusively a laudatory term.  A _baleboosteh_, to echo Mr.
Mitchell's closing words, &ldquo;just gets things done, like any
good manager.&rdquo;  Even more, though, she is generally admired
for this talent.  To quote Leo Rosten in _The Joys of
Yiddish_ (McGraw-Hill, 1968): &ldquo;To call a woman 'a real
_baleboosteh_' is to bestow high praise indeed: It means the
honoree is a splendid cook, baker, laundress, and, above
all, keeps so immaculate a home that 'you can eat off the
floor...' &rdquo; (p. 30).  Which is not to deny the possible
connotation of 'a bossy woman,' which Rosten himself
admits (although relegating it to the last of eight shades
of meaning).  Uriel Weinreich, on the other hand, in his
authoritative _English-Yiddish Yiddish-English Dictionary_
(McGraw-Hill, 1968), gives no pejorative meaning whatever.

In any event, no doubt many a real _baleboosteh_ has also
been a real _ballbuster_ in her own right.  But the hypothesis
of an etymological link, while it tickles my linguistic
funny-bone, has to leave me unconvinced.

The third eye-catcher was Arnold M. Zwicky's bilingual
redundancy game.  I'm sure it will attract many additions.
_Mount Fujiyama_ calls to mind any number of geographical
examples.  Among them: _Mount Kilimanjaro_ (Swahili,
_kilima_ 'mountain'), _Mount Mauna Loa_ (Hawaiian, _mauna_
'mountain'), the _Sierra Nevada Mountain Range_ (Spanish,
_sierra_ 'mountain range'), the _R&iacute;o Grande River_ (Spanish,
_r&iacute;o_ 'river'), the _Guadalquivir River_ (Arabic, _guad_ 'river'),
_The Alhambra_ (Arabic, _al_ 'the'), etc.  You should also
probably receive dozens of letters suggesting the grand-daddy
of them all, _the hoi polloi_, though somehow this
doesn't offend me too much.  I suppose it's already become
such a clich&eacute; that the correct form (without either the _the_
or the _hoi_) would sound almost sillier than the redundancy.
But a similar barbarism, bordering on the vulgar,
never fails to jar me: &ldquo;a, b, c, d... 'and _et cetera_' &rdquo; And I
scrupulously avoid restaurants whose menus boast a &ldquo;daily
_soup(e) du jour_&rdquo;!
_—Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University_

#### Letters {Frieda Arki}

I'd be happy to see a column in VERBATIM devoted
to new and current expressions in the American language
which for some reason seldom seem to reach the periodic
dictionaries of American slang.

The words and expressions I'm thinking of surface from
all corners of our society—some are institutionalese, where
full professor on tenure can and do admit to having
_cathected_ a particular event, or _intuited_ something.  From
the mean streets come some of the best: to _ralph up_ 'to
vomit'; to _flake_ 'walk'; _blow someone away_ 'shoot someone';
_waste someone_ 'kill him'; _grossed out_ 'nauseated (at
something).'

I'll bet everyone reading this has a few at his elbow
ready to send you.

_—Frieda Arkin, New York, New York_

#### Letters {Edwin H. Hammock}

I ... enjoyed the delightful piece by Mrs. Gilman
[VERBATIM II, 1] ...concerning the accent and pronunciation
of New Englanders.  I want to call attention to
the fact that court reporters are perhaps the only people
in the world who deal with spoken language which must
be reduced to writing and punctuated without the privilege
of changing, editing, correcting; the possible exception
is that we may interrupt (with due embarrassment)
and clarify a misstatement.

I once had the challenge of a judge of a state court who
said, &ldquo;Federal courts usually grant motions such as this
quite readily, but state courts are prone to grant them, so
your motion is overruled.&rdquo;

Sometimes we get consolation from the dictionary—
_irregardless_ is now duly in print—but nobody has yet
pointed out just how to punctuate a sentence like this:

&ldquo;The economic principles of a political party—quote, unquote—are
apt to be made on the run.&rdquo;

_-Edwin H. Hammock, Columbus, Ohio_

#### Letters {W. H. Rawlings}

My _Random House Unabridged_ (1971) does not include
the verb to _barberchair_.  This term came up in a
casual conversation with a man who has had some experience
in forestry in Montana.  We were discussing a recent
accident here in which a large tree being cut down fell in
the opposite direction from that intended, demolishing
a house.

My friend explained that the fellers of the tree had
apparently not taken into account the possibility that the
tree had grown with a spiral and that the cutting had released
the tension in the tree trunk, causing it to _barber-chair_,
or 'twist around.'

I suppose the word comes under the heading of trade
jargon or cant and may be listed in a glossary of trade
terms, but I thought it of interest.

_-W. H. Rawlings, West Vancouver, B.C._

#### Letters {Sophie W.S. Brown}

Having collected names for years, I was, like M. Jourdain,
astonished to learn the term for what I'd been doing
all along: onomastics.  Herewith, a few names from my list:

<quote>
_Ida Virginia Reel_     _Stewart Maiden_
_Rev. Raymond O'Pray_   _Norma Into_
_Charles Tennis_        _Richard Oyster_
_Lillian H. Her_        _Mrs. King Solomon_
_Luther Orange Lemon_   _Briton English_
_Merton Cleverly_       _James Cutie_
_Dow Roof_              _Walter Hidden_
_Josephine Opacity_     _Lynn Shoals_
_Leland Rummage_        _Brian Miscall_
</quote>

Are there any fanciers of homographic-heterosemantic
phonoglosses?  These have pleased me:

_age ago cave dare date eat ire mare miles sit sum time vale_


_—Sophie W.S. Brown, Woodcliff Lake, N.J._

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v2n2_1975-09)