---
title: "Vol II, No 4 [February 1976]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Noun Overuse Phenomenon Article

_—Bruce D. Price, Word-Wise, New York, New York_

Have you noticed a new &ldquo;clunk-clunk&rdquo; sound in the English language?  Phrases such as &ldquo;patient starter package&rdquo; for _sample_?  &ldquo;Drug dosage forms&rdquo; for _pills_?  &ldquo;Health cause&rdquo; for _sickness?_  &ldquo;Increased labor market participation rates&rdquo; for _more people working?_ This overuse of nouns is a modern trend that has pretty much escaped notice.  To put the phenomenon on the intellectual map, I've dubbed it Nounspeak. The allusion is to Newspeak, about which Orwell wrote: &ldquo;Newspeak was designed not to extend but to diminish the range of thought.&rdquo;

The Germanic languages like to pile up nouns. The Romance languages virtually forbid it.  The English lexicon, betwixt and between, has traditionally accepted nouns in pairs with no hesitation.  Examples are _book store, love affair, deer crossing_, and _state university_.  Three nouns in a row used to be the outer limit and is a rare find in English prose before 1950. Now we daily encounter excrescences like &ldquo;growth trend pattern&rdquo; and &ldquo;consumer price inflation&rdquo; and even, hold your hat, &ldquo;U.S. Air Force aircraft fuel systems equipment mechanics course&rdquo; (from a Long Island newspaper).

Nounspeak is not grammatically wrong.  We're concerned here with good style and with clarity and with avoiding problems for ourselves.  _Space ship_ is not a problem.  _Space ship booster rocket_ is the beginning of a problem.  Most writers would, I trust, try to find alternate phrasing.  But more and more we're having to accept decided problems such as _space ship booster rocket ignition system_.  I suggest it's time to back up.

Scientists love Nounspeak.  Anyone hearing them joust with their mother tongue must lament the change of standards since the Royal Society took as its motto, _Nulla in Verba_, more than 300 years ago. Bureaucrats also love Nounspeak.  Certainly the military loves Nounspeak.  Would you ever guess that _target neutralization requirement_ means 'the desired dead'?  Or that _airplane delivery systems_ might mean 'bombs'?  Here's the National Academy of Science discussing military research: &ldquo;Work has included development of empirical and rational formulae for aerosal survival, formulae for predicting human lethal dose, and quantification of disease severity.&rdquo;  (They're talking about germs and poisonous gases.)  And most of all the &ldquo;soft sciences,&rdquo; such as psychology, education, sociology and anthropology, love Nounspeak.  A prize of some sardonic sort ought to be presented to the behaviorist quoted in _Science Digest_ who concocted _place for goods purchase_.  It takes a minute to realize he's thinking about 'stores.'  The pattern is that people with little to say turn to Nounspeak for pompous packaging, while those with something unsavory to say find friendly camouflage in Nounspeak's abstractions and opacities.  Who can forget _body count?_

At a glance Nounspeak might seem a natural development, like the disappearance of the distinction between _who_ and _whom_ or the evolution of a slang word into polite speech, but it is only natural in the sense that foods such as breakfast cereals are a &ldquo;natural&rdquo; development in modern society.  Normally, a language is shaped by the intellectual writers at the top and the great mass of not-so-intellectual speakers at the bottom.  But Nounspeak, like breakfast cereals, is largely an artificial imposition, perpetrated by that growing multitude in the middle with from one to four years of college.  Not at all restrained by any sense of educational deficiency, this multitude talks to dazzle its own ears.  And to hell with Sir Quiller-Couch.

People aren't _broke_ any more.  They have a _money problem_ or a _bad money situation.  Discontented consumers_ (real people) have become _consumer discontent_ (an abstraction, like so much Nounspeak).  Weathermen don't predict _rain_ any more: now it's _precipitation activity_.

There may be a metaphysical dimension here.  People often have the sensation that they aren't being heard. So they keep lumping noun on noun, as though by saying the same thing two or three times, they'll be understood across the existential void.  Can you think of another reason for _Newsweek's_ startling duo, _inlet cove?_  (One can hardly find two more perfectly synonymous words in English. So why use both?)  And _rain postponement dates_ recently appeared on a sign in the subway in New York City.

Nouns must comfort with their solidity.  They seem to pin matters down, to freeze life, to ward off future shock. But it's largely a sham.  Life is flux and process.  Verbs are truer to this constant change; and expert stylists have always recommended reliance on verbs.  Listen to Gertrude Stein railing against nouns in &ldquo;Lectures in America&rdquo;: &ldquo;Things once they are named the name does not go on doing anything to them and so why write in nouns.... And therefore and I say it again more and more one does not use nouns....  Nouns as I say even by definition are completely not interesting.&rdquo;  And Gertrude Stein was speaking about nouns in meager doses, not the excesses here labeled Nounspeak.

Poor Gertrude Stein.  Alive today, she could not read the front page of any newspaper in the country without finding a surfeit of nouns, many of which can be cut entirely with _no_ loss of sense.  The favorite free-loaders are _area, situation_ and _problem_.  One of Nounspeak's major linguistic discoveries is that you can attach any one, or even two of these words to any other English word with no change of meaning.  The gain in precision is illusory but the loss of clarity is real.  &ldquo;What's your problem area, Jack?&rdquo;

Nounspeak shares common ground with jargon and bombast and gobbledygook and prolixity and confusion of whatever sort.  But Nounspeak does seem to be the most sharply defined of these phenomena and may be the more interesting in exhibiting its own rudimentary &ldquo;grammar,&rdquo; the devices by which perfectly fine English is &ldquo;translated&rdquo; into Nounspeak.  (One cannot help thinking of Nounspeak as being almost a dialect of English.)

The first and most obvious of these devices is: never use one noun when two (or three) can be rummaged up. Contemplate these words: _subject; interim; spending; transition; passengers;_ and _contract_.  Is not each a sturdy soldier of a word, wholly equipped by itself and ready for any mission?  But these excellent nouns split in Nounspeak to become: _subject matter; interim period; spending total; transition period; passenger volume;_ and _contract agreement_.  (All examples are from the press.)  Note that nothing is added except the extra syllables.  Like germs, one noun splits into two, and then one of those can become two again.

A second technique for subverting English into Nounspeak requires changing strong, aggressive verbs into weak nouns.  _We control pests_ in English.  _We accomplish pest control_ is Nounspeak.  It's hard to see any good reason for this device.  But many variations can be found in the press.  The idea is to smash those verbs.  Mothers don't _feed_ infants, they practice _infant feeding;_ teachers don't _educate_ any more, they work at _student education;_ politicians don't _appeal to voters_, they have _voter appeal;_ readers don't _respond_, they show _reader response_.

A third technique diminishes clarity by disdaining the possessive 's or of.  &ldquo;Nixon had this to say about the Agnew criticism....&rdquo;  Heard on the radio, there is no way of knowing whether Agnew was criticized or criticizing, except by context.  Paradigmatically, &ldquo;B's A&rdquo; and &ldquo;A of B&rdquo; are being changed wholesale into &ldquo;BA.&rdquo;  Thus _rate of change_, which is smooth and flows easily into the brain, becomes _change rate_, which is &ldquo;clunk-clunk&rdquo; English and hard to digest.

In the years ahead English will depend much more heavily on nouns than Gertrude Stein might like.  But it's reasonable to ask that our writers and editors steer us away from Nounspeak's worst excesses.  We'll know the tide has turned when the IRS whittles its _Tax Schedule Rate Chart_ down to _Tax Rate Chart_, then to the very sensible _Tax Chart_, then--unlikely victory--to _Taxes_, which is what they were trying to say all along.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: The Enigmatic Eggplant

The name itself is a puzzle.  Actually, there are two English names.  Eggplant is the original appellation and seems to derive from a white, egg-shaped variety.  This &ldquo;eggy&rdquo; eggplant is more frequently encountered in Europe, as is the zebrine strain, which has longitudinal purple-and-white stripes.

By 1800, however, the term &ldquo;aubergine&rdquo; had crossed the channel to England, where it is now the accepted name for eggplants of all shades.  _Aubergine_ is also the standard French name, and that name, too, has mystified men who might have been wiser.  The editors of the _Oxford English Dictionary_ etymologized, with evident dubiety, to the effect that _aubergine_ is the diminutive of French _auberge_.  Any traveler knows that in France an _auberge_ is an inn, but we are told in the _O.E.D_., on the alleged authority of the great French lexicographer, Littr&eacute;, that in this fruity and enigmatic case, &ldquo;auberge&rdquo; is a variant of &ldquo;alberge,&rdquo; a word for peach.  The _O.E.D._ also cites a Spanish word for apricot.  These are, I submit, unsatisfying if vaguely plausible guesses.

Fortunately, the true explanation is there for all to see in Littr&eacute;'s dictionary, where it has been for more than a century.  He states that &ldquo;aubergine&rdquo; derives, via Spain, from the Arabic word for eggplant, _al-badhinjan_.  This makes historical sense, and the Arabic term leads, by evident phonological processes, first to _alberenjena_ (the modern Spanish word for eggplant is the same minus the Arabic definite article, _al: berenjena_), and then to aubergine.

Various other kinds of documentary evidence collected by Alphonse De Candolle in his _Origin of Cultivated Plants_ build a good case for believing that the eggplant itself was brought to Europe by Muslims who themselves had met with the plant in Africa no later than the dawn of the Middle Ages.  Muslim invaders then carried it across the Strait of Gibraltar.  But they were only a link in a chain of transmission that had begun in India centuries before.  We can be sure that the eggplant was known in the subcontinent in earliest historical times because the Sanskrit word for eggplant, _vartta_, has survived in the modern Hindi term, _bharta_.  [Reprinted with permission from &ldquo;The Enigmatic Eggplant,&rdquo; by Raymond Sokolov, _Natural History_ Magazine, May, 1975, p. 39.  Copyright &copy; The American Museum of Natural History, 1975]


#### EPISTOLA {W.M. Woods} 
The word _cowbird_ has bothered me for a long time. This is the common name given to _Molothrus ater_, the American cowbird.  Every dictionary I have consulted states that the bird was given its name because it associates with cows.  My own observations indicate that it simply is not so.  Grackles, starlings, sparrows, and crows associate with cows and their droppings and fodder much more than do cowbirds.

The American cowbird is a relative of the European coocoo, or cuckoo, or whatever.  It lays its eggs in the nests of other birds for them to hatch and rear the cowbird's young, as does the European cuckoo.  I think this habit gave the American cowbird its name.  I think some immigrant, probably of German origin, noticed this habit of the cowbird and called it a &ldquo;Kuh-kuh-bird,&rdquo; ultimately, &ldquo;Kuh-bird.&rdquo;  Now _Kuh_ means 'cow' in German.  I think that some person of non-German origin, perhaps in the Pennsylvania Dutch region, who had a smattering of German by association, corrupted the term _Kuh-bird_ into English as _cowbird_.

Every lexicographer I have approached has pooh-poohed my notion.  Where is your evidence?  they ask.  Of course, there is no evidence.  There is only negative evidence. Cowbirds do not associate with cows all that much.  
_—W.M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee


## A Quick Fox Jumps over the Cwm Fjord-Bank Glyph Biz  
_—Russell Slocum, Reading, Pennsylvania_

A _quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog_ is a popular grammar school writing exercise incorporating all 26 letters of the alphabet in a 33-letter sentence.  For those wishing to shorten the lesson, it may also be the seed of an obsession.

Holo-alphabetic sentences can be addicting.  Unpraised holo-alphabaddicts have spent a good deal of time determining that Ezra 7:21 is the only Biblical verse containing all the letters, although it takes 170 letters to do it and excludes _j_, which wasn't around for the translation.  But creating a 26-letter holo-alphabetic sentence is the goal of most.  Perhaps driven to desperation, Augustus DeMorgan, a 19th-century mathematician, used the pre-15th century alphabet (no _j_ and an ambiguous _v_) to reach 26 with _I, quartz pyx, who fling mud beds_.

Using the modern alphabet, it has been comparatively easy to create holo-alphabetic sentences of between 29 and 33 letters.  There's the story of the World War I cryptoanalyst who wrote home requesting, &ldquo;_Pack my bag with five dozen liquor jugs_,&rdquo; and the likes of _Quick wafting zephyrs vex bold Jim_.  In 1964 a magazine contest for the shortest ended in a tie at 28 letters: _Waltz, nymph, for quick jigs vex Bud;_ and slightly more obscure, _Blowzy frights vex, and jump quick_.

Complicated modifiers and implied articles raise the question of what constitutes a valid sentence.  But in the heat of condensation, interest in content usually becomes secondary to overcoming the greatest obstacle, the ratio of six vowels to twenty consonants. Bringing the vowelless _nth_ into the game better balances the groups, but as the sentences shrink their meanings often become less lucid.  For example: 'Endless zigging and zagging through legal loopholes prevented the diminutive employees of an Iranian pyx manufacturer from turning their products into music boxes,' or, in other words and 27 letters, _Nth zigs block Qum dwarf jive pyx_.  In 26 leters: 'an esteemed Iranian shyster was provoked when he himself was cheated.  An alleged seaside ski resort he purchased proved instead to be a glacier of countless oil-abundant fjords,' or _Nth black fjords vex Qum gyp wiz_.

In addition to _nth_ there is _cwm_ a noun meaning a rounded valley or natural amphitheater.  'An eccentric's annoyance upon finding ancient inscriptions on the side of a fjord in a rounded valley' can be phrased as _Cwm fjord-bank glyphs vext quiz_.  Telling of his 'irritation at being cheated by a promoter's endless balking,' a brief Chapter II in the eccentric's life might read, _Nth balks gyp, vex cwm fjord quiz_.

Although the use of _nth_ and _cwm_ in a sentence leaves only fourteen consonants to mesh with the six vowels, seemingly incompatible groupings in the former category often appear.  In fact, it seems necessary to include _fjord_ or _fjeld_ in the sentence to keep it at 26 letters. An example using the latter word: 'A famous singer from a plateau valley (an unnatural wonder) was cheated in a wager concerning the infinite nature of quarks, a business he did not wholly understand'--_Nth quark biz gyps cwm fjeld vox_.

With the ultimate concision attained, it remains only to devise the most comprehensible holo-alphabetic sentence. While some of the preceding may seem contrived, word collections like _Nth cwm fjeld barks gyp quiz vox_ make them seem relatively clear.  Yet the number of possible combinations of the 26 letters is 27 digits long.  There must be a few more that make sense.


## Antedate Dictionary Citations 
_—David Shulman, New York City_

In VERBATIM II, 1, appeared an interesting article on dictionary citations in general.  This article, however, is intended to complement it by describing only a particular form of citation.  Rather than the proper selection of one that clarifies the meaning or use of a word or phrase, the concern here is with the citation that antedates any previous record or shows possibly the first printed occurrence. This is especially true for the _Oxford English Dictionary_, the _Dictionary of Americanisms_, and any others that are based on historical principles.

Particularly, I am concerned with the _Supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary_ now in process under the editorship of Dr. Robert W. Burchfield.  I abbreviate it as _NED Supp. 2;_ the _first Supplement_ was published in 1932 and Vol. I of _NED Supp. 2_ was published in 1972, letters A to G.  The citations now especially needed are for letters H to Z.

The finding of such antedating citations at this time for new words is not a difficult task, but for the older words, especially those recorded in the original _Oxford English Dictionary_, it is extremely difficult.  One must bear in mind that for that work, many editors and many contributors collaborated over many years of research.  One person alone, indeed, had submitted over a hundred thousand citations of all kinds--he was a doctor with unlimited time in jail.

Dr. Burchfield made the task somewhat more organized by providing voluntary readers with printed lists on the new words, A to Z, with their earliest dates.  In this way, they knew what earlier dates to look for on the new words.  But, for the older words, one had to consult the _NED_ and _NED Supp. 1_ to make sure.  In my case, I reorganized the Burchfield lists into various categories by subject matter such as scientific, slang, numismatic, theatrical, and so on.  Then, I could narrow my reading by consulting books and magazines in each category with the word list handy for that category.

Regarding the older words, I was forced to check each one with my four primary sources, _NED, NED Supp. 1, DA_ (_Dictionary of Americanisms_) and _DAE_ (_Dictionary of American English_) and I even went further to ensure that Dr. Burchfield would not find my antedates recorded in other references already at his disposal.  I did all this to avoid duplication and to try to be certain' I was submitting antedates unknown to _NED Supp_. 2.  After checking the _NED Supp_. 2, Vol. 1, I found that more than 90% of my antedates submitted with my painstaking effort had been accepted.  Since I had contributed several thousand, it was a measure of satisfaction for a labor of love.

Considering the many years of omnivorous reading, mainly at the New York Public Library with its tremendous resources for such research, it was indeed a labor of love, but it also had many fringe benefits.  My vocabulary, education, and interests were enhanced.  At the same time, I found material for newspaper and magazine articles which I wrote from time to time.

After a while, I got to memorize many words and their earliest dates, so that in my reading I could tell if I had found an actual antedate.  Certain books were helpful. For example, words or phrases considered strange or foreign or neologisms might be italicized by the author or printer.  Thus, they became easier to spot with the eye, as I did not often read line by line but scanned the text. Sometimes, a writer had a stereotyped style, and I would not bother to read such a writer's work.  But writers like George Ade and Damon Runyon could prove quite rewarding for citations.  Then, too, a magazine like the _Police Gazette_ would provide me with more useful citations than the _Christian Missionary Gazette_.

If I was concentrating on a certain word rather than taking catch-as-catch-can any neologism as a lepidopterist with a butterfly net (&agrave; la Nabokov), then really good lexicographic detetive work was required.  Thus, for example, I felt it important for the questionable etymology of _charley horse_ to run it down, and that I probably did by reading a host of books and clippings in the Spalding baseball collection of the New York Public Library.  It was amazing how much had appeared in print prior to 1900. This also resulted in an article, &ldquo;Baseball's Bright Lexicon,&rdquo; which _American Speech_ published.

I think many more antedates can be found.  In the majority of cases, no dictionary can be sure it has the first usage, and so the &ldquo;game is still afoot.&rdquo;  I found it a challenge and I enjoyed the hunt immensely.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: chic

The French word _chic_ (pronounced &ldquo;sheek&rdquo;) originally did not mean 'smart, stylish, correct, becoming,' as it apparently means today.  Originally it meant 'lucky find.' If a group of French boys or even grown men were out for a walk and one of them spied a silver coin lying on the ground, he would pounce on it and pick it up exclaiming &ldquo;Chic!&rdquo;--which would translate into American as 'What a lucky break for me!' A French beachcomber, coming upon a rare and beautiful shell or piece of driftwood would do likewise.  So also would French antique dealers, police detectives, and other types, including the auto mechanic searching for that replacement part for that old-model car.

Likewise, French women, shopping for wearing apparel in the boutiques and salons of Paris, and eventually finding hats or dresses or coats or shoes that were just the right size and style and color for them, also would exclaim &ldquo;Chic!&rdquo; meaning 'What a lucky find!'  They usually did this in front of a mirror of course, trying on the stuff, and British and American women shoppers in those boutiques and salons, seeing this happen over and over again, mistakenly assumed that that oft-repeated exclamation meant 'smart, stylish, correct, becoming.'  It certainly looked that way as the French women preened themselves and postured in front of the mirrors and smilingly exclaimed &ldquo;Chic!&rdquo; or &ldquo;Tr&eacute;s chic!&rdquo;

The British and American women shoppers proceeded to use the word themselves--they could do no less!--in that same connotation.  So well did they succeed, collectively, in promoting and popularizing this usage, that _chic_ eventually came to mean just that _even in France_.

Let us hope and pray that you and I never have the misfortune of hearing it pronounced &ldquo;chick.&rdquo;  

_—Roger Clancy, New Smyrna Beach, Florida_


## <emph>&ldquo;The Bronx?/No, thonx&rdquo; —Ogden Nash</emph>

_Abraham Tauber, Professor of Speech, Yeshiva University and John Jay College of Criminal Justice, C.U.N.Y._

Bronx, the name of a certain borough (county) in New York City, a place that has its own troubles, has had a recent precipitate decline in nomenclature prestige. Of course, the &ldquo;Bronx cheer&rdquo; has been an ugly epithet-gesture for some time, defined as such in the Unabridged Edition of _The Random House Dictionary of the English Language:_ &ldquo;_U.S._ a vulgar spluttering noise made with the lips and tongue to show contempt or disgust.  Also called _raspberry_.&rdquo;

But now that _The New York Times_ reporters use similes like &ldquo;as devastated as the South Bronx,&rdquo; the process of pejoration has about hit bottom.

Not even the memory of the &ldquo;Bronx Bombers,&rdquo; of Yankee-World Series fame, or the attempt to devise a &ldquo;Bronx cocktail&rdquo; in some of the borough's better watering places, to parallel the sister borough's &ldquo;Manhattan,&rdquo; can dispel the gloom.  To raise the image or symbolism of the Bronx, a Bronx Academy has been formed to honor those who have brought it fame and to inspire its young to emulation.  The Bronx Society of Letters and Science is doing well to complement the cultural efforts of the Bronx Council of the Arts and its Museum.  To cap these strenuous attempts, the Bronx seeks to recapture its heroic past through the Bronx Historical Society in the Borough of Universities.

But the struggle to rehabilitate the name of the Bronx is an uphill fight, from personal testimony.  When this writer pointed out to Ogden Nash some years ago that his amusing rhyming couplet, &ldquo;The Bronx?/No, thonx&rdquo; was funny, but that it hurt what was left of the Bronx ego and its self-respect, the poet offered this apologia:

>I wrote those lines, &ldquo;The Bronx?  No, thonx&rdquo;  
 I shudder to confess them.  
 But now, a sadder, wiser man  
 I say, &ldquo;The Bronx?  God bless them!&rdquo;  

And so should we all, every one.


## Vengeful Verse: Revenge Reversed  
_—Don L. Jewett, D.Phil. (Oxon.), University of California at San Francisco_  
_The Story:_

During the French Revolution, a member of the royalty, imprisoned in the Bastille, had sufficient time to ponder his fate, and, seeing the end at hand, contrived a revenge in the form of a poem describing his plight.  The poem contained numerous puns which, he hoped, would &ldquo;punish&rdquo; those that understood them and who were, presumably, acquiescent if not active in his demise.  He copied the poem onto pieces of paper which, when fashioned into the form of paper airplanes, were sailed out of the bars of the cell window down to the rabble below.  Only one of the &ldquo;missives&rdquo; is known to be in existence, bringing us a unique view of the thoughts of a doomed man, cunningly devising his &ldquo;poetic&rdquo; revenge.

_The Poem:_
>1  I fear that I'll be punish-ed  
 2  For every puny pun-I-shed.  
 3  But their lies the dichotomy,  
 4  The pun-ish will die, caught--oh, me!  
 5  I'll not flea, but fly, in-tense  
 6  By words that flew past, in-tense.  
 7  Then I'll fight death with dual content,  
 8  If you see what your punish-meant!  
 9  (Re-right I won't, I'm wont perverse,  
 10  I think it wrong too oft re-verse.)  

_The Analysis:_

The poem is untitled and unheaded, presumably as a subtle indication of the author's own future.  It is unsigned, presumably to prevent his revenge from triggering additional punishment.

In the first line he first uses the word _punish_, which becomes a recurrent theme in the poem, just as it must have been in his rambling thoughts.  This word is itself a pun, for it is both a verb and a noun, i.e., 'to punish' and 'the punish'--those who pun.  Presumably he fears that his captors will punish the punish.  Note that in the first line his wording tends to arouse sympathy; probably this is a fiendish device to lure the unsuspecting reader deeper into the poem without fully comprehending what lies ahead for him. The same self-deprecating theme is carried into the second line where the words _pun-I-shed_ mirror the preceding line's _punish-ed_.

Now, all puns derive from double meanings, but only in &ldquo;first-class&rdquo; puns are both meanings applicable to the situation or content of the phrase containing the pun.  If one sets such standards, then the first lines are not truly &ldquo;first-class,&rdquo; certainly in comparison with the lines that follow. In passing we should note the &ldquo;1&frac12; class&rdquo; pun where _puny_ can read either &ldquo;puny&rdquo; ('small') or &ldquo;pun-y&rdquo; (an adjective) in line 2.

In line three the first-class puns begin to appear.  At first the words _their lies_ seem to be the words of the familiar expression &ldquo;but there lies the dichotomy,&rdquo; but the spelling of the second word suggests a deeper meaning that there are &ldquo;lies&rdquo; told by someone (presumably either the &ldquo;pun-ish&rdquo; author alluded to in the next line or the lies of his captors, or both!).  The line ends with the word _dichotomy_ which refers to a division in two; &ldquo;into what?&rdquo; comes immediately to mind.  Presumably the word refers to the double meanings in puns rather than the division into two which will be the author's ultimate punishment.

 Line four completes the pattern set up previously when the last words of line 2 were shown to be part of the last word of line 1.  Similarly, the last words of line 4 mirror the end of line 3.  While the word _pun-ish_ refers to those who pun, one cannot help but wonder if the author also means the _punish_ to refer to punishment-- which he hopes will someday be banished, i.e., die.  Here we see some of the optimism which begins to develop as the poem changes from the humble, self-effacing early lines to the vigorous and almost boisterous final lines in which the reader who has assimilated the poem must now bend to the author's will as the double meanings multiply within the reader's brain, like the nucleic acids of a deadly virus.

Line 5 makes obvious reference to the classic:

>A flea and a fly in a flue  
 Said the flea &ldquo;Let us fly,&rdquo;  
 Said the fly &ldquo;Let us flee,&rdquo;  
 So they flew through a flaw in the flue.  

This &ldquo;inner&rdquo; poem must have played heavily upon the author's subconscious, since it is so clearly a poem of entrapment, and planned escape--with a happy ending (for one hopelessly imprisoned).  Thus we see the similar theme of what the author will do to escape his predicament now emerging in lines 5 through 8.  In line 5 he tells us he cannot leave (that he will not &ldquo;flea&rdquo;), but that he will escape, by meaning only (_in-sense_) by &ldquo;flying words&rdquo; (flying past on the backs of paper airplanes) which are angry, i.e., &ldquo;incensed.&rdquo;  Alternatively, possibly he has become &ldquo;incensed&rdquo; _by words_ (line 6).  If so, his words, like his feelings, are &ldquo;intense.&rdquo;  However, if the words have flown past then they are obviously past _in-tense_--just as the word _flew_ is!  The word _flew_ obviously completes the &ldquo;flea, fly, flew&rdquo; parallel with the shorter poem.

In line 7 the author's message is now apparent--his fighting spirit is undaunted and in his mind he battles as in a duel, using as his &ldquo;duelling&rdquo; weapon the content of his message (&ldquo;duel&rdquo; _content_).  The _content_ is, of course, _dual_ because it is composed of puns, so that contemplation of the entire poem must provide him with twice the enjoyment (i.e., _dual content-ment_), if the reader perceives the _dual content_ of both the puns and the revenge i.e., _what your_ (the reader's) _pun-ish_ (the author who puns) _meant_ (in writing the poem), and that the reader also perceives _your_ (the reader's) _punish_- (punishment) _meant_ (means), i.e., what the author must undergo for the reader.  Note that the author considers the _punishment_ cruel, because he also thus indicates that it is &ldquo;mean.&rdquo;

By line 9 the author's revenge is in full flower and he drops entirely the self-deprecation of the initial lines.  Fully baring (bearing?) his anger, he defiantly refuses to retract (re-tract) what he has done.  He feels that all of his puns are correct in both of their meanings, i.e., he is _re-right_.

He will not _re-write_ the poem partly out of a _perversity_ expressed in poetry (i.e., _per verse_).  Taking a moral stance that it is wrong to change (i.e., _reverse_) _too oft_-en, he refuses to _re-verse_ his poem.

Reaching the end of the analysis, we must ask the question: Did the poem succeed in its purpose?  Direct evidence is lacking, but we can quite assuredly state that the poem had little effect upon the French peasantry, since few, if any, were literate, and even fewer had knowledge of the English tongue!  Thus, with his passionate anger unrequited, he could not have died the happiest sad-ist.  His work remains only to be appreciated by individual mass-ochists, such as yourself.


#### EPISTOLA {Lester E. Rothstein} 

>&ldquo;Malo &times; 4&rdquo; translate as:  
 I'd rather be  
 In an apple tree  
 Than a bad man  
 In adversity.  

But my guess is that, even with the addition of prepositions plus that word _quam_ 'than' the phrase is so ambiguous that it would have been Greek to any classical Roman.

I recall another Latin gem that could be sung to a cartoon tune:

>Pop-oculus nauticus vir sum (_bis_)  
 Ad finem pugnabo  
 Quod &ldquo;spinach&rdquo; consumo  
 Pop-oculus nauticus vir sum.  

And then, there's &ldquo;Shell Be Comin' 'Round the Mountain&rdquo;:

>Ea montem circumveniet, cum veniet (repeat 5&times;)  
 Ea quattuor albis equis vehetur cum veniet (5&times;)  
 
(Then down to three horses, two horses, one horse, and walking.)

I modestly claim authorship of this superb translation while full of college beer (_cerevisia universitatis_).  Its main forte was that it proved quite a tongue-twister when you tried to sing it to a fast-strumming guitar.  Switching those case-endings was murder! [Lester E. Rothstein, New York, New York]


## Secrets of 'American English' May Yield to Dialect Geography

_William Safire, The New York Times, Washington, D.C._

In Bernard Shaw's &ldquo;Pygmalion,&rdquo; Professor Henry Higgins was able to pinpoint the district of origin of a Cockney flower girl by listening to her accent and vocabulary. Could that be done today by an American linguistics expert and a local Eliza Doolittle?

Thanks to a growing branch of language study called dialect geography, the answer may be yes.

Since the early thirties, when dialect pioneer Hans Kurath began gathering data for his linguistic atlas of the eastern United States, language researchers in other sections of the country have been working on regional atlases to discover how words, usages and accents have traveled from one locality to another, as well as between social classes.

Dialect geography is not yet a full-fledged academic discipline, but Prof. Harold Allen of the University of Minnesota estimates that there are now 25 specialists active in the field.  Much of their work dovetails to make possible a coast-to-coast study of the way &ldquo;American English&rdquo; came to be.

One set of clues is in word usage: Do you _take_ cream or _use_ cream?

Other clues are in vocabulary: A _hero_ in New York is a _hoagy_ in Philadelphia and a _sub_ in Washington, D. C.

Still other footprints of language movement can be found in pronunciation: A California _oar-inge_ is shipped east to become an _ar-ringe_, as New England _grease_ turns to _greaze_ as it dribbles south of Trenton.

Most geographers of language agree that the information gathered so far indicates that several dialects of British English landed along the American Eastern Seaboard. These became spiced with Americanisms borrowed from traders, Indians and slaves, or coined to describe freshly discovered situations, and the speech styles trekked westward in traceable patterns.

&ldquo;Take _pail_ and _bucket_,&rdquo; says Dr. Kurath, professor emeritus of the University of Michigan, author of &ldquo;Studies in Area Linguistics&rdquo; and, in active retirement at 83, regarded as the father of dialect geography.  &ldquo;In New England, through the upper Midwest to Seattle, a container made of metal is called a _pail_.  But from Pennsylvania west and southward, the same container is called a _bucket_. There's a complication: If it's made of wood, the New England and northern word would also be _bucket_, taken from ship's buckets and fire buckets.  You have to be careful.&rdquo;

Years of selective sampling have led to the drawing of dialect dividing lines, and a dozen dialect areas have emerged.  Dr. Kurath stresses that dialect differences exist within each area, in social gradation from folk speech to cultivated speech, and that constant migration commingles American dialects.

Prounciation patterns show the spoor of the mobile language.  &ldquo;Mary married Harry,&rdquo; for example.  West of the Alleghenies, all three words are pronounced generally alike; in the East, says Dr. Kurath, all three are pronounced differently, and Mary can be _may-ree_, _mair-ee_, _marry_ or _merry_.

General linguist Mario Pei points to another East-West difference in pronunciation: In most of the East, there is no difference between _horse_ and _hoarse_; in the West, the _oar_ sound gets hoarier treatment.  (New York's mounted police, however, ride _hawses_.)

A typical North-South difference is _wash_ (North) and _wush_ (South); the nation's capital is called _Washington_ in New England and _Wushington_, or _Wurshington_, in the South and Southwest.

Sometimes a pronunciation that is outside the normal stream of dialect migration can identify the speaker.  For example, the _ou_ in &ldquo;about the house&rdquo; has a round sound in the speech of Maryland and Virginia--more &ldquo;_about_ the _howse_.&rdquo;  When this sound is heard in the discourse of a person who otherwise speaks like someone from the northern Midwest, the speaker is usually Canadian.

Unique to Utah is the reversal of the _or_ and _ar_ sounds: As one Salt Lake City resident said: &ldquo;Here we praise the _lard_ and put the _lord_ in the refrigerator.&rdquo;

Tracing the westward trek of America's earliest dialects, trying to find out how and where the eastern _bag_ became the western _sack_, language geographers must cope with three other migrations: the movement of blacks from South to North; the retirement migration to Florida and southern California, and the move from rural to urban to suburban within all American regions.

When people move about this way, language cross-pollinates, and local dialects are enriched.  The Forty-Niners of California, who coined words like _splurge_ and usages like _strike it rich_ and _pan out_ from their mining experience, reached back into early English rural archaisms to reintroduce _gumption_ and _deck_ (rather than pack) of cards.

However, these movements tending to localize and enliven dialect are opposed by the two centrifugal forces of language and enemies of dialect: the mandatory public school, which attempts to enforce &ldquo;standard&rdquo; speech, and the national communications media, which have favored a &ldquo;general American&rdquo; accent.

In the past, television was seen to be the homogenizer of the language, producing a national speech like that used by Walter Cronkite and John Chancellor--nationally understandable and &ldquo;correct&rdquo; but inhospitable to philological flavor or originality.  Of late, language geographers have been cheered by three developments:
<quote> 
&bull;  The practice of networks of hiring reporters with regional accents.

&bull;  The ability of mass media to popularize local dialect or occupational argot on a national scale, resulting in a language that becomes more uniform but changes more quickly.

&bull;  The demand of some local advertisers to present their messages in local dialect, with a &ldquo;down home&rdquo; touch, which is a countervailing influence to most television network spech.
 </quote>

Can linguists predict which direction the American English language will take--toward more centralization and standardization, or toward an increase of local dialects in communities within different cities?

Dr. Pei sees &ldquo;pockets of strong resistance&rdquo; within a general trend toward standardization: &ldquo;Good Brooklynese and good Ozarkian are not likely to be obliterated, even in a historical period of centralization.  It was the same at the height of the Roman Empire, when Latin was insisted upon, but the Iberians and the Gauls held on to their local differences.&rdquo;

A specialist in dialect geography, such as Dr. Kurath, is more reluctant to project his data into the future: &ldquo;Variations in speech reflect differences in ways of life. That's what makes the historical study of usage so fascinating.&rdquo;

In that case, could he--like the fictional Professor Higgins--listen to a person's speech and be able to identify birthplace, social class, and itinerary through life?  &ldquo;I could make a very good case for my guess.  But not on television --I'm usually too slow to make a decision,&rdquo; he says.

Copyright &copy; 1975 The New York Times Company.  Reprinted by permission from the issue of September 28, 1975.


#### EPISTOLA {Philip E. Hager}

This note acknowledges the article of Paul M. Lloyd [VERBATIM I, 5, 2] and responds to the article of Roger W. Wescott [VERBATIM I, 1].  I have long collected specific binomials which are virtually synonymous or may have been coined to appear so.  In the following list of some examples many also alliterate:

 {{< column >}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>aches and pains</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>alas and alack</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>assault and battery</i>  {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>bib and tucker</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>bruised and battered</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>by and by</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>dark and dreary</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>ditch and delve</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>fits and snatches</i>  {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>high and mighty</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>hue and cry</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>let or hindrance</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>lo and behold</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>look and see</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>odds and ends</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>over and above</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>pick and choose</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>rough and tumble</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>time and tide</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>up and doing</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>waifs and strays</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>wear and tear</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>weep and wail</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>well and good</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>whys and wherefores</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>wind and weather</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{<row >}} <i>wrack and ruin</i> {{</row>}} 
 {{< /column >}} 



[Philip E. Hager, University of the Puget Sound]


## Where the Harts Wear Pants  
_—Sister Mary Terese Donze, ASC, De Mattias Hall, St. Louis, Missouri_

If some of the hymns we are singing in today's liturgical celebrations are indicative of the word level of our younger Catholic population, it would seem we've come down a bit, for whatever else there was to be said against the old hymns, they at least had vocabulary value.

The fact struck me with unusual force when I dictated the word _blaspheme_ to a group of ninth-grade students recently: They frowned at me as if all of them had suddenly developed a hearing disability. Would I please repeat the word?  I'd be only too glad to.  &ldquo;The word is _blaspheme_.  Comes from _blasphemy_. Means a grave irreverence.&rdquo;  Irreverence?  What's that? So help me!

There are times when it's a matter of prudence not to press a point.  I felt this was one of those times. &ldquo;O.K. You're hung up on the word?  Forget it.  The next word is _bookkeeping_.&rdquo;  But I wondered about those kids.

I learned the word _blaspheme_ in the fourth grade.  No credit to me.  It just so happened that in our school everyone started learning hymns from the printed page in Grade Four.  One of the songs to Our Lady began, &ldquo;I'll sing a hymn to Mary,&rdquo; and we went on to sing: &ldquo;When wicked men _blaspheme_ thee, I'll love and bless thy name.&rdquo;  If wicked men blasphemed, it had to be a mean, nasty thing to do.  With time and repetition the word grew into its more proper definition, but we already had it under fair control by the end of the hymn practice.  And so on with any number of other words that became &ldquo;old hat&rdquo; for us before we left grammar school.

What was true in our school was true in Catholic schools across the nation.  Children were building up an accelerated vocabulary from the hymns they were singing.  Probably the better percentage of the Catholic population in the country first launched their _fragile bark_ (spelled &ldquo;barque&rdquo; in our hymnal) on life's _tempestuous_ sea in &ldquo;Mother, Dear, Oh Pray for Me.&rdquo;  On Holy Name Sundays, if the clash of arms between the powers of good and the forces of evil could not actually be heard as &ldquo;Sweet Name&rdquo; rang out, it wasn't the fault of &ldquo;_baffled_ Satan's power...in death's _appalling_ hour.&rdquo;

During Lent, hordes of Catholic youngsters _deplored_ their sins in song and _implored_ the Blessed Mother's protection in &ldquo;every _melancholy_ hour.&rdquo;  With solemn propriety they likewise mourned Christ's _mangled_ Body, beheld Him _reviled_ and put to _scorn_, and saw death's _pallid hue_ come over Him.

At Christmas the same children, together with the angels, formed a _radiant throng_, singing around the manger of the Child who was &ldquo;tenderly sleeping so _tranquil_ and sweet.&rdquo;  And they ushered the _magi_ into the parish churches by the light of a star _serenely beaming_, the while they handled the _frankincense_ and _myrrh_ with graceful abandon.

It is possible that my freshman class would wave off _enraptured_ and _warbling_ as easy ones.  I wouldn't bet on it.  Yet there was a time when, come the 12th of September with its feast of the Holy Name of Mary, thousands of children praised the Virgin's name as a sound that fell on their &ldquo;enraptured ears&rdquo; as &ldquo;sweet as the warbling of a bird.&rdquo;

Youngsters didn't always get the full implication of the words immediately, but they sang the songs so often that little by little the ideas sank in.  It took longer, of course, for some ideas to sink in than for others.  I can think of one song--Sister had duplicated it on her &ldquo;jelly&rdquo; duplicator--where the first line presented me with a real problem.  What could a fourth grader make out of singing—and in church of all places—&ldquo;as pants the hart.&rdquo;  It took a while before the words conjured up the correct images, but I was still far from the ninth grade when I discoverd that _hart_ was a word in its own right and not a misspelling, and when it turned out to mean 'deer,' even the &ldquo;pants&rdquo; seemed to fit.  However, if the word had been &ldquo;panted&rdquo; it would have helped.  I couldn't remember our dog ever having done his heavy breathing in the present tense.

Another song that was rich in vocabulary content but a bit rough on me (and I imagine on the rest of us) was one we sang to honor St. John the Evangelist.  (This was another of those duplicated songs.  Could be there was a curse on these copyright violations!)  Why we should sing of St. John and of no other apostle was never quite clear to me.  We didn't sing of St. Peter who should have had first &ldquo;dibs&rdquo; in my way of thinking.  Later, in a moment of disrespect, I figured out for myself that Sister must have taken a personal fancy to the song and that we learned it for her sake with St. John benefiting on the side.  In any case, there was one line that was very hard to handle: &ldquo;Whose heart could _brook_ the cross of Him it loved so well.&rdquo;

An uncle of mine lived on a farm near Belleville, Illinois.  Running through the pasture at the foot of the hill near his farm was a brook.  Summer after summer I had spent my vacations there, and I had crossed and recrossed that brook more times than I could remember.  But &ldquo;brook the cross?&rdquo;  Well, that was something to think about.  I still think about it, though differently now.

Words like _circumcision, womb_, and _bosom_ took on wholesome connotations in the sacred setting of a hymn. And when we sang &ldquo;in His bosom breathe out my last sigh,&rdquo; _bosom_ was good vocabulary and it was also good comfort to know we'd die resting over His heart.  At least there were no Mae-Westian overtones to the word.

There's practically no end to the list: _fraught, dross, majesty, abode, triumphant, transgressions, celestial, peerless, supernal, immaculate, infinity_.  Anyone who still has an old _St. Basil's, St. Gregory's, Catholic Youth_, or even a _Magnificat_ of later date, could come up with dozens of others.  Best of all, the learning process was painless-- merely a by-product of daily hymn practice.

Today's &ldquo;Sons of God,&rdquo; &ldquo;Allellu,&rdquo; &ldquo;Come and Look with Me&rdquo; hymns may be around a few more years.  (I doubt whether any of them will have the longevity of &ldquo;O Lord, I Am Not Worthy.&rdquo;)  However, one thing seems evident: when they burn themselves out and their ashes are cooling, it isn't likely that we'll find much of a residual vocabulary when we begin poking around in their dusty remains.

[This article appeared originally in _Our Sunday Visitor_, March 10, 1974, and is reprinted by permission.]


### EX CATHEDRA: Apostrophes  
Apostrophes serve two main functions in written English: one, they indicate the possessives of nouns and noun-type words like gerunds (but not pronouns); two, they mark the omission of one or more letters in a contraction or abbreviation.  There are a few other, conventional applications (e.g., the _1930's, mind your P's and Q's_), but we shall leave those for discussion at another time.

When we were a child--that construction shows one of the problems one can encounter when dealing with the editorial _we_--we recall that a friend of our parents' gave them a gift of porous paper coasters imprinted with something like &ldquo;Drink with the Urdang's.&rdquo;  Our father (which art, we assume, in Heaven), an English teacher, forbade their use, though they remained in a drawer of the buffet for many years.  Mrs. G.R. Morrow [Swarthmore, Pa.] offers some other examples: _Jojos Lounge; The Wilson's telephoned...; ice cold soda's; sandwich's; St. Peters_ [see VERBATIM II, 1, 3]; and _St. Paul United Methodist Church_ [in Largo, Florida].  These reflect a mixture of the absence of a possessive apostrophe where it belongs and the insertion of an anomalous apostrophe where none is required.

In other contexts, we see _Ham n Eggs, Ham 'n Eggs_, and _Ham n' Eggs_, but only rarely what one might expect because both the _a_ and the _d_ are missing, _Ham 'n' Eggs_, although we have seen _Ham 'n' Eggs_, treated as if the _n_ were some special sort of signal.  Clearly, an apostrophe is not to be confused with an open single quotation mark.

The question of whether or not to use 's to form the possessive of a proper noun ending in _s_ is not always easy to decide, for it depends on the style of a particular piece of work.  Most often, if the proper noun is short--one or two syllables--the _s_ is added after an apostrophe: _Van Nuys's downtown area; Tom Jones's house_; but there may be a choice between _Bill Williams's house_ and _Bill Williams' house_.  One hears a conscious choice, too: there is a difference in the sound of _Williams'_ and that of _Williams's_.

The apostrophe should never be used when a simple plural of a proper noun ending in _s_ is intended: _The Papadopolises are moving tomorrow_ (not &ldquo;Papadopolis' &rdquo; or &ldquo;Papadopolis's&rdquo;); _keeping up with the Joneses_ (not &ldquo;Jones' &rdquo; or &ldquo;Jones's&rdquo;).  One area of confusion remains, however, when we encounter what might be called the &ldquo;possessive absolute.&rdquo;  That is a construction in which the object of the possessive has been omitted: _We are going over to the Joneses' [house] tonight_.  Another kind of example: _&ldquo;Whose lawn mower is that?&rdquo;  /&ldquo;It's the Joneses._' &rdquo;

Our best advice is avoidance: if an uncomfortable construction is encountered, and you don't know how to handle it, avoid it.  Many copy editors and stylists frown on the use of the possessive apostrophe with proper nouns, preferring an _of the_...construction, where possible. In some instances, that may be awkward, but for the most part it is less burdensome to write (if not say): _the downtown area of Van Nuys_ rather than _Van Nuys's downtown area; the exports of the Netherlands Antilles_ rather than _the Netherlands Antilles'_ [or _Antilles's_] _exports_, and so on.



#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro} 
I was happy to read, in Pat Solotaire's letter (II, 2, 12), that the Gratuitous Negative (&ldquo;I love candy.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;So don't I.&rdquo;) has puzzled others beside myself.  I have wondered why it is heard throughout the Northeast (not only in Maine) and especially, I think, in juvenile speech.  The only explanation I can come up with is not very convincing, namely, that the second element, always beginning with _so_, was originally a rhetorical question (&ldquo;I love candy.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;So?  Don't I?&rdquo;), ultimately--and inexplicably--becoming an exclamation.

One hears another type of Gratuitous Negative in even more supposedly sophisticated and less regional speech.  Two examples: &ldquo;I miss not seeing him,&rdquo; and &ldquo;I can't stay but a minute.&rdquo;  Obviously, this phenomenon is a syntactic portmanteau, a compressing of two thoughts into one: &ldquo;I miss seeing him.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;I'm sorry not to see him.&rdquo; and &ldquo;I can stay but a minute.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;I can't stay more than a minute.&rdquo;  I imagine it stems from the same psycholinguistic source as the French pleonastic _ne_: &ldquo;J'ai peur qu'il ne vienne,&rdquo; meaning 'I'm afraid he will come,' while implying that I wish he wouldn't.  The difference is that the French redundancy is a mark of elegance; the American, a mark of sloppy grammar.

Curiously, the inverse of the Gratuitous Negative has recently surfaced in popular speech: _I could_ [instead of _I couldn't_] _care less_!  On the face of it, this would seem to be merely a negatively charged exclamation, on the order of _Well, that's just lovely!, I'm really touched!'  You're a fine one to talk_, et al.  But on closer inspection, _I could care less_ differs fundamentally from such expressions in that the true negative, _I couldn't care less!_, is still used in parallel with it, whereas one never hears (and presumably never has heard) such true negatives as \?\_Well, that's not just lovely!, \?\I'm not really touched!_, or \?\_You're not a fine one to talk!_  Perhaps--again--what we have here was, originally, a rhetorical question, _I could care less_?  As such, it even has a slightly Yiddish ring to it, like the traditional _I should care_?, usually accompanied by a nod of the head and a shrug of the shoulders.  Other explanations and/or observations will be welcome.
[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]


#### EPISTOLA {Jon Mills}  
I have been similarly fascinated by the use of quotation marks, as commented on by Pat Solotaire [VERBATIM II, 2, 12].  Two recent examples:

(1)  The Jacqueline Susann book _Once Is Not Enough_ was made into a movie, billed not as:

Jacqueline Susann's &ldquo;Once Is Not Enough&rdquo; but rather as

&ldquo;Jacqueline Susann's Once Is Not Enough,&rdquo; which makes no sense at all (unless the title of her book was really, &ldquo;Jacqueline Susann's Once Is Not Enough,&rdquo; in which case the movie should have been billed as:

Jacqueline Susann's &ldquo;Jacqueline Susann's Once Is Not Enough.&rdquo;

(2)  A bottle of dish soap in my kitchen has printed on the label the words, in quotation marks, &ldquo;Contains No Phosphates.&rdquo;  Are they, perhaps, quoting an authority on phosphate content?  A similar use is made in advertising, where a slogan will be set aside by quotation marks: &ldquo;Tastes great!&rdquo;, etc.  I don't think that advertisers are fools. The use of quotation marks must have a predictable motivational effect.  I would like to know what it is.

With reference to Sophie W.S. Brown's letter [II, 2, 14], what are &ldquo;homographic-heterosemantic phonoglosses&rdquo;?

I would like to know if any readers have ever looked for words with the property that, if a specific vowel is replaced by any of the other vowels, the result is still a word.  For example, _pack, peck, pick, pock, puck_.  The words I've found are _mass, pat, bag, last_, and (amazingly enough, seven letters) _blander_.  Some I reject (e.g., _ball:_ there's something about the validity of _boll_ that I find questionable).

_Facetious_ is the only word I know of that uses all of the vowels (and no more) in sequence.  The shortest word I know of that uses all five vowels is _sequoia_, and the next shortest is _equation_.  Has anybody found other examples of sequentiality or brevity?
[Jon Mills, Chicago, Illinois]

_We, too, were unfamiliar with the term &ldquo;homographic-heterosemantic phonoglosses,&rdquo; but the meanings of its elements are transparent enough_: homographic _means '(of two or more words) written identically'_; heterosemantic _means 'different in meaning'_; phonogloss _means 'an explanation in sound(s).'  Hence, the entire expression would mean something like 'words spelled the same way but with different meanings.'  That leaves_ phonoglosses, _which mystifies us, we admit.  But if one examines the examples given by Ms. Brown, all are common English words that are also common Latin words, though they mean different things in each language.  There ought to be many more_.

_We cannot understand why Mr. Mills rejects_ boll: _isn't that what cotton comes in?  Blander is a good one!  If pack, etc., are made into packs, one could add pyx to cover &ldquo;...and sometimes y_.&rdquo;  —_Editor_



#### EPISTOLA {Mike Covington} 
In VERBATIM II, 2, 12, Pat Solotaire documents the Gratuitous Negative in the English of Maine.  There is a Gratuitous Negative in Georgia also, found in sentences like, &ldquo;I miss not being back home.&rdquo;  The _not_ is superfluous, and I suspect it is a generalization from Standard English sentences like, &ldquo;I'm tired of not being back home.&rdquo;  Likewise, the Maine Gratuitous Negative in &ldquo;George really got schnockered at Judy's party.&rdquo;  /&ldquo;Well, so didn't she.&rdquo;  could well be a blend of &ldquo;Well, so did she.&rdquo;  with &ldquo;Well, didn't she also?&rdquo;
[Mike Covington, Athens, Georgia]


#### EPISTOLA {Harry Cimring}
There is a word which now escapes me that describes a linguistic phenomenon which I call &ldquo;over-familiarity with the language.&rdquo;  Examples of this can be seen in calling _Palm Springs_ &ldquo;The Springs&rdquo; or _Las Vegas_ &ldquo;Vegas&rdquo; (which, at least, may be preferable to &ldquo;Los Vegas,&rdquo; a common pronunciation that carries with it a connotation of inevitably in face of the odds).

My immigrant mother always spoke of a &ldquo;plate of cream&rdquo; when she meant _ice cream_, and she served a &ldquo;dish of grass,&rdquo; her version of \?\_aspara-grass_.

Radiographs (pictures taken by X-ray radiation) and roentgenographs (pictures taken by roentgen rays, also called X rays) are, naturally, also called _X-ray pictures_, sometimes shortened to _X-rays_.  A dentist of my acquaintance went one step further: when he took an X-ray picture, he &ldquo;shot a ray.&rdquo;

Those who &ldquo;play the market&rdquo; are well aware of the name of _the Dow-Jones stock averages_.  This has been successively dehydrated to _the Dow-Jones averages, the DowJones_, and, ultimately, to, &ldquo;What did _Dow_ do today?&rdquo;
[Harry Cimring]

### Reviews: THE AMERICAN LANGUAGE: An Inquiry into the Development of English in the United States

_H.L. Mencken_, 4th ed. 1936 (20th ptg. 1974), Alfred A. Knopf, with _Supplement One_ (11th ptg. 1975), with _Supplement Two_ (8th ptg. 1975). 

Despite the heavy amount of data contained in _The American Language_, its anecdotal style provides an enjoyable introduction to the history and development of the daily language of America.  Reading _The American Language_ should be like receiving a long letter from home, in which one receives a large amount of material about familiar subjects.  The sections on the history of the deprecations of American English by British speakers and Anglomaniacs will not only give rise to a lot of guffaws but will also go a long way in helping to erase the inferiority complex so many people have about their English.

The early editions were very well received, and so much new material poured in in response to Mencken's request for data that the fourth edition is not just another revision but a totally new book.  Likewise, the supplements give much new documentation plus a large amount of data on place names and grammar.

Mencken never pretended to be a specialist in linguistics. He often chastised specialists for spending their time studying Hittite, American Indian, and other &ldquo;esoteric&rdquo; languages instead of answering his call for a comprehensive grammar of common speech.  He seemed to have considered it downright unpatriotic to spend time studying Eskimo when there was no comprehensive grammar of American English.  Little did he realize the immensity of the undertaking he was urging.  Mencken's strength is also his weakness.  His anecdoctal presentation makes it easy for the general reader to handle so much data, but his lack of systematic analysis distresses linguists.

Early in the eighteenth century, the alarm against the intrusion of Americanisms into British English began to be raised.  But the flood of new words and phrases was unstoppable.  At first, it seemed that an &ldquo;Americanism&rdquo; meant &ldquo;any unfamiliar item.&rdquo;  In trying to keep British English pure, efforts were made to classify Americanisms so that they could be identified and eliminated.  A common analysis was: (1) the preservation of items lost in Great Britain, e.g., _notify a person_; (2) the introduction of new American items, e.g., _belittle_; and (3) the peculiar American development of English items, e.g., _creek_, for 'a small stream' instead of 'a narrow bay' or 'inlet of the sea.'

Even in the early decades of the twentieth century, Americanisms were still being denounced; but when they began to be used in Britain, the _Oxford English Dictionary_ was searched for quotations from Chaucer to show that they were really British and not American.  Often a phrase denounced as an Americanism really originated in Britain and was unknown in America, and many Americanisms were picked up in Britain without anyone being aware of it.  But there were saner heads in Great Britain who understood that just because American English was different from British English it wasn't therefore automatically wrong and to be scorned.

It was not until 1890 that _Dialect Notes_, the first journal devoted to American English, was set up by the American Dialect Society, which had been founded the preceding year.  _American Speech_ was not established until 1925.  _The Dictionary of American English_ was begun at the University of Chicago in 1925 under Sir William Craigie, an Englishman.  The _Linguistic Atlas of the United States_ was begun after a conference of the Linguistic Society of America in 1929, and its first fascicle appeared in 1936 under the editorship of Dr. Hans Kurath, an Austrian.

Three characteristics of American English were usually noted: (1) general uniformity throughout the country; (2) disregard for rule and precedent; and (3) a tremendous capacity for taking in new words and for manufacturing them out of its own materials.  Since a number of dialects of English in Britain are not mutually intelligible, it was thought strange that one could travel the long distances in America and still be understood without resorting to some received standard language.  Some of the printed texts of American English, such as those of Mark Twain, led people in Britain to think that American English was much more different from British English than it was.  This misconception was perpetuated by the underworld slang of the early talking pictures.  Since people in the New World had to deal with very different flora, fauna, geographical features, and social situations, it was inevitable that many new vocabulary items would arise.  Also, most people on the frontier were illiterate, or nearly so, and consequently were not likely to coin words in the fashion of a university professor.

Words were borrowed from many American Indian and European languages, e.g., _raccoon, opossum, moose, crayfish, portage, caucus, cookey_, and _Santa Claus.  Yankee_ is apparently derived from the Dutch _Jan Kees_ (_John Cheese_), a derogatory nickname for the Dutch in New York and the Dutch Buccaneers on the Spanish Main.  It is not known how this came to refer to Americans.

American English exerts a very strong pressure on British English and seems to have dragged British English with it, but few Briticisms have entered American English, e.g., _candyshop_ (instead of _store_), _smog_, and _wangle_. Both British and American English have gone through similar periods of change.  In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, both went through a period when euphemisms were used for terms that in any way referred to sex or that could be regarded as expletives.  But again, America gave more than it received.

The pronunciation of British and American English differs very much.  This is especially noticeable in the intonation or melody with which a sentence is pronounced. There are fewer syllables in many words in British English, e.g., _extraordinary_ has five or six syllables in American English, but only four in British.  The accent falls on different syllables, e.g., _prim&aacute;rily_ in American English, but _pr&iacute;marily_ in British.

One of the most noticeable differences between Standard American and Standard British is the pronunciation of vowels.  British English uses the so-called broad _a_ of _dark_ before many voiceless consonants and consonant clusters where American English uses the so-called flat _a_ of _that_.  But, contrary to a general belief in America, the flat _a_ is used in many words in British English, e.g., _fancy, stamp_, and _gas_.  Also, despite a general belief to the contrary, the flat _a_ is not a &ldquo;corruption&rdquo; of the broad _a_.  Works published in England and America in the late eighteenth century show that many words that now have broad _a_ in England and New England had the flat _a_.  Between 1830 and 1850, the broad _a_ &ldquo;ran riot&rdquo; in the Boston area.

There are few differences in the pronunciation of consonants in America and Britain.  The most commonly noticed is the dropping of _r_ at the ends of syllables in Britain, where the _r_ is pronounced in America except in a few areas, such as parts of New England and Tidewater, Virginia.  Mencken is incorrect in his statement that the _I_ of the first syllable of _fulfil_ and the _d_ of _kindness_ are dropped in Britain but not in America, since many Americans drop these also.

In the seventeenth century, the rules of English spelling were very vague, and early documents contain spellings that seem fantastic today.  As printing increased, uniformity began to appear.  By the beginning of the eighteenth century, the principal English authors spelled much alike.  Samuel Johnson's dictionary, published in 1755, achieved universal acceptance as a guide to orthography, and many of his spellings are still accepted.  Benjamin Franklin attempted to establish an orthography in 1768, which added six new letters; but it remained for Noah Webster to achieve a divorce between British and American spelling practice with his _Grammatical Institute of the English Language_, published in 1783.  Webster's motives were in part patriotic since he wished American English when printed to look different from British English. Webster's _The American Spelling Book_, the first part of his _Grammatical Institute_, went through various editions and sold 62 million copies by 1889.  Webster's legacy has left us with -_or_ instead of -_our_ in words like _color_, _s_ instead of _c_ in words like _defense, -er_ instead of -_re_ in words like _theater_, and characteristic spellings, especially, _jail, wagon, plow, mold_, and _ax_.

Mencken's robust joy in describing the development of English in America will provide the reader with a fascinating account of how many parts of our language came to be without subjecting him to the jargon and technicalities of modern linguistics.  _The American Language_ is not a technical history of the development of American English, but for the general reader or anyone with bicentennial fever, it provides a most enjoyable introduction to the development of American English.

—_James E. Redden, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale_

### Reviews: NAMES ON THE GLOBE

_George R. Stewart, Oxford University Press, 1975_

Rumor has had it for years that George Stewart was working on a book dealing with the place-names of the world.  Now rumor can cease, having been proved correct by the recent publication of his substantial volume presenting a reasoned account of the naming of places on this ever-shrinking planet of ours.  Despite its obviously intentional titular reverberation, _Names on the Globe_ is not simply a global rewriting of the earlier, more national, _Names on the Land_.  It is in many ways a more mature book, having shed much, although not all, of the romanticism of the earlier work, but, thank goodness, not its touches of creative flair and recreative imagination.  It is a vigorous book, displaying time and again refreshing touches of the youngest eighty-year-old mind in the profession. It is a methodical and well-organized book, and it is above all a personal book, drawing on the accumulated files and knowledge of one man's life-long involvement with the entirely human phenomenon of names and naming.

It is, therefore, also an American book, viewing the globe and its toponymy with American eyes and interpreting this toponymy through the American experience. Illustrations of points made and of categories delineated in the general sections are largely taken from the American map or, for earlier periods, from English and Anglo-Saxon place-nomenclature.  The phenomenon of phonetic transfer of names from one language to another, for example, is given substance by a detailed discussion of the loss of the middle consonant in Bexar, Texas, the retaining speech-habits reflected in San Francisco, Calif., and the complexity of relationships between American Indians and settlers in New England which produced such variants as _Pequonnock, Poquomock, Poquonock, Pequannock_, and _Peconic_ from the same Indian original meaning something like 'little field.'  Folk etymology is explained with the help of _Smackover_ from French _Chemin Convert, Picketwire_ from _Purgatoire_, and _Lemonfair_ from _Le Mont Vert_.  For visual transfer Stewart cites the influence of Norman scribes in England where _Dunham_ became _Durham.  Sarisbury_ was replaced by _Salisbury_, and _Exester_ and _Glouchester_ turned into _Exeter_ and _Gloucester_.  The spelling of _Los Angeles_ demonstrates the influence of printing, and the name of _Raft River_ in southern Idaho is Stewart's cultural detective story worthy of a Simenon.

In the long middle chapter devoted to the naming activities of man in different parts of the world--a kind of applied toponymics illustrating the principles expounded in the more philosophically, more theoretically, more methodologically oriented portions of the book--America and the British Isles, too, dominate the discussion, supplemented chiefly by coverage of the toponymy of classical Greece (_Athens, Sparta, Thebes, Argos, Corinth, Delphi_, etc.) and Rome (_Rome, Latium, Florence, Pavia_, etc.), of the Biblical Near East (Genesis 31: &ldquo;And Laban called it Jegarsahadutha, but Jacob called it Galeed&rdquo; is a beautiful example of dual naming, and Numbers 32: &ldquo;And Nobah went and took Kenath, and villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name&rdquo; shows a devastating sense of personal achievement culminating in the right to name), and the age of exploration (Columbus the Namer!), whereas both Africa and Asia receive comparatively short shrift, and the Scandinavian countries, so well researched onomastically, hardly figure at all.  It is a globe as seen and appreciated in its proportions from the U.S. or, perhaps, even more narrowly, from California.

There may be those who might think of such a distorted globe in purely negative terms, demanding comprehensiveness and balanced coverage in a volume of such pretensions.  This reviewer is not one of them.  It is so much more satisfying to have an author operate within the well staked-out range of his private knowledge--and Stewart's range is considerable--than have him flounder in waters whose depths he has not sufficiently probed, relying exclusively on other people's marker buoys.  That things have, nevertheless, gone wrong occasionally, mostly because of reliance on not completely reliable sources (W.C. Mackenzie is hardly the best authority to choose for Scotland, for example, and P.W. Joyce, although excellent in his time, is not the last word on Irish place names) is not surprising and probably almost unavoidable in a one-man undertaking of this scope, especially when such a large number of languages is involved.

There is, however, a second advantage to a scrutiny of our global place-nomenclature from an American point of view.  As Stewart points out quite rightly in a number of different contexts, the preoccupation of many European scholars with name-etymology, i.e. with the linguistic roots of a name and its linguistic evolution, has tended to neglect altogether the toponymic principles as they quite clearly emerge from an examination of the processes of naming and of the results of such processes in areas, like the American west, settled within human memory or at most within the last century or two.  Once the purely linguistic approach has been abandoned, an opportunity has been provided for a new kind of onomastic vision which treats names as names and not just as words with peculiar properties.  Although Stewart does not concern himself in any detail with the whole question of the relationship between name and word, his insistence on a study of _naming_, rather than of _names_, or in addition to that of names, creates an intellectual climate in which all kinds of exciting new things become possible, not the least of which would be the removal of names from a purely lexical context.  Even the more than one hundred bodies of water in Minnesota, called _Mud Lake_, make sense now, as do such cultural transfers from Europe as _Boston, New Orleans_, and _Harlem_, or, within the United States, _Lexington_ and _Winchester_.  A shift of stress from Ber'lin to 'Berlin and a lengthening of vowel in &Amacr;thens make something new out of a meaningless sound sequence.

To this reviewer, therefore, those chapters and sections of Stewart's book that concentrate on &ldquo;Man, the Namer,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Mind of the Namer,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Place-Names as Sources of Knowledge&rdquo; are possibly more significant and challenging than the central chapter on &ldquo;Namers at Work.&rdquo; In these sections, Stewart's mind is at its best, always probing, always questioning, always challenging, frequently committed.  For this reason the book, while of necessity disappointing as a reference work which it was never meant to be, will be enjoyed most as just that--a challenge. That is certainly how I have read it, apportioning agreement or disagreement as I went along: approving of the emphasis on human motivation in naming; delighting at the attempts, however rudimentary, at a basic place-name grammar; being dissatisfied with the somewhat spurious reasons advanced in support of a claim for the near universality of &ldquo;the specific-generic system&rdquo;; raising my eyebrows (or at least the one which is still European) at the oversimplified presentation of the so-called &ldquo;European research method,&rdquo; but fully agreeing with the persuasive argument against a predominantly etymological approach to onomastic research; tut-tutting at one or two misprints like _Angel_ for _Angeln_ (p. 69) as the original homeland of the Angles; responding with pleasure to the outlining of &ldquo;name systems&rdquo;; being a little puzzled by the distinction made between descriptive and associative names; detecting certain apparent flaws in the categories of classification proposed; rejoicing in the treatment of incident names; missing some reference to the conversion of personal names into commemorative place-names without the addition of a generic; applauding the sound statements on folk-etymology, etc.

If there is still any doubt, let me reiterate: This is not a reference book, but one to be read carefully page by page, one to wrestle with, one to take a stand on. Whether _Names on the Globe_ produces agreement or disagreement, delight or despair, approval or disapproval, it will never bore, but will not fail to challenge or to make one think.  It will also never fail to serve as an excellent illustration of one of Stewart's own, to this reviewer indisputable, statements (p. 370): &ldquo;Yet, properly used, place-names can serve, legitimately and significantly, to extend knowledge.&rdquo;

—_W. F. H. Nicolaisen, State University of New York at Binghamton_

### Reviews: A STUDY OF WRITING

I.J. Gelb, A Phoenix Book, University of Chicago Press, 1973. 

We accept writing as a natural part of our daily lives. We see its manifestations in all phases of our personal activity, and we seem to take it for granted.  We tend to forget that ours is a print-oriented society, and that the progress of our civilization is in direct proportion to our ability to communicate with one another by means of the written word.  Once we are cognizant of the importance of this subject in the history of mankind, it is only natural to ask about its origin and development.  What general principles, for example, govern the use and evolution of writing through time, and can a theory of writing be developed which will explain these general laws?  For more than two decades, Professor Gelb, a specialist in Near Eastern languages and Linguistics at the University of Chicago, has been preoccupied with these questions.  This publication, which appeared in 1951 in its first edition and which has been consistently updated in subsequent revisions, is the culmination of his years of extensive research and academic experience on the subject.

Writing is an outgrowth of the cave paintings and stone carvings of prehistoric man.  The geometric designs of the great Oriental writing systems, such as Sumerian, Egyptian, Hittite, Chinese, etc., were originally picture drawings.  These pictures or logos were used to express concrete words.  This is still evident in the rebus of the coat of arms of Oxford which shows an ox crossing a ford. These word signs, however, were limited.  The next stage in the natural development of writing can be found in the use of syllabic signs.  In Sumerian, for example, the syllable _ti_ originated from the word sign _ti_ which meant 'arrow.' The final stage in the history of writing came into being with the evolution of the alphabet where vowels are expressed by separate signs or by means of special diacritic marks.  What is important about this historic account from signs and syllables to the alphabet is the fact that it represents a natural transition.  Although a stage of evolution may be arrested, it cannot be skipped over or reversed.

The major word-syllable systems which Gelb discusses at length are Sumerian (3,100 B.C.-75 A.D.), Egyptian (3,000 B.C.-400 A.D.), Hittite (1,500-700 B.C.), and Chinese (1,300 B.C.-present).  The origin of the Chinese system merits comment.  It is known that the Chinese writing made its appearance during the Shang dynasty as a fully developed phonetic system.  Since sophisticated writing systems do not spring up _de novo_, and since the Shang period was subject to many foreign influences, it can be reasonably argued that the word-syllable system of Chinese was borrowed, _in principle_ and not in form, from the Near East.

Among the syllabic systems discussed by Gelb are Elamite, West Semitic, Cypriote, and Japanese.  These systems were derived from the Sumerian, Egyptian, Hittite, and Chinese patterns, respectively.  The West Semitic syllabary is of special importance because it gave us the Hebraic tradition of writing.  Finally, the alphabetic systems singled out for explication by Gelb were Greek, Hebrew, and Sanskrit.  Because Greek has a fully developed system of vowels and consonants it represents the ultimate in orthographic systems.  Furthermore, although the forms have undergone minor modification with the passage of time, its underlying principle has not been improved upon for more than two millennia.

The study of grammatology, or the investigation of writing, is a fascinating topic.  What makes it even more informative is the unique ability that Gelb has for conveying in lucid prose the general principles which govern the use and evolution of writing.

—_Robert St. Clair, University of Louisville_

### Reviews: THE STORY OF THE ALEPH BETH

David Diringer, Thomas Yoseloff, Ltd., 1958. 

Perhaps one of the greatest archeological finds in the story of the alphabet occurred accidentally in 1929 in the village of Ras Shamrah on the Syrian coast.  In excavating the ruins, the ancient and prosperous town of Ugarit was discovered with thousands of clay tablets written in cuneiform, or stylus writing.  It is conjectured that the alphabet employed in these tablets was invented by a native user of the North Semitic alphabet, and that he was adept in the use of the stylus on clay.  This inference is based on the fact that out of the thirty letters used in the Ugaritic documents, twenty-two were not only similar in form and function to the North Semitic alphabet, but even appear in the same order of recitation.  As expeditions continued to operate in the Near East, similar discoveries began to unfold.  A mere decade later, another outstanding epigraphic, or stone writing, discovery was made in Lachish. It was here that the scribblings of a school boy on a clay tablet were found with the scratchings of the first five letters of the Early Hebrew alphabet.  From all of these expeditions and discoveries, the story of the alphabet gradually emerged.  It is a widely accepted fact that the word-syllabic writings of Egyptian formed the basis for the West Semitic and Phoenician syllabaries.  From these the vocalic and consonantal system of Greek emerged as a superior orthographical system.  The transition from the Old Hebrew syllabary to the contemporary Hebrew alphabet, however, is of special interest to Diringer and forms a major portion of his exposition.

The signs used in writing Old Phoenician are said to have originally represented pictures.  _Aleph_ was the head of an ox; _beth_ was the picture of a house; and _gimel_ represented the form of a camel.  Because all writing systems grew out of pictographs or representations of pictures, this theory was widely believed.  Diringer views this theory with skepticism and argues that the adoption of the names &ldquo;oxhead,&rdquo; &ldquo;house,&rdquo; and &ldquo;camel&rdquo; were merely artificial mnemonic devices similar to those which modern school children use when they recite: &ldquo;A is for Apple.&rdquo;

The chapter which deals with the Hebrew system for representing vowels is highly informative.  Unlike the Greek alphabet, the vowels of Hebrew are not indicated by means of separate signs intercalated among the consonantal forms of a word, but are symbolized by means of separate diacritic marks placed below or among the consonantal signs.  When these letters were included in writing, they were usually known as _matres lectionis_ or 'mothers of reading,' because of their function in clarifying the reading process.  The insertion of these vowel letters is sometimes referred to as _scriptio plena_ ('full script'), and the exclusion or omission as _scriptio defectiva_, (defective script').  An example of the two types of scripts can be seen in the name David which was written as _DWD_ in the defective syllabary of Old Hebrew, and _DWYD_ in the full script of alphabetic Hebrew.  The sign _Y_ is not an independent syllable, but functions as a device to guarantee that the _W_ of _DWYD_ is pronounced as _WI_ and not as WA, WE, WO, or WU.  From this system of _matres lectionis_ the pure vowels of the Greek were but a natural extension of an innovative system.

Diringer, a specialist on writing systems, unfolds the history of the Hebrew alphabet in simple nontechnical language.  Hence, this book is not only valuable for the student of Hebrew, but it is also relevant for those who share an interest in the rise and development of systems of orthography.

—_Robert St. Clair, University of Louisville_



#### EPISTOLA {Thomas L. Bernard} 

There is no doubt in my mind that the contribution of the Celtic languages to English has been accorded short shrift and has not received the recognition by linguists and etymologists that it truly deserves.  It was a source of satisfaction to this author therefore, to read the interesting and comprehensive article &ldquo;The Celtic Element in English&rdquo; by Cornelius J. Crowley of St. Louis University [VERBATIM II, 2, 9].  I certainly wish to add my voice to his, in decrying the minimizing of the Celtic contribution. Herewith are some further examples of words used in English whose etymological roots stem from an original Celtic influence: _ambassador_, from the original Celtic _ambi-actus_, 'messenger' (lit. 'one sent around'), by way of the Latin _ambactus_, 'helper or henchman'; _andiron_, from the Gaulish _andera_, 'heifer' (through association with cow's horns as decorations); _ballyhoo_, from the name of the village (_Ballyhooly_) in Ireland noted for its brawls; _bug_, from the Welsh _bwg_, 'bogie' or 'ghost'; _bunny_, from the Gaelic _bun_, meaning 'bottom' (the tail of a hare or a rabbit); _coracle_, from the Welsh _corwgl_, 'boat'; _corgi_, this Welsh word consists of _corr_ 'dwarf' and _ci_ 'dog'; _cwm_, Welsh for 'valley,' used as a geographic term; _eistoddfod_, 'Welsh musical or poetic competition' from the Welsh _eisteddfodau_, 'sitting' or 'session'; _flannel_, from the Welsh _gwlanen_, which comes from the word _gwlan_ meaning 'wool'; _gab_, Gaelic for 'mouth' (and hence 'chatter') from which we also get the word _gob_ (in England a popular form of candy for children is &ldquo;gobstoppers&rdquo;), and its derivatives _gobble_ and _goblet; galore_, from the Gaelic _gu_ 'to' and _leor_ 'sufficiency'; _galosh_, from the Gaulish _gallica_, 'sandal' (cf. Latin _calligula_, 'soldier's boot'); _German_, from the Celtic _gairm_, a battle cry transmitted via the Latin _Germanus; golf_, from the Gaelic _gowf_ 'blow with the hand' (an acceptable pronunciation for _golf_ is &ldquo;gof&rdquo;); _gull_, from the Welsh _gwylan_ or the Breton _gwelan_, 'sea bird'; _havoc_, from the Welsh _hafog_ 'devastation'; _hooligan_, a variant of the personal Irish surname _Houlihan; hulla-baloo_, the Irish name given to 'wailing at funeral ceremonies'; _humbug_, from the Irish _uim_ bog 'soft copper' (which was used to debase and counterfeit official coinage); _key_, from the Celtic _cai_ 'reef' or 'low island' (cf. _quay_ and Spanish _cayo_); _lag_, from the Cornish _lag_ 'wet and soiled'; _Limerick_, from the place name in Ireland; _mallarkey_, from the Irish personal surname which became associated with insincere or meaningless speech; _minion_, from a Celtic word meaning 'small,' hence 'follower' or 'servile'; _palfrey_, from the Gaulish _voredos_ (cf. Latin _veredus_ 'fast horse') and related to Welsh _gorwydd_ 'horse'; _penguin_, from the Welsh _pen_ 'head,' and _gwyn_ 'white'; _plaid_, from Gaelic _plaide_ meaning a blanket or a woolen cloth; _poteen_, from the Irish _poiteen_, diminutive of _pota_ 'pot,' and associated with the illicit distillation of whiskey; _shenanigan_, from the Irish _sionnachuighim_, 'I play the fox' connoting 'deceit,' 'trickery,' or 'nonsense,' _shinny_, from the Gaelic _sinteag_ 'skip' or 'jump,' from which we also get _shindig_, 'type of dance' or 'social affair'; _sporran_, from the Gaelic _sporan_ 'purse' or 'pouch'; _Strathspey_ a Scottish place name, and the name of a dance; _truant_, from the Welsh _truan_ 'wretch' or 'vagabond'; _tory_, from the Irish _toriudhe_ 'robber' or 'highwayman,' or from the Gaelic _toir_ 'pursuit' (in origin the word referred to 17th century Irishmen who, having been dispossessed, became outlaws).

A number of place names in Cornwall appear to be English, but are actually Anglicized forms of the original Cornish.  Examples are: _Land's End_, which, being at the tip of southern England, sounds an appropriate enough name, even though it is actually _llan sant_ 'holy church.' Another example is _Lizard Point_, the word _lizard_ being a corruption of the Cornish _llys_ 'enclosure' and _ardd_ 'high.'

In the past few issues of <emph>VERBATIM,</emph> there has been considerable discussion of &ldquo;bilingual redundancies&rdquo; and a number of examples have been examined.  In this particular context of Celtic words, we can cite: the _River Avon_, or the _River Afton_ (cf. the popular song, &ldquo;Flow Gently Sweet Afton&rdquo;), both of which mean 'river river' (Celtic _afon 'river_').  Again in this regard, one could mention _Mount Ben Nevis_ (or _Ben Lomond_, etc.), _ben_ being Gaelic for a peak or mountain.  Another instance of this exists in _Pendle Hill_, where 'hill' is repeated three times, first in Welsh (_pen_) then twice in Old English.  A yet grosser tautological example is the name _Torpenhow Hill_, in which we find the Celtic _tor_, the Welsh _pen_, the Saxon _how_, and the Old English _hill_ in sequence, so that the name translates as 'hill hill hill hill.'

In his book _The Story of Our Language_, Henry Alexander states that, &ldquo;the few words that seem to be of Celtic origin are insignificant.&rdquo;  Regrettably, remarks of this nature are expressed all too often by writers in the field who should know better.  The sum of evidence to the contrary is such that the accuracy of this kind of statement is certainly open to serious question.
[Thomas L. Bernard, Springfield College]


#### EPISTOLA {Edward C. Pinkerton} 
Cornelius Joseph Crowley on &ldquo;The Celtic Element in English&rdquo; [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> II, 2, 9] could have cited more-- and more frequently used--English words of Celtic origin simply by listing cognates of words that he did include. For example: from the same source as _brock_ 'badger' come _brocade, broach, brooch_ (according to the _American Heritage Dictionary_), and possibly _broker_ (Eric Partridge's _Origins_); from Old Celtic \?\_karros_ > Gaulish _carros_ > Latin _carrus_ come, besides _car: carry, career, carriage, cargo, charge, carroche, cariole_ and _caricature;_ very possibly related to Celtic \?\_pett_ 'piece' and Gaulish \?\_pettia_ are _petty, petite, piece, patch_ and _pet, petticoat, pettifog, petty officer, petit_ jury, etc.; and descendants of Old Celtic \?\_vassos_ 'man' are, besides _vassal: valet_ and _varlet._  Mr. Crowley missed a good bet in _embassy_ and _ambassador_, which trace back to Gaulish \?\_ambactos_ 'one who is sent around.'  ...Because many of these words came to English by way of Latin and Old French, their ultimately Celtic origins are often overlooked.

On the other hand, English _clan, cross_ and _ass_ are claimed by Mr. Crowley as Celtic because derived from Irish but, according to the experts on my bookshelves, these words were earlier derived by Irish or Scottish from the Latin: _clan_ via Scottish Gaelic _clann_ 'offspring' from Latin _planta_ 'shoot for cultivation, scion'; _cross_ via Old Irish _cross_ from Latin _crux, crucem;_ and _ass_ from Latin _asinus_ via Old Irish _asan_ (_Merriam-Webster 3rd_).  Latin _asinus_ in turn is thought to have come ultimately from a non-Indo-European, Asia Minor source--_American Heritage_ says: &ldquo;from the same source as Sumerian _ansu_&rdquo;; and the ultimate source of _cross_ may be Punic (Carthaginian or Phoenician).

It is pertinent to ask when a Celtic word entered the mainstream that evolved into modern English.  Many, such as _slogan_ (1513), _whiskey_ (1715), _blarney_ (1810) and _smithereens_ (1841) are comparatively recent borrowings. (The dates are from the _Oxford English Dictionary_). Also, many words on Mr. Crowley's list are used almost exclusively in an Irish or Scottish setting: _asthore, cateran, colleen, claymore, gallowglass, kern, macushla, mavourneen, ogham, pibroch, spalpeen_.

The possibly Celtic derivation of _curse_ (from Irish _c&uacute;rsagim_) is mentioned by Eric Partridge (in _Origins_), by the _Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology_, and by _Merriam-Webster 2nd;_ but not by the _Oxford English Dictionary, Merriam-Webster 3rd_, or _American Heritage_, all of which account _curse_ to be of obscure or unknown origin; indeed the _OED_ states flatly: &ldquo;no word of similar form and sense is known in Teutonic, Romanic, or Celtic&rdquo; --and they don't alter this opinion in the 1972 _Supplement_.

Finally, the word _leprechaun_ has metathesized from Old Irish _luchorp&aacute;n_, where the _lu-_ element means 'small' and the _-chorpan_ derives from Latin _corpus_ 'body'; hence, 'small body.'
[Edward C. Pinkerton, Baltimore, Maryland]


#### EPISTOLA {Patrick Drysdale}
I am most grateful to Mr. Crowley for providing so much information about Celtic loan words in English [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> II, 2, 9].  I was glad to note the inclusion of _shebeen_, but I was sorry to miss _shebang_ 'a low drinking establishment frequented by the loggers and rivermen of Lower and Upper Canada.'  The definition is from _A Dictionary of Canadianisms on Historical Principles_ (Toronto: Gage, 1967), which also includes the following note:

>Although this term is usually assumed to derive from Cdn F _cabane_, it seems possible, in view of the Canadian sense, that Irish _shebeen_ of similar meaning was the source, especially since Irishmen were prominent among the shantymen with whom the term is associated.
 
The second meaning given covers the phrase _the whole shebang_, pointing out that the citation from a Newfoundland folk song (_c_1885) also suggests possible Irish influence.

The note quoted above is cross-referred to another at the entry for _shanty:_

>Although the most probable source of _shanty_ is Cdn F _chantier_, especially in lumbering contexts, the possibility remains that a similar word, derived from Irish Gaelic _sean tig_ 'hut' may have been introduced by Irish immigrants into Upper Canada, where the term seems first to have enjoyed currency; it may well be, therefore, that two different words of similar form contributed to the generalization of this term and its derivatives in Canada during the nineteenth century.  Cp. note at _shebang_.

Whether or not Crowley would admit _shanty_ as a possible derivation from Irish I don't know, but the possibility allows for interesting speculation on linguistic miscegenation.

While I have the _Dictionary of Canadianisms_ to hand, I would also like to comment on the fascinating note on _barberchairing_ from W. H. Rawlings [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> II, 2, 16].  The verb is new to me, but a _barber chair_ has, I believe, long been used in lumbering circles for the evidence of sloppy tree-felling that leaves 'a stump having an upright flange left standing above the undercut when the tree topples.'  [See illustration.]  This meaning is assumed to have come from the fact that the resulting stump looks like a high-backed seat.  If a tree thus miscut is likely to twist as it falls, then the verb _barberchair_ may have developed from the open compound with a re-interpretation of its meaning.

What, in fact, are the semantics of _barber chair?_  Does it suggest primarily a seat with a tall back, a seat that rotates, or--perhaps more to the point--one that is inclined to topple over backwards?  I wonder, too, whether these lumbering uses of the term _barber_ originally had any connection with the notion of poor cutting; the connotations of _barber_ in informal speech have not always been the most favorable.  Does your enlightened readership include any lumbering experts who can elucidate this mystery?
[Patrick Drysdale, Gage Publishing Limited Agincourt, Ontario, Canada]


#### EPISTOLA {John J. Ruster} 
I would like to make a few comments on &ldquo;Celtic Elements in English&rdquo; [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> II, 2, 9].

As the author says, Celtic elements in English are too often slighted.  This is equally true of other areas where Celtic civilization used to flourish.  Remainders, in specific words, turns of phrase, and very commonly in place-names are common in France, southwest Germany, and to a lesser extent in N. Spain and in Portugal.

A peculiarly Celtic trait is the reckoning of people and things in sets of twenty.  This survives in our English _score_.  All Celtic languages still spoken (Irish and Scots Gaelic, Welsh and Breton) reckon in this manner: _two score, three score and ten_, etc.  In modern French only the four score (_quatrevingt_) has survived.  Oddly enough, reckoning is also done in this manner in the Basque language, which is considered to be unrelated to any other known language.  I am not aware of such usage in German, although, especially in the Bavarian dialect, Celtic survivals are alive and well, such as in the word _Trumm_ (cf. Scots Gaelic _truime_) 'an unusually large and ponderous object' or 'a very sturdily built man.'  But in S. Germany the 'half-a-hundred' as an alternative to 'two-score-and-ten' has survived.

The Old-Irish _carpat_ 'carpenter' must be a loanword derived from the Latin _carpentum_, 'wagon' or 'chariot,' first used in Augustan times.  Hence came _carpentarius_, initially used as an adjective (Pliny) and still later as 'a maker of carriages.'  Celtic words for 'carpenter' differ widely.  The oldest may be _saor_, an undifferentiated 'universally skilled artificer,' 'companion of kings,' and sometimes 'god.'

An interesting aspect of _cateran_ (Scots Gael. _ceathairne_) is its connection with the number four, i.e. 'fourth estate,' Celtic society had three classes with defined status and privileges: the king, the nobles, and the freemen.  At the bottom of the pyramid were the landless peasants, tinkers, jugglers, etc.  Though they did not have rights that were spelled out, there was the possibility of &ldquo;upward mobility.&rdquo;  The term did not become one of scorn until relatively recent history, when political and economic upheavals drove some of the Scots into rebellious acts and brigandage.

On &ldquo;Irish Bulls&rdquo; [VERBATIM II, 1, 1] and the German bull, by an odd coincidence of assonance, the German word for this linguistic extravagance is _Verbalhornen_.  Dictionaries usually translate this as 'to bowdlerize.'  This is incorrect, inasmuch as the worthy Rev. Bowdler won his fame by presenting the world with a &ldquo;cleaned up&rdquo; version of Shakespeare.  Johann Balhorn, a German printer who died at Luebeck c. 1574, took liberties with the works he printed, but his thrust was to heighten the impact and elegance, rather than the elevation of the moral tone.  Collections of fables, very popular in his days, traditionally had a picture of a rooster on the last page.  Balhorn is credited with an edition in which the rooster had no spurs, but proudly stood beside a basket filled with eggs.

The exercise in futility of &ldquo;going from Pontius to Pilate&rdquo; is an example of &ldquo;German bull.&rdquo;
 [John J. Ruster, Monterey, California]


#### EPISTOLA {Sol Rosenfeld} 
<emph>Qui Docet Discit?</emph>

At the risk of incurring the wrath of linguistic liberals and being called &ldquo;an intolerant guardian of the language,&rdquo; I feel that I am on pretty safe ground since my joust is as champion of the Hebrew language.  I am grateful to <emph>VERBATIM</emph> for many things, not the least of which is the opportunity of venting my spleen at the shabby way Hebrew is treated--both as to transliteration and translation--by various Bible editions, dictionaries, encyclopedias, and by people who should know better.

At first, I wanted to chide Prof. R. B. Lees for his writing _H_ (with the dot on the bottom failing to show up altogether towards the end of the article' and _S_ [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> I, 3, 1] until I read the article by Prof. Harvey Minkoff [<emph>VERBATIM</emph> I, 4, 8] and it struck me that it must be the rule of the house, in which case may I ask the editor: What is all this Tzimes-Ged&uuml;nze-Fuss all about?  Many languages have certain letters that speakers of other languages have difficulty pronouncing, such as the Arabs say &ldquo;Bombey&rdquo; for _Pompeii_ and &ldquo;batrack&rdquo; for _patriarch_. The Russians say &ldquo;Gillels&rdquo; for _Hillels_ and &ldquo;Kagan&rdquo; for _Kahan_.  Equally famous are &ldquo;rots of ruck&rdquo; of Japan and Korea and &ldquo;flied lice&rdquo; of China, and so on.  Yet, no one makes any bones about it.  But when it comes to that throat-clearing sound--my, oh!, my!--the linguists run around in circles.  I have seen it written as _CH-KH-H_ and even _HH_ and some by the same language outfits.  Since the English language is a twig of the so-called Teutonic branch of the language tree, why not do as the Germans do?  They write _macht, nacht, auch, Mittwoch_.  You would not write _maht, naht, auh_, and, certainly not (with a courtesy nod to Prof. Read), _Walphaggis-naht_.

As far as _S_ is concerned, Mr. Peter Farb in his interesting book, _Word Play_, points out on page 351 that the sound &ldquo;sh&rdquo; is written fourteen different ways in the English language and, believe it or not, _S_ is not among them. So the question still remains, why look for strange gods when we have _show, shoe, shine, shadow,_ etc.?

I enjoyed Prof. Lees's article very much, but was surprised to find that he makes a couple of errors while he finds fault with other scholars.  I refer to _eslag_ which is in reality _ashlag_, and is derived from the Assyrian _ashlagu_ 'snowlike.'  'Snow' in Hebrew is _sheleg_, in Aramaic _tlag_ or _talga_, and in Arabic _talj_, while _ashl'gan_ is _kalium_.  He writes that _hamtzan_ comes from _hometz_ 'vinegar,' but that is not correct at all.  First _chamtzan_ is derived from _chametz_, which means general 'sourness,' and is applied to sour dough as well as vinegar.  'Vinegar' is called _chometz_ because it is the 'essence of sourness' I am sure that Prof. Lees knows the origin of the word _vinegar_, and if there is any doubt in his mind as to anything I have written, being Professor at Tel-Aviv University, I am certain that he can substantiate or repudiate my statements with a little more research.
[Sol Rosenfeld, Brooklyn, New York]

_Shortly after we received the above, we received word of Mr. Rosenfeld's death.  Since certain comments in his original letter made reference to material he intended to send us later on, but which he did not complete, we have taken the liberty of editing the preceding to eliminate those remarks we found irrelevant_.

_In reply to Mr. Rosenfeld's criticism of our &ldquo;house&rdquo; style, we can say only that we have none for Hebrew, and we made every attempt to follow Prof. Lees's diacritics accurately_.  —_Editor [LU]_
 

#### EPISTOLA {Dorrice R. Morrow} 
If you ever do give us some Words of Wisdom about &ldquo;it's me,&rdquo; please consider the plural pronouns and their colloquial usage.  This is a quotation from a letter to _Saturday Review_ (5/31/75): &ldquo;...I think all of us would be happier to return to taxation without representation.  Then someone else, not us, would be responsible for the inequities.&rdquo;

A group waiting to be summoned for jury duty is told: &ldquo;Everybody assigned to Judge C's court, come this way.&rdquo;  Someone says, &ldquo;Come on.  That's us.&rdquo;

In the first quotation, the error offends the ear.  In the second, it seems fairly natural, i.e., colloquial.

How about the third person plural?  &ldquo;Do your parents know you are here?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Sure, it was them who sent us.&rdquo; _They_ would be correct, but would it be more forceful?

You cannot get this controversial subject tied up in a bow knot, but your opinions would be of interest, indeed.
[Dorrice R. Morrow, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania]

_Acceptability lies in the ear of the listener or, more likely, in that part of his brain tempered by his prejudices.  To some, any kind of solecism at all is offensive; to others, who consider themselves liberated, the essence of language lies in communication, however that may be construed as devoid of grammatical stringencies; to us, although rudimentary communication may have its virtues born of necessity, an essential part of communication remains the style with which information is transferred and the appropriateness of the style.  Thus, we consider poor grammar poor style; where style is not terribly important, the importance of good grammar wanes.  In many colloquial situations, style is less critical than bare communication. In the first example, we should examine carefully the appropriateness of the solecism in a letter dealing with a serious subject, published in a periodical of some literary responsibility.  Since we can assume that the letter is reprinted_ verbatim, _can we not also assume that_ SR's _reprinting it as it stands reflects the editor's silent commentary on the opinion expressed by the writer? [See Martin Fincun's letter in_ VERBATIM _1, 2, 7, for example_.]

_We cannot, frankly, imagine anyone saying &ldquo;That's we,&rdquo; in the second example.  The only way around the problem is via &ldquo;He means [or They mean] us.&rdquo;  It is hard to say that &ldquo;That's us,&rdquo; &ldquo;It's me,&rdquo; and a few other expressions of the same ilk are unacceptable: surely, to the purist they are, and if you are dealing with purists, such constructions should be avoided (if you care what the purists think), but the direct grammatical alternatives are, at best, awkward.  The problem is compounded by the fact that acceptability and unacceptability vary with the purist and with the degree of &ldquo;perfection&rdquo;--whatever that is--the purist is capable of insisting upon._

_Your query about the forcefulness carried by they in place of them in the last example is a highly personal one: we don't find them any more forceful than they.  Surely, something like, &ldquo;Who did you think sent us?&rdquo; might have been even more forceful and more dramatic.  There are, of course, many alternatives that can be considered--&ldquo;Naturally !  They sent us!&rdquo; [with appropriate stress]; &ldquo;Of course!  Do you think we'd've come if they hadn't (sent us)?&rdquo; --and so on.  It is bootless, when dealing with poor style, to consider alternatives that represent mere grammatical corrections: one must deal with the entire expression_. —_Editor [LU]_

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v2n4_1976-02)