---
title: "Vol III, No 2 [September 1976]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---


## Grammar: The Terms Betray the Bias
_Donald A. Sears   
California State University, Fullerton_

Those of us over fifty have learned our grammar several times over, struggling each time with shifting terminology.  From the Latin-based grammar of Wooley with its nominatives, genitives, and accusatives through the dos and don'ts of early Hodges (_The Harbrace Handbook_), we boxed ourselves into the structural approaches of the fifties, and drew Calder-like mobiles of branching trees as we pursued Chomsky's transformational logic.  With an occasional wistful glance at the traditionalist Longs (_The System of English Grammar_), we confounded ourselves in Fillmore's cases and Lamb's stratifications.  For the changes have been rapid; and to our confusion, each new school of grammar has developed its own taxonomy.  With each development we have been asked to learn a fresh array of terms, always with the claim of greater &ldquo;scientific&rdquo; precision.

Closer examination of these terms, however, reveals less science than poetry, less precision than metaphor, less innovation than acceptance of the latest intellectual fad. To each age, its dominant world view; with each shift, a compulsion to substitute new terms in the old disciplines, be they of history, criticism, science, or in this case language study.  The following is an initial attempt to bring order to taxonomic chaos, to suggest categories in the development of grammatical terminology.

1.  THE NORMATIVE

Now two centuries old is the familiar terminology that started in the eighteenth century, grounded in its belief in universal norms and raised by the moral nineteenth century to overtones of ethical values.  Compounds were labeled _impure_ and _improper_ when their morphemes were drawn from more than one language.  Suffixes were accused of _tainting_; words _contaminated_ one another.  Paradigms were found to be _defective_ in Modern English.  And semantic change was analyzed in terms of _amelioration_ and _pejoration, elevation_ and _degradation_.  Grammar itself was _right_ or _wrong_.  To mishandle the semicolon was to stray from the paths of rectitude and commit a _comma fault_. From religion itself came terms such as _hierarchy, canonical forms,_ and _relics_.  But a new breeze of Darwinian evolution was in the air even as the normative terms were pouring forth.

2.  THE EVOLUTIONARY

While the great debate of religion versus evolution echoed among scholars, the normative terms of grammar with their religious moralism were under attack by the new.  Words were now seen as _native_ or _alien_; they became _naturalized_ and _domesticated_, underwent _diffusion_ and _migration_.  In the process of _acclimatization_, they became _conditioned_ by _environment_.  The results might be a _mutation_ or _adaptation_.

As the age wore on, Darwinian terms broadened into biomedical terminology applied as metaphor to language. The _pedigree_ theory traced the _family tree_ and _branches_ of the Indo-European languages.  We read of _word-crossing, linking,_ and _liaison_.  Some suggestive verbs became known as _copulative_; nouns and pronouns might be _epicene_; constructions might be _pregnant_.  Words were studied _root_ and _stem_, and were caught in acts of _nesting_ and _symbiosis_. Some were found to undergo semantic _rejuvenation_.  But biological determinism was going down before physical determinism and a new fad of naming was a-borning.

3.  THE PHYSICAL SCIENTIFIC

The drive to make linguistics scientific flooded the literature with jawbreaking terms derived with new affixes of -_ival_, -_eme_, and _allo_- (_adjectivals, phonemes_ and _morphemes, allomorphs_ and _allosemes_).  The search for natural &ldquo;laws&rdquo; identified _centrifugal_ and _centripetal_ forces.  &ldquo;Root&rdquo; was replaced with _element_ and _nucleus_, leading to _residue_ forms and _residual_ phonemes.  _Amalgams_ and _agglomerations_ were identified from _components, constituents,_ and _segments_.  _Diachronic_ versus _synchronic_ approaches vied with _endocentric_ versus _exocentric_ to confound the neophyte. From geology came terms like _drift, matrix_ and _embedding, attrition,_ and _petrification_.  Gradually, however, some newer sciences--closer in subject matter to linguistics --were emerging.

4.  THE COMMUNICATIONIST

From the Bell Telephone Laboratory came communication theory, from MIT came cybernetics, and from IBM the application of mathematics to computer science.  The linguists snuffed the change of air and spoke of _sets_ and _subsets_, of _encoding_ and _decoding_ messages, of code _switching_ and _feedback_, of _frame_ and _base_, of _senders_ and _receivers_ and semantic _noise_.  Language now was seen in terms of _input_ to generate an _output_.  The _efficiency_ of the _code_ could be measured in terms of its _productivity_. 

What the next intellectual wave will contain of scientific detritus and terms to torment the tyro the eighties will tell.  We can at least be sure that future linguists will continue to respond to the trends, to lend their discipline the aura of scientific exactitude by adapting and adopting the latest fashion.  Happily for those of us more humanistically inclined, there are still those linguists who have drawn their metaphors from general fields.  From music come _allegro_ and _lento_ forms; from industry, _constructions_, sentence-_building_, and _modification;_ from banking, _borrowing_ and _loan_ words.  More generally still, consonants may be _broad_ or _slender_; and vowels, _dark_ or _light_.  Words may be _full_ or _empty_, and morphemes appear as _bound_ or _free_.  Words may be _telescoped_, _clipped_, or _coined_; some remain as _stumps_, stand _forlorn_, get packed into a _portmanteau_.

We await the next development whether it come from rocketry and outer space (boosters? capsules? orbits?) or oceanography (the deeps? submerged?) or environmental science (ecology? semantic smog?)--whatever.  Come it will, as future linguists proclaim their newness with borrowed metaphors of the trendiest intellectual development of the future.  Their terms will betray their bias.
 


#### EPISTOLA {Harry Oster}

It distresses me to note [II, 3] your contributors so flagrantly ignoring the existence of Portuguese as one of the major Romance Languages.  Indeed, statistically it is the second most widely-spoken Romance tongue, preceded only by Spanish and in front of French and Italian by tens of millions of speakers.

Although it bears a superficial resemblance to Spanish, Portuguese is really quite a different language with grammar, cadence, and tonal quality all its own.

In &ldquo;Talking Turkey,&rdquo; Professor Fowkes credits Hindi for geographying our &ldquo;turkey&rdquo; as &ldquo;per&umacr;.&rdquo;  The proper Portuguese word for that succulent bird is &ldquo;peru&rdquo;; it should not require immense research to trace the word back beyond the Hindi Curtain to the Portuguese sailors and merchants who, in the 15th and 16th centuries dropped seeds of their language and culture around the globe.

And in &ldquo;Conjugal Oddities,&rdquo; Axel Hornos has shortchange himself and family by confining his fascinating game to Spanish, French, and Italian.  Had he window-shopped Portuguese, he would have discovered such gems
as:

_meia_ 'stocking'/_meio_ 'half'

_p&aacute;_ 'shovel'/ _p&oacute;_ 'dust'/ _p&aacute;o_ 'bread'/ _p&eacute;_ 'foot'

_leite_ 'milk'/ _leito_ 'bed' (of a river, road)

_pia_ 'sink'/ _pio_ 'chirp'/ _pi&aacute;o_ 'top' (toy)

_doca_ 'dock'/ _doce_ 'candy'

_lixa_ 'sandpaper'/ _lixo_ 'rubbish'

_m&aacute;o_ 'hand'/ _mau_ 'evil'

I am not a professional student of language but simply (to quote the advertisement which originally enticed me into subscribing to **VERBATIM**) someone who &ldquo;loves words.&rdquo;  And so I find it especially gratifying that the Portuguese-speaking world does not load pejorative connotations into their word for _amateur_.  Their single word _amador_ means both 'non-professional' and 'lover.' _[Harry Oster, S&atilde;o Paulo, Brazil]_



## Esrever Hsilgne
_Robert A. Fowkes  
New York University_

Long before the hucksters told us that _Serutan_ spelled backwards was &ldquo;nature's&rdquo;--implying apparently that the product was the opposite of natural--I acquired the habit, or psychological affliction, of reading words and signs backwards.  It was an attendant phenomenon on another puerile stunt, that of reading a page upside down.  Before the age of ten I could do this almost as fast as reading right side up.  I was a slow reader.  Possibly the only practical value that subsequently accrued from this aberration from normal human behavior was an ability to handle with relative facility scripts reading from right to left.

It was fascinating to me to imagine a meaning to _Gnikoms On_!, and I pictured to myself some sort of gas mask or anti-emphysematic device to be put over our juvenile faces.  Exactly what kind of pots _lluf pots_ were, escaped me.  One day, as I waited for a bus to take me to school and to the tender mercies of a ferocious substitute, Miss Luke, which was clearly in the days before the substitute was at the mercies of the pupils, I read her name and title on the approaching _Loohcs Sub_.  Much later came the realization that the opposite of _University_ is, approximately, _it is revenue_, something that various deans have been telling me for years, while assuming the _alumni_ to be _in mula_.

A store in a town where I lived as a child was called _Garton's_, and since I once bought a handkerchief there in an emergency, _snotrag_ seemed an appropriate reversal of the name.  A Chinese neighbor in the same town once ordered _klim_ in the grocery store, and I assumed with childish delight that he was saying _milk_ backwards, until he added, &ldquo;extra heavy.&rdquo;  Years later a dried milk product was actually called _Klim_.

That pornographic danger could lurk in simple names of products was obvious when _Tums_ read alphabackwardly as _Smut_.  That _animal_ is the reverse of _lamina_ struck me while I was doing a crossword puzzle, a blow from which I soon recovered.  Long before commercial diaper services tended to fundamental infantile needs I perceived that a _diaper_ was _repaid_, but I was not exactly sure how, or to whom.
 

Our neighbors' tough son _Dennis_ seemed to merit the backward condemnation _sinned_, but his rather pious _sister_ seemed to have difficulty in reading _resist_.  Why a _decal_ should be _laced_ or a _dessert tressed_; why a _peek_ should _keep_, or the _dew_ be _wed_--not wet?--or _Camus_ become _sumac_, or a _gnat_ have a reverse _tang_, or a _tuba abut_, or a _trap_ be a _part_, was no clearer than the _room_ on a _moor_, or _Emil_ in _lime_, or _grub_ in a _burg_ (possibly a _hamburg_: _grub mah_!).  A _keel_ could spring a leak, but hardly a _leek_. Were some _kinfolk_ named _Klofnik_?  _Fidelio_ is _oiled if_--if what?  If the singers are in good voice?  A _reward_ could come backwards out of a _drawer_, and an _Yliad_ was a distorted _daily_ epic.  Did we _retap_ the _pater_ as a source of supplemental allowance?

Many fragments of reverse English look as if they could or should mean something: _dradnats_ for _standard_ (reminiscent of a mangled dreadnought?), _red now_ for _wonder_ (ex-fascist, perhaps), _Kroy wen_ (cry when it hurts?) for _New York, yawbus_ (not mine!) for _subway, set a ropave_ for _evaporates, rewolf_ for a _flower, torrac_ for a backward _carrot_.  The _state_ turns into a plural in reverse French, while _united_ is almost detained in the same language, and _muni-mula_, whatever that is, is forthcoming-- or backcoming, from _aluminum_. 

A non-existent New York University student named _Duarf_ finished second in the race for some class office one year; he was a not too backward _fraud_, as were those who had entered his name.  _Sreknoy_ for _Yonkers_ suggests a new and imminent horror (_Schreckneu-Neuschreck_?  I have often read the street sign _Yonkers Ave_. as _Eva Sreknoy_, imagining vaguely some frightening Valkyrie). 

The _devil lived_, but waxed _livid_ when called _divil_; but _evil_ is not _live_, and _denim_ is not _mined_.  _Aborigines_ may possibly back out of a place called _Senigiroba_, why not?  

But _radar, kayak, gag, poop, peep,_ and _noon_ are on a frustratingly complete _level_ of palindromicity, not a city in which this reverse English thrives.  

A Roman schoolboy supposedly read the Latin name of his city (of course Latin; what else?--well, maybe some antecedent of Latin) backwards and thus rendered affably effable the ineffable name _amor: Roma_.  

The title _Erewhon_ baffled me in high school, for I didn't get &ldquo;nowhere&rdquo; reading the utopian designation backwards (despite Leumas Reltub's possible justification in treating _wh_ as a unit, and despite later temptation to render _Geritol_ as _Low Tiger_, or _English_ as _shingle_).  

In school we used to try the reverse trick on our own names (for, unfortunately, I was not alone in the madness). We cheated in one respect: we retained the order of first and last names.  Thus, the procedure that produced _gnikoms on_ was not followed (the product would have been, rather *_on gnikoms_ presumably an exhortation to a team of some extraterrestrial origin).  Nevertheless, _Trebor Sekwof_ looked and sounded like a conceivable reverse of _Robert Fowkes_; schoolmates branded it an improvement, in fact.  _Mij Snave_ even worked for _Jim Evans_, as did _Dranreb Efeeko_, more or less, for _Bernard O'Keefe_, or _Ekim Navillus_ for _Mike Sullivan_.  But _Ztirf Ztluhcs_ did wretchedly for _Fritz Schultz_, while _Nan Tibbit_ had a rough time indeed in shifting into reverse.  > 

Well, even the _Forverts_ is read _rikverts_.  

But shun Dylan's _Llareggub_; it's imperative. 

 

I am interested in enlarging my collection of English words in which a hyphen is necessary to distinguish one word from another, otherwise identically spelled.  I solicit help to expand the following list: 

_dis-ease_   _re-creation_   _draw-er_ 

_pray-er_    _re-present_    _re-form_    

I would be particularly interested in forms without _re_- or _-er_ and in forms that are less likely to be assimilation followed by back-formation.  _[Gene Chase, Asst. Prof. of Mathematics, Messiah College, Grantham, Pennsylvania 17027]_

**Duo for Voice & Percussion**

We were discussing Alfred Noyes.  
Howells said he'd never heard the sound  
But volunteer'd: &ldquo;Once I heard Saul Bellow  
I didn't mind hearing Ezra Pound.&rdquo;  

_—E. O. Staley, Maplewood, New Jersey_


## Tom Sawyer Whitewashed
_Nancy LaRoche  
Hartford, Connecticut_

How wonderful to be weaned on the likes of _The Wind in the Willows,_ I thought, as I scanned the pages of a large, library anthology of children's literature, chock full of nursery rhymes, fairy tales, excerpts from the &ldquo;classics.&rdquo;  There he was again, the incorrigible Toad, tricking his would-be reformers, evading the Law which forever tries to restrain his natural, lovable recklessness.  

But it was primarily Grahame's language that gave me pause--the delight in words, their marvelous creative and evocative power, the music and magic in the lines that lure the child into his fictional world.  The genius of Grahame lies in his refusal to talk down to his audience, to adapt his style and diction to the &ldquo;limited&rdquo; verbal world of children.  Rather he stretches their linguistic horizons; part of the fascinating new world to which they are introduced and to which they respond is an awareness of new sounds and words, a sensitivity to the _how_ of expression.  Little does it matter that the structural patterns are often unfamiliar and the words themselves likely to trip the tongue, not to mention the understanding, of many an adult-- _wonted, paroxysm, habiliments, squandering, contemptuously, languid, artful_.  But mood and meaning are clear to the child, who drinks in all his vessel can hold, all the while being subtly affected by the excess mysterious verbal waters swirling and splashing about him.  

I'm getting carried away with words myself, I know. As I was saying, I was riffling the pages of a children's anthology when I was seized with these musings.  I next happened upon a passage from _Tom Sawyer_--the whitewashing episode, of course.  It had been carefully whitewashed itself, apparently in preparation for oral reading by a teacher or librarian or whoever else might be engaged in introducing children to the delights of literature.  (It seems unlikely that a parent would have been responsible for the excisions and substitutions I found.)  

I studied the perversions of the text, attempting to discover a motivation or method in the madness.  It appears to me that this is what happened to Poor Tom.  (Parentheses indicate excisions, _italics_ substitutions.)  

Unfamiliar words or words deemed difficult had been omitted entirely or replaced by &ldquo;simpler&rdquo; ones: the (locust) trees; a Delectable Land, dreamy, (reposeful) _restful_, and inviting; he passed his brush along the topmost (plank) _part_; he went (tranquilly) to work; Tom (contemplated the boy) _thought_ a bit; the (balmy) summer air.  In not one instance cited here, nor in the many instances not cited, would the original wording have prevented a young listener from grasping the idea.  

What was evidently considered &ldquo;improper&rdquo; English and some regionalisms were also cut: Jim never got back with a bucket of water (under) _in less than_ an hour; Ben Rogers (hove) _came_ in sight.  Similar treatment was given allusions or other references to the unfamiliar.  The listeners were deprived of seeing and hearing Ben Rogers &ldquo;personate&rdquo; a steamboat.  And &ldquo;Tom planned the slaughter of more innocents&rdquo; becomes &ldquo;of more innocent boys,&rdquo; while &ldquo;part of a jew's harp&rdquo; is verbally purloined from his catalogue of worldly wealth by this contemporary Bowdler.  

The last excision, however, may have been motivated instead by whatever led this custodian of children to shield them from all references to race or slavery: (White, mulatto, and Negro) boys and girls gathered round the town pump; soon the (free) boys would come tripping along. And in this version a young Black boy addresses a White boy by his name only--the deferential, respectful &ldquo;Marse&rdquo; is abandoned for the naked &ldquo;Tom.&rdquo;  

Passages that do not advance plot or contain dialogue but rather describe moods and attitudes or present ideas are blocked out completely: (There was a song in every heart; and if the heart was young the music issued at the lips); (A deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit); (Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden). The famous distinction between work--&ldquo;whatever a body is obliged to do&rdquo;--and play--&ldquo;whatever a body is not obliged to do&rdquo;--was prevented by pencil from falling on the ears of the young listeners, many of whom were probably at work that very moment.  

This horror story ends with the most unkindest cuts of all--those apparently made for &ldquo;moral&rdquo; purposes.  While others worked and Tom watched, he &ldquo;had a nice, good, (idle) time.&rdquo;  Evidently idleness and goodness are mutually exclusive terms for the sacred snipper.  Tom's essentially immoral behavior must not be reinforced.  So the youthful audience subjected to this truncated version is left with Aunt Polly's admonition that she'll &ldquo;tan him&rdquo; if Tom stays out too long at play and doesn't return for more assigned chores.  They are deprived of Twain's beautifully ironic ending to the incident: Aunt Polly rewards Tom for his labors by bestowing upon him a choice apple while he at the same time, in the current vernacular, manages to &ldquo;rip off&rdquo; a doughnut as well.  

&ldquo;I know the taste of the watermelon which has been honestly come by, and I know the taste of the watermelon which has been acquired by art.  Both taste good, but the experienced know which tastes best,&rdquo; said Twain.  And those kids would be among the experienced.  Wouldn't they love the apple and the doughnut and the delicious payment for work not done?  Wouldn't we all?  But they mustn't be allowed to savor, even vicariously, the delights of stolen and unearned pleasure.  And they mustn't be allowed to see authority successfully and unknowingly thwarted!  

Well, I may be making much ado about nothing or a mountain out of a molehill (depending on your respective literary and metaphorical lights).  But I don't think so. True, this is an isolated instance whose circumstances are unknown.  My inferences are pure conjecture.  

Yet no matter the agent of or reason for _Tom Sawyer's_ mutilation, its validity as a symptom of the sickness that afflicts too many young readers remains.  Uncomfortable with the unfamiliar, if not openly hostile to it, they rebel at extending the boundaries of their linguistic and literary worlds.  They are ignorant of the fact that to do so is to expand the horizons of their _real_ world.  This hacked-up version of _Tom Sawyer_ illustrates their unformed tastes to perfection--no &ldquo;hard&rdquo; words, no unfamiliar references, no descriptive passages, no controversial subjects.  And were Tom's theft and deceit of Aunt Polly included, not a few would feel compelled to sit in judgment on him, their assessment of his moral guilt or innocence constituting their sole, supreme response to the work.  

Who is robbing them of the richness that is language, that is literature?  The culprit is the mentality that takes the locust from the trees, the balmy from the air; that reduces reality to fact and action, destroying mood and meditation; that erases the unpleasant past of our &ldquo;peculiar institution&rdquo; rather than seizing upon it as part of our present; that fears and hence censors the foibles and faults of humanity.  


## Gullah: A Historical Note and Quiz
_Sterling Eisiminger  
Clemson University_

Thomas Pyles called it the great exception to the homogenity of American speech.  But while Gullah has long recognized as a difficult dialect, its origins have been disputed.  Prior to the work of Lorenzo D. Turner, a Negro linguist familiar with the West African languages, who spent over twenty years researching the origins of Gullah, scholars mistakenly assumed during the first forty years of this century that the dialect was illiterate English acquired and modified by black slaves who lost their native tongue and learned a second language from their white overseers. Turner's painstaking fieldwork has shown that over six thousand words (four fifths are personal names) in Gullah are of African origin.  The parent tongues include some thirty West African languages among which are Efik, Hausa, Wolof, Malinka, Kongo, Yoruba, and Ibo which are spoken in countries in and between Senegal and Angola. (The term _Gullah_ itself is either a shortened form of _Angola_ or a form of _Gola_, the name of a tribe in Liberia.)  

Turner notes that because of the relatively low duty charged for African slaves and the African reputation for meekness (as opposed to West Indian slaves), some 100,000 Africans were brought to the tidewater regions and sea islands of South Carolina, Georgia, and Northeastern Florida between 1708 and 1808; although import was illegal after that, many were still brought in.  Isolated historically and geographically, the Gullah blacks retained much of their African linguistic inheritance, and probably through the interplay of black and white children, as Mitford Mathews suggests, some Africanisms such as _voodoo, juke, jazz, bango, samba, tote, buckra, cooter, okra, gumbo_, and _chigger_ crept into English.  Of course, the slaves adopted and altered many modern and obsolescent English terms too, including: _watermillion_ 'watermelon,' _drap_ 'drop,' _gwine_ 'going,' _larn_ 'learn,' _sarpint_ 'serpent,' _pizen_ 'poison,' and _puppus_ 'purpose.'  Employing an African intonation and featuring an absence of inflection (_e_ replaces _he, she_, and _it_), this amalgam or pidgin called Gullah is spoken today with a rapid, crackling, musical delivery by perhaps 250,000 people.  

The literary uses of Gullah have been modest.  In the early nineteenth century at least three white literary artists, Caroline Gilman, Edgar Allan Poe, and William Gilmore Simms, made varying use of the Gullah culture.  After the Civil War and well into the twentieth century, local colorists made somewhat wider use of the dialect.  These writers include Joel Chandler Harris, who is better known for his use of up-country dialect, Ambrose E. Gonzales, who compiled an extensive glossary of Gullah in his collection of Gullah tales _The Black Boarder_, and Dubose Heyward, author of _Porgy_. 

The following matching quiz has been compiled from the terms collected by Ambrose Gonzales, Lorenzo Turner, Ann Haskell, Reed Smith, and myself.  Try to match the standard English term on the right with the appropriate Gullah equivalent on the left.

{{< column >}} 
{{<row >}}__1.  tittuh {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}A.  remnant{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__2.  tetch {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}B.  sister{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__3.  goober {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}C.  peanut{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__4.  geechy {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}D.  to question{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__5.  to quizzit {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}E.  Gullah{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__6.  shut-mout' {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}F.  to speak{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__7.  she-she talk {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}G.  to exaggerate{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__8.  a shout {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}H.  dawn{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__9.  to crack (one's) teeth {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}I.  feminine gossip{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__10.  day clean {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}J.  a wife{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__11.  lawfully lady {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}K.  a shrew{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__12.  clap-hat bitch {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}L.  secretive{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__13.  to cut de green calabash{{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}M.  a religious dance marked by ecstatic motion{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__14.  free issue {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}N.  married man's girl, not his wife{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__15.  a settin' up {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}O.  to harrass{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__16.  side-gal {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}P.  flattery{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__17.  sweetmouth {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}Q.  covetous{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__18.  bad mouth {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}R.  collection plate passed to pay for the funeral{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__19.  big eye {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}S.  curse{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__20.  burial saucer {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}T.  a wake{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}__21.  to tarrigate {{</row >}} 
{{<row >}}U.  child of white mother and black father{{</row >}} 
{{< /column >}} 

Answers: 1B, 2A, 3C, 4E, 5D, 6L, 7I, 8M, 9F, 10H, 11J,
12K, 13G, 14U, 15T, 16N, 17P, 18S, 19Q, 20R,
21O.

 

**Addenda**

The language of the eastern mountain regions of the US--the Appalachian region--has a number of interesting colloquialisms.  _Ary_ and _nary_ (or _airy_ and _nairy_) are used quite naturally and unaffectedly by persons native to this region to mean 'any' and 'not any,' or 'none.'  They tend to use these colloquial expressions, in preference to the more generally used terms, as emphatics.  (I suspect that there is a linguistic rule here.  The older term is preferred when the intent is quite serious, when the emotions are deeply involved, when ingrained values and standards are at stake.  Notice the use of Biblical--really Elizabethan-- language in matters of religion.)

The word _gravel_, which in General American is a collective noun, has here both a singular and plural form.  For example, _He picked up a handful of gravels and threw a gravel against the window to wake Tom up._  

_Molasses_ is frequently used as a plural, particularly by the less educated: _These molasses was made in Cade's Cove._  

_Lens_ is sometimes used as if it were plural.  _Both lens of my safety glasses were so scratched up they had to give me new ones._  

I ran into a colloquial term, old around here, but new to me, just the other day by eavesdropping on one end of a conversation on the phone between Johnny Loy and Greg Mansfield, both of whom work at Oak Ridge National Laboratory where I, too, am employed.  Johnny is the general factotum who sees to it that the plumbing works, the doors open and close, the lights burn, and so on, in Buildings 4500N, 4501, and 4505.  Johnny is a myth and tradition in his own time.  There is a genre called Johnny Loy stories around here.  These stories go back to the very birth of atomic energy.  

Greg is a very scholarly fellow, a translator of six or seven languages in the Information & Reports Division (Library). Greg comes from up northeast, somewhere.  

Johnny is strictly local, of mountain heritage.  

As I eavesdropped on one end of the conversation, it became apparent that the talk was about a pretty little secretary who was getting married to a craftsman at the Lab.  I didn't know either of them, but apparently both Johnny and Greg did.  

Johnny said into the phone, &ldquo;Greg, I feel awful sorry for that little girl.  I feel real sorry for her.  Greg, that son-of-a-bitch is a bank-walker if I ever saw one.  I saw him once in the old change-room in 3950, and the son-of-a-bitch is a real bank-walker, if I ever saw one.&rdquo;  

Apparently, Greg, on the unheard end of the line, wondered, as I did, what a &ldquo;bank-walker&rdquo; might be.  

&ldquo;Why, Greg,&rdquo; said Johnny, &ldquo;you remember when we were kids, and we went down to the swimming hole to skinny-dip; boys built like you and me, we got our clothes off and got in the water as quick as we could, to avoid embarrassment.  But up on the bank was that _bank-walker_, striding around and showing off.  He usually didn't have much brains, and usually he was skinny and knock-kneed-- or bowlegged--and he generally didn't have much to be proud of, but he had something to brag about, and he bragged about it by bank-walking.&rdquo; _[—W.M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee]_


### OBITER DICTA 
From time to time, we are moved to comment on the questionable literacy of &ldquo;educated&rdquo; people, but no one, as far as we know, has yet offered any comment on professionals' use of their own language.  We find it just as disconcerting to read a menu on which words are misspelled as we should to learn that our doctor doesn't know how to spell _penicillin, pneumothorectomy_, or _staphylococcus_.  To be sure, there are fields in which the professional or trade jargon is mainly oral, but the restaurant business isn't one of them, notwithstanding the nature of the business.  

A restaurant in Essex, Connecticut, offers a dish trimmed with &ldquo;Mandarian&rdquo; oranges; the same place lists a &ldquo;roast beef sandwich with au jus,&rdquo; and, when we queried the waitress for an explanation, it was explained that &ldquo;the au jus is on the side.&rdquo;  Another restaurant, in nearby Ivoryton, offers the hybrid dish, &ldquo;medalions de veal.&rdquo;  

While we're on the subject of restaurants, readers may be interested to learn of a (very good) homestyle restaurant in Chester, Connecticut, called _Otto's Restaurant_.  Several years ago, Otto sold the place, and the new owner's name is Walter.  Not wishing to change the name of the restaurant (&ldquo;good will&rdquo; being worth $1.00), the new owner now has a large sign outside that reads: &ldquo;OTTO'S RESTAURANT--Otto's Name Is Walter.&rdquo; _[—LU]_ 

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _THE INTERPRETATION OF LANGUAGE.  VOLUME II: UNDERSTANDING THE UNCONSCIOUS MEANING OF LANGUAGE_
by Theodore Thass-Thienemann, Jason Aronson, Inc., 1968

Once, following dominant fads, I conceived of linguistics as something approaching an exact science.  Once I believed that etymology held the key to vast stretches of language change.  Then, while giving a seminar report on Plato's _Kratylos_, with its optimistic implication that the etymon would lead us to the &ldquo;real meaning&rdquo; of a word, I exclaimed, with a flash of insight, &ldquo;He obviously didn't mean it!  This is satire!&rdquo;  Whether that insight (of 40 years ago) was genuine or spurious, the cynicism engendered remains. Paradoxically, my fascination with etymology has never waned.  

The present volume<ftnote>1 I confess to not having read volume I, which doubtless disqualifies me as a reviewer, although this is evidently a complete and separate work in itself.</ftnote> with its curious sub-title (who or what is &ldquo;unconscious&rdquo;?) shows a similar fascination with etymology and is also reminiscent of the idea espoused-- or rejected--by Plato, that etymology gets us to the &ldquo;real&rdquo; meanings.  The author favors the word _properly_: Old English _an-lic_ 'only' &ldquo;properly&rdquo; meant 'one-body'; Hungarian _l&oacute;here_ 'shamrock' &ldquo;properly&rdquo; means 'horse testicle,' etc. Present-day meanings are evidently &ldquo;improper.&rdquo;  Sometimes, however, the author overlooks earlier meanings himself.  In treating the &ldquo;polarization (not a freezing process) of milk and meat&rdquo; (pp. 38-39) he apparently equates meat with animal flesh.  But the biblical passage quoted (Hebrews 5.13-14) has _stere&agrave; troph\etilde\_ 'solid food,' which could be vegetarian, and the polarization is not milk vs. meat but liquid vs. solid.  

_Sarko-ph&aacute;gos_ &ldquo;flesh-eater&rdquo; for 'coffin,' traditionally explained (as early as Pliny, and before) as referring to the limestone that consumed the corpse, is regarded as meaning rather the return into the &ldquo;swallowing womb&rdquo; of the mother (_Terra Mater_), pp. 39; 303.  This would, granted, shed light on Job 1.21: &ldquo;Naked came I out of my mother's womb and naked shall I return thither.&rdquo;  That &ldquo;returning thither&rdquo; had me worried a bit as a boy in Sunday School, where a mass of terrifying lore was dispensed.  (I also shared Nicodemus' bewilderment at the admonition, &ldquo;Ye must be born again.&rdquo;)  If we say that the return is to Mother Earth, the riddle is at least half-solved.  One recalls Faust's, &ldquo;The Mothers!  Mothers!  It sounds so strange.&rdquo;<ftnote>2 Goethe, _Faust_, Part II, line 6217: _Die M&uuml;tter!  M&uuml;tter!'s klingt so wunderlich_.</ftnote> Recent semantic developments make _mother_ sound still stranger.  

Highly alarming is the assertion that _education_, Latin _educatio_ (like the German calque _Erziehung_) was not &ldquo;originally&rdquo; (&ldquo;properly&rdquo;?) a drawing-out (of the best in a pupil?  from barbarism to cultivation?) but has a more sinister reference to cattle-breeding and denotes castration, cf. &ldquo;From Castration to Education&rdquo; (pp. 114-117).  The word _wanton_, we are told, indicates the opposite of this baneful educated state, meaning &ldquo;not pulled out,&rdquo; therefore intact in vital respects and gloriously _lewd_; ignorance was indeed bliss.  

The author's theory states that language (= vocabulary) has been transformed by repressive anxiety over three &ldquo;focal points of organic existence&rdquo;.  (p. 11): the beginning (birth), the end (death), and the act of creating new life (sexual union).  Three main sections of the book partially reflect that division, with considerable overlapping and interpenetration: &ldquo;Separation and Reunification&rdquo; (13-42); &ldquo;Oedipus--Identity and Knowledge&rdquo; (43-117); and &ldquo;The Return--Childhood Lost&rdquo; (119-226). There follow addenda, notes, bibliography, and indexes (with Old English curiously put under &ldquo;Index of Foreign Words&rdquo;).  

Thass-Thienemann bases his interpretation on child psychiatry, developmental psychology, and dream interpretation. He explores subconscious verbal fantasies by following the &ldquo;long, wide way of language&rdquo; (p. 1).  He tells us that modern English bears messages sent in a remote past (to whom?); there is a hint that post-hypnotic suggestion is actualized in the fantasies of the disturbed. If so, this must be by the remotest of controls, even cutting across ancestral lines.  It seems that only a population of &ldquo;ethnic purity&rdquo; from very ancient times until the present could assure the kind of message-transmittal assumed here. The author is, admittedly, aware that language is not handed on through the genes, but he does call ancient speakers &ldquo;our ancestors.&rdquo;  Would not &ldquo;predecessors&rdquo; be better?  What about speakers of English (perhaps monoglots) whose ancestors were Ugrian or Basque or what-not? Furthermore, are we now sending messages to distant generations in the future?  What are we trying to tell them? Despite this carping criticism, there is something intriguing in the contemplation of the long course of language transmission and the obvious connection (via breath and psyche) with remote predecessors, whether relatives or not.  

The book abounds with fascinating lore and is really engrossing reading.  I have more confidence in the psychological portions, about which I know little--hence the childlike trust--than in those bordering on linguistics.  I would disagree with some etymologies, which are usually not the author's own, but admit that even &ldquo;false&rdquo; etymology plays a role throughout the ages.  There are more than a few errors of detail; some words are assigned to the wrong language (Irish, Sanskrit); others are nonexistent, although they no doubt were found in the author's sources.  He cannot know all the languages cited, hence the room for error of evaluation.  Transcriptions are sometimes unfortunate (for Sanskrit, Hebrew, Gothic), but these too follow others (although the absence of diacritics may be an original feature). Linguistic works cited are, while substantial, mostly old.  

The author evidently became enamored of the term &ldquo;phonemic&rdquo; at some time.  But his use of the term violates the phonemic principle.  Whether the &ldquo;phoneme is dead&rdquo; or is alive and well, it has meant to those using it a significant unit within the sound-system of one language; it is thus meaningless to apply it across language boundaries as does our author (pp. 34, 35, 91, 101, 108 _et passim_).  

Once or twice he is surely pulling our leg(_s_).  The sons of Austrian and Hungarian nobles, we are told, were called, like the eldest son of the King of France, _dauphin_. Schoolbooks were prepared _ad usum delphini_ 'for the use of the dolphin (dauphin).'  This is compared by the author (p. 16) with English &ldquo;school of fish.&rdquo;  One needs to head for the _Elephant and Castle_ for a strong drink.  

Most of the disagreements above are petty in nature --not all.  Even errors in detail and terminology will not vitiate a valid central thesis.  But one or two implications are hard to accept.  For example: vocabulary change is best observable in aberrations of the disturbed; their speech reflects more accurately an ancient stage than does the speech of the &ldquo;normal&rdquo; speakers.  The afflicted are in the favored position of being able to make profound revelations of a broad cultural nature, sometimes approaching the universal (this contrasts with Freud's treatment of speech aberrations as an individual phenomenon).  In his rational moments, the patient apparently has no such magic touch with pristine language.  How, though, can he recapture an ancient semantic level when there are no intermediate steps?  _Men darf zayn meschugeh_?  Perhaps it helps.  

The volume appears to be extremely useful (with observation of the necessary caveats) for those concerned with language, folklore, comparative literature, Biblical studies, etc., in addition to the author's own major field. It would also perhaps prove fruitful to us in languages and linguistics to turn to some of the publications in the bibliography that are no doubt important sources hitherto overlooked by most of us. 

_—Robert A. Fowkes, New York University_

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _THE GUINNESS BOOK OF NAMES_ 
Leslie Dunkling, Guinness Superlatives Limited, 1974

No book in onomastics comparable to this one has been published in the United States.  Frankly, it is doubtful that a publisher here would have accepted it.  Perhaps only in England, where the professional and the amateur faculties of an author can still tie the subtle knot that associates sensibility, can the disrhythmic quidnunc, the gouty antiquarian, or the purely innocent be granted space. Although the text qualifies as an astounding success, it contributes little that is substantially new to a specialist.  In that way it is like a one-volume edition of Mencken's _The American Language_--compendious, encyclopedic, stylistically distinctive, and informed.  Sounds impossible and slightly tipsy!  

The book is truly attractive in format and layout, with relevant photographs and illustrations throughout.  For instance, a photograph of the musical scores of &ldquo;Louise,&rdquo; &ldquo;Michelle,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Tip Toe Through the Tulips&rdquo; is used to point up the associational influences that may cause parents to name their child because of the current popularity of a song.  _Tulip_ is, of course, the name given by the singer Tiny Tim to his daughter.  Dunkling coins _nameograph_ as the descriptive term for identifiable sketches of famous persons, such as Washington, Lincoln, or Churchill.  A free-style drawing of Charlie Chaplin illustrates _Chaplin_.  The book jacket, a montage of pictures, shows a cut of the upper half of a nubile girl wearing a Princeton University T-shirt, the mainmast of the sailing vessel _Cutty Sark_, a birth registration sheet for 1883, a geological survey map of the island of Hawaii, a platter of cheese wedges (brands named), cheesecake (Miss England of 1970 reigning in near-undress), the Drunken Duck, and rogues' gallery shot of Leslie Dunkling, full-face and right profile, No. 1199062. The jacket exudes a sprouting sensuality that must not go unnoticed.  

With this falderol out of the way, we can slip between the covers.  Dunkling has the audacity to title the first two chapters, &ldquo;What's In a Name?&rdquo;  This dampens the enthusiasm of anyone knowledgeable with the name game.  Yet, both short chapters are carried off with a flamboyance not seen in any books on names that I know.  He even quotes the &ldquo;infamous&rdquo; lines from Shakespeare's _Romeo and Juliet_ at the very beginning, a commencement hardly promising. It is here, however, that we are confronted with a critical mind.  The passage is worth quoting:  

>Juliet's beautiful speech, which in context is a passionate plea for what is known to be a lost cause, is often misinterpreted.  Juliet does not believe what she says even as she says it, and Shakespeare certainly did not believe it.  He gives quite a different answer to his own question many times in his plays and poems.  With his usual genius, however, he makes Juliet ask herself a timeless question which has an infinity of answers.  The innumerable sub-editors who have echoed the question at the head of a thousand columns simply acknowledge the fact.  We must also acknowledge it, and attempt to find some answers.    

In control here is a brash and daring commentator who uses a trite approach to introduce something quite serious and important.  

After this comes a short, too short, glossary of name terms, and then sections on a name's meaning, origin, and density.  The highly complicated concept of the &ldquo;name-print&rdquo; theory is described enough to make us wish he had developed it further.  According to this, all of us have &ldquo;an onomastic finger-print&rdquo;; that is, we react in personal ways to names on a list, something that will reveal both our general and our specialized knowledge.  It is a kind of name association test, only more limited, though probably no less revealing.  Other sections include commentary on duplication and transfer, names as vocabulary, personal name substitutes, modifiers, love names, hate names, and the psychological problem of &ldquo;one's own good name.&rdquo;  

He classifies names in &ldquo;at least four ways&rdquo;: By their linguistic status; by their formal characteristics; by type of origin; and by the nomenclature to which they belong.  In each section, the author subtly and unpretentiously inserts linguistic and psychological interpretations.  Names are discussed synchronically and diachronically; for instance, _Belcher_ probably had the ameliorative meaning of &ldquo;pretty face,&rdquo; from _bel chiere_, but its English form and present meaning can leave the owner &ldquo;sadly exposed.&rdquo;  He is especially concerned with his own name, a concern that extends to all of us who have &ldquo;strange&rdquo; names.  Schoolboys taunted him with &ldquo;Does dung cling?&rdquo;  Some persons insist on hearing _Dumpling_, either through actually being hard-of-hear-ing or through maliciousness.  The name is easily derived through analyses of sound changes in English dialects that connect surnames like _Dunkley_ with place names of _Dinkling_ and _Dinckly_ in Lancashire.  Such commentaries permeate the text.  

In a sense, the book is an introduction to both the theory and practice of names and naming.  No extensive treatment of any category of names occurs, although the encapsulating is so sophisticated as to obviate any necessity to list examples for the sake of listing or proliferating. The categories, then, are not exhaustive, but they indeed cover major areas and types: Names of pubs, houses, streets, trades, magazines, flowers, ships, apples, railways, lorries, on to &ldquo;No End of Names.&rdquo;  With some casting around, we could find omissions, one notably being names in sports, except for a mention of names of racehorses.  So encompassing is the coverage that Dunkling's supposition that we may have more names in our vocabulary than we do &ldquo;ordinary language&rdquo; must be taken seriously.  

Mr. Dunkling has produced a book that deserves shelf space anywhere that good books are found and reading time by anyone who pretends to fluency in English.  If the owner's reading ability is skewered to the bell bottom, then the book can serve well as a coffee-table adornment, a martini-klatsch conversation piece, or for a roach pinchout. It is a breezy, salty, and substantial book from across the sea.

_—Kelsie B. Harder, The State University College at Potsdam, New York_

### To Cave

The word _cave_ is listed only as a noun in Webster's, but I have long known it as a verb.  _To cave or to go caving_ primarily means 'to explore a cave.'  Ah, to go caving! And whoever goes is a _caver_.  

Now oddly enough, I do find the words _spelunker_, n. and _spelunk_ v.i. in Webster's.  I have been a caver for more than twenty years, and I have known a thousand, two thousand cavers.  Never, ever, have I heard anyone speak of himself as a &ldquo;spelunker,&rdquo; and the thought that someone might be about to _spelunk_ is droll.  I _have_ on occasion known cavers to use the words in print to insult somebody.  

Cavers go caving, but there are some very nice things that caves themselves do that most noncavers do not know about, although they instantly understand when they hear. Caves _go_ or they _pinch out_.  _Going cave_ is a cave or cave passage that gives no indication of pinching out.  Such cave is _virgin cave_.  It is a big thrill to explore virgin cave.  And to find _big cave_ is a special treat.  _Live cave_ shows a lot of promise; _dead cave_ does not.  In a cave, cavers _look for cave_, searching for those small holes that may lead to wonders. I think that is about all.  I'm all caved out.  Now I wish you all could listen to a record of &ldquo;The Caving Mother Blues.&rdquo;

_—Red Watson, Cave Research Foundation, University City, Missouri_

### Trite 'n' True

There is a special version of the linguistic binomials that fascinates me which is found in the area of advertising. I can remember when, in the not-too-distant past, products advertised for sale were rather simply and directly named.  One readily understood what was meant by _Old Dutch Cleanser_ or _Dutch Masters_, by _Ry-Krisp_ or _Rice Crispies_, by _Quaker State Oil_ or _Quaker's Rolled Oats_.  

Not so these days when product designations tend toward slogans, aphorisms and expository phrases.  _Hard as Nails, True to Life, Hour after Hour_ and _Twice as Nice_-- all in the cosmetic field--are examples of this genre.  

One specific trend currently is what might be termed the double-barreled or conjunctional approach.  This is not an entirely new phenomenon, as witness such venerable commodities as _Sea &amp; Ski_ (rhyme), _Spic 'n Span_ (tradition) and _Head &amp; Shoulders_ (geography).  

What is so alarming is the overkill that is being practiced. For instance, _Shake 'n Bake_ are seasoned bread crumbs, _Break 'n Bake_ are pizzas, and _Bake &amp; Take_ are reusable aluminum pans.  _Thick 'n Creamy, Cool 'n Creamy_, and _Warm 'n Creamy_, refer, respectively, to salad dressing, pudding, and a beauty cream warmer.  

In the next-to-Godliness category we find _Soft 'n Clean, Groom and Clean_, and _Squirt-N-Kleen_, the last an oral hygiene device.  Covering the moisture spectrum pretty well are such items as _Wash and Care, Spray 'n Wash, Wash 'n Dri, Tote 'n Dry_, and _Soft &amp; Dri_, mostly in the &ldquo;beautifying&rdquo; business.  

There are _Bathe 'n Glow_ (baby lotion), _Mop &amp; Glo_ (floor cleaner), _Sweet 'n Low_ (artificial sweetener) and _Punch 'n Gro_ (garden product).  There are _Gloss 'n Toss, Toss 'n Serve, Brown N Serve, Stir N Serv, Mix 'n Drink, Heat 'n Eat, Whip &amp; Chill, Wipe 'n Dipe, Cut 'n Clean, Kleen 'n Shine; Stretch 'n Seal_ and _Scratch &amp; Sniff_ (the last a notebook).  Then, too, we must remember: _Lean &amp; Lively, Long &amp; Silky, Silk 'n Hold_ and _Silk 'n Silver_. Finally, let us not forget _Tuf 'n Ready_ and _Crisp 'n Tender; Spray 'n Wash_ and _Spray N Vac; Thick &amp; Frosty_ and _Fit &amp; Frosty; Rich 'n Easy, Nice &amp; Easy, Nice 'n Soft_ and _Soft 'n Pretty_... and _So-on 'n So-forth_.  

As you can see, the list is _Long 'n Endless_.  However, the outlook isn't as bleak as it appears.  Fashions in advertising, like fashions in clothes, change quickly and we shall soon be on a _New 'n Different_ kick.  _—Harry Cimring, Hollywood, California_


#### EPISTOLA {Martha (Patsy) White}

In addition to &ldquo;A Bicentennial Pair: George & Patsy&rdquo; [III, 1], there was a &ldquo;Tom & Patsy&rdquo;—The Jeffersons.  Both Mrs. Jefferson and the daughter were Marthas, called Patsy.  

And further, I too am Martha, and have been called Patsy all my life.   _[Martha (Patsy) White, San Rafael, California]_ 

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _KEYWORDS, A Vocabulary of Culture and Society_
Raymond Williams, Oxford University Press, 1976

We assume that one of the highest compliments to be paid a book is an expression of envy at not having been the author of it.  Unhesitatingly, unabashedly, we submit that we regret not having written this book.  In all honesty, though, we must add that we regret, too, being incapable of having written so lucid yet so erudite a descriptive analysis of semantic change taking place in that odd place described as being before our very eyes, under our very noses.  

The author has selected 155 English words (like _aesthetic, alienation, art, behaviour, bourgeois, bureaucracy, capitalism, career, ... creative... culture... democracy..., equality..., family_, etc.) that he considers to be key words in modern culture.  Through detailed discussion of their etymologies, their cognates, their synonyms and antonyms, and their general historical and contemporary behavior, he traces the development of each from its purely formal origin through its semantic development as illustrated by the political, philosophical, and critical writings in which it has been employed.  The discussions vary in length from less than a page to several pages, and each carries a list of cross references (at the end) to related Keywords in the book.  Monolingual lexicographers are traditionally accused of carrying on some sort of verbal incest because they attempt to define the words of a language using the words of the language itself.  If not precisely incestuous, it must be acknowledged that the practice of monolingual lexicography is, indeed, an exercise in circularity, unlike bilingual or multilingual lexicography, which, at least, offers the salve of being able to use a metalanguage.  Williams sidesteps this problem rather neatly: by virtue of dealing with so few words, he can, in effect, use the rest of the language as a metalanguage and no circularity is apparent.  

Though admittedly a small niggle, it might be necessary to point out that nothing would be gained from arguing that some of these Keywords ought to be replaced by other Keywords of our own choosing; but that would prove a bootless argument, indeed, for we should soon become mired in the philosophical questions of Williams' choices rather than in the genuine enjoyment and admiration of his treatment of those he has selected.  No one can gainsay the importance of these 155: at worst, he can but lament that there aren't 1550 or 15,500 or 155,000 treated in like manner.  

For here is what lexicography is all about.  

Witness these cuttings, presented entirely out of context:  > 

**Equality** has been in regular use in English since [early 15th Cent.], from ... [OF] _&eacute;qualit&eacute;_ ... [**L**] _aequalitatem_, ... r[oot] w[ord] [L] _aequus_-level, even, just.  

[**Medium**] ... **Media** became widely used when broadcasting as well as the press had become important in COMMUNICATIONS (q.v.); it was then the necessary general word.  MASS (q.v.) **media, media people, media agencies, media studies** followed.  

[**Liberal**] ... But **liberal** as a pejorative term has also been widely used by socialists and especially Marxists. This use shares the conservative sense of lack of rigour and of weak and sentimental beliefs.  Thus far it is interpreted by **liberals** as a familiar complaint....  

[**Literature**] ... Where Johnson had used **literature** in the sense of being highly literate in his _Life of Milton_, in his _Life of Cowley_ he wrote, in the newly objective sense: 'an author whose pregnancy of imagination and elegance of language have deservedly set him high in the ranks of literature.'    

As can be seen from even this small sample, it is almost impossible to deal with language without encountering controversy, and we do not mean to imply, in our earnest recommendation of this book, that the reader will necessarily agree with all of the views expressed.  Yet, views cogently expressed are in short supply this season, and especially in the cheaper (albeit impermanent) paperback edition, this book can be guaranteed to engender thought and stimulate discussion.  It is required reading for all who moan that we don't use English the way we used to.  

If we allowed ourselves a niggle, above, perhaps we may be permitted a quibble here: the typographic style gets a bit cumbersome at times.  For instance, once a cross reference to another entry has been indicated by setting a given word in small capitals, it is unnecessary to supply the redundant '(q.v.)' following.  The editors would have done better to have followed _OED_ (or VERBATIM) style. As far as the style of the writing goes, the author would have been well advised to have avoided such phrases as &ldquo;--- is a complex word&rdquo; and &ldquo;--- is a difficult word,&rdquo; one of which appears in almost every entry.  Neither is required for the formulaic approach to his subject, which he has managed to avoid without sacrificing a measure of useful uniformity among the entries.  _[—LU]_

### _Proverbially Speaking_  
Don't minimize the man who maxim-izes.  
_—A. S. Flaumenhaft, Lawrence, New York_


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: _hermaphrodite to bulldagger_

Etymologically the most interesting word in the English language is probably _dike_, referring to a lesbian, with all its variations such as _Diesel-dike_ 'a fat lesbian who walks like a Mack truck,' etc.  What is so interesting and unusual about _dike_ is that all the intermediate forms of this term, from its etymological original, which is _hermaphrodite_, to its most evolved derivative, _bulldagger_, are all in simultaneous existence at the present time and have been at least since the 1930s; and I have at one time or another heard them all in actual use: _hermaphrodite, morphodite, morphodike, dike, diker, bull-diked_, and _bulldagger_. The &ldquo;bull-&rdquo; element in these last two of course refers to largeness or maleness. _—G. Legman, France_

### Ahless Havad

Where did the ahs in Havad go?  
Who managed this sly maneuver?  
Some Irish Yankees put one each  
On the ends of Chiner and Cuber.  

_—E. O. Staley, Maplewood, New Jersey_

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _PLACENAMES OF GEORGIA, Essays of John H. Goff_  
Edited by Francis Lee Utley and Marion R. Hemperley,
University of Georgia Press, 1975

John Goff had as many trades as fingers: he was a scholar, teacher, dean, economist, transportation director for TVA, consultant for TVA in Alabama and for Bonneville Power Company in Oregon, chief economist and director of research for FDR's Transportation Board of Investigation and research, writer, and self-appointed inspector of Georgia placenames.  During the last 17 years of his life, Goff made hundreds of observations on Georgia placenames, but he published most of these in the _Georgia Mineral Newletter_.  Marion R. Hemperley of the Georgia Surveyor General Department and Francis Lee Utley, late of the Ohio State University, have edited 135 of these essays to give both the general reader and the specialist in onomastics a thoroughly delightful volume.  This book is a handsome, entertaining, and informative collection--a significant contribution to the study of linguistics, history, geography, and folklore which are the domain of place-name study.  

Like Thoreau, Goff was no theorist.  He loved a meandering road, and, because he was not on another man's errand, the inspector took the time to go his own way.  He began his work tracing the course of the Old Federal Road in North Georgia; in the years that followed, he studied the names of creeks and crossroads--and all the terrain and settlements in between--with the same loving attention that Thoreau gave to the ice, woods, and chickadees around Concord.  

As a result, Goff's work has the effect of a sprawling epic catalogue of Georgia placenames, more than 1500 of which are indexed by the editors.  The range of his scholarship and the deftness of his intuition, however, are bound in an engaging prose style that makes a reader grateful to be shet for a while of the orthodox taxonomist:  > 

_No Business Creek_ is one of those distinctive names of Georgia and for a long time the writer thought it was the only such moniker in the country until he found a North Business Creek listed in Henry Gannett's _Gazetteer of Virginia_.  This discovery led to some searching which turned up a second No Business Creek in Morgan County, Alabama, northwest of Hartselle.  This find in turn raised a question about Gannett's North Business Creek; perhaps he had made a slip by interpreting No as No., an abbreviation for north.  Apparently there was such an error, because a reliable Virginia map disclosed that the correct designation is No Business and not North Business Creek.  Further study may show the name is also employed in other sections.  But be that as it may, usage of the expression in such widely separated areas as Virginia, Georgia, and Alabama implies that old-timers were generally familiar with the appelation. (p. 150)  

Gopher Town, or &ldquo;Go' Town&rdquo; as the place is sometimes called, is a crossroads on Georgia 39, below Donalsonville in central Seminole County.  According to a good informant, the name was derived from the fact that an enormous gopher was once killed in the vicinity and its dried shell hung over the door of the community store.  The term gopher in this case does not refer to any of the various species of western rodents, but to a burrowing land turtle (_Xerobates polyphemus_), which can be found on the lower Coastal plain.  The creatures are sometimes caught and their flesh used as food. (p. 128)  

The exact site of the town of Eastertoy is not known but most likely it centered about present Dillard, which is located on a fine rise that overlooks the beautiful bottoms along Betty Creek and the Little Tennessee.  Old people around Dillard used to say that they had always heard that Indians were living at the site when the first white people arrived to take up properties they had won in land lotteries.  Further evidence that the place was at Dillard can be found in the fact that Mud Creek which is also known as _Estatoah_, or as _Estatoah Falls Creek_, enters the right side of the Little Tennessee on the northeast side of Dillard. (p. 279)  

It might be of interest to add that the crossroads at Plains of Dura was the intersecting point for two early traces.  One of these routes, Bond's Trail, led southward from old Traveller's Rest, below Montezuma on Flint River via Ellaville, Quebec (on Georgia 153 in Schley County), Concord Crossroads, Plains of Dura, Plains, and Paradox Church Crossroads in the southwest corner of Sumter.  From there it crossed into extreme northwest Lee County and joined what is now the Edwards Station-Bodsford Road, just to the east of Chokeeligee Creek. This last route, a former Indian path, ran along the east-side of Kinchafoonee Creek.  To the south of its juncture with Bond's Trail, at a point about two miles northwest of today's Neyami in Lee County, it forked with one branch leading southeastward through Neyami at the site of old Starkville, thence eastward to Pindertown, a noted Indian crossing point on the Flint River.  The other prong continued south alone Kinchafoonee Creek to Kennards Settlement and Cowpen, at the present bridge on Georgia 32. (p. 36)    

Even with the eight footnotes deleted here, the historical and geographical value of the work seems apparent even in these representative passages.  The discussions of placenames are equally rich with information for the linguistic geographer and the folkorist.  Besides the regional words, _cowpen_ /k&eacute;p&ecaron;n/, _gopher_, and _pinder_, mentioned above, subregional words are also documented in local designations, e.g., _Redbug Road_ would be _Chigger Road_ in North Georgia and the village of _Red Bud_ northwest of Atlanta wouldn't appear in South Georgia.  _Bonny Clabber Bluff_ would be _Thick Milk Bluff_ if the area had been dominated by Germans instead of Irish, and _Blue John Creek_ would be _Skimmed Milk Creek_ if a modern urban namemaker felt obliged to use a dairyman's pejorative. The political folklorist will surely find significance in the fact that Jimmy Carter's hometown of Plains is a fairly recent abbreviation of _Plains of Dura_, the site of Nebuchednezzar's great golden image that led to the fiery furnace for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.  

In three essays on the phonology of Georgia placenames, Goff discusses local pronunciation of nearly 100 local designations, recording divided usage, illustrating variation with a fairly consistent and successful nontechnical description, and clarifying accentuation when needed. Outlanders are given the preferred native pronunciations of _Albany_ [&ldquo;All' benny&rdquo;], _Aragon_ [&ldquo;Arrow'-gun&rdquo; or &ldquo;Arrer'gun&rdquo;], _Schley_ [&ldquo;Sly'&rdquo;], and _Taliaferro/Bolivar_ (which make a perfect rhyme in Georgia).  Even Georgians will learn from this book; how many of us would pass a pronunciation quiz that includes _Gardi_ (&ldquo;Guard-eye&rdquo;), _Philamee_ (&ldquo;Flimee&rdquo;), _Schlatterville_ (&ldquo;Slaughterville&rdquo;), _Sowhatchie_ (&ldquo;Syehatchie&rdquo;), and _Towaliga_ (&ldquo;Tyelye'gee&rdquo;)? There is some comfort, however, to find even the natives of Screven County rhyming it with _Stephen, seven,_ or _driven_.  

The good life and hard traveling of Georgia's people are reflected across every page of this fine book, from _Social Circle_ and _Fancy Hill_ to _Scrougetown, Scufflele Bluff_, and _Lordamercy Cove_.  Even without an _Amsterdam, Athens, Berlin, Bremen, Canton, Cairo, Damascus,_ two _Dublins, Egypt, Geneva, Lisbon, Madras, Mecca, Natal, Rome, Scotland, Turin, Tunis_, and _Vienna_ on the map of his favorite state, Goff could have concluded his work as Man Walking and with no apology to Thoreau:  

> If with fancy unfurled  
You leave your abode,  
You may go round the world  
By the Old Federal Road.   

_—Lee Pederson, Emory University_

### &ldquo;--but this Thesaurus!&rdquo;

**I**

A dictionary is a word-society  
Recording next of kin-and doubtful heirs;  
To know a word one must concede co-action  
And recognize both genes and variants:  

Consider _gens,_ host to appendages  
That he fulfills, becoming with their aid  
_Degeneration, gentry,_ and _benign,_  
_Congenial, generous,_ and _genteel;_  
Through limpet affixes he can expand  
Yet in himself remain intact.  

To know a word--to wonder how it lapsed:  
Why did stout _toad-head_ yield its place to _tadpole_?  
And Roman _little mouse_ retreat to _muscle_,  
Then later in sea-armor mask as _mussel_?  
Did _mob_ from _mobile vulgus_ wax pernicious?  
And _bus_ from _omnibus_ decrease in content?  
And when did _quelque chose_, deprived of birthright  
By artless tongue, descend to mocking _kickshaws_?  
What lack of energy reduced the pace  
Of quick _s'aventurer_ to leisured _saunter_?  
What weariness betrayed the jovial _surfeit_  
To such vicissitudes as end in _sad_?  

So in that ordered word-society  
Is every member diagramed for sound  
Maintaining each his use and proper place.  

II  

But this Thesaurus!  Challenging your thought  
To find the mediant word to give it flesh!  

This teeming source that quickens or confines  
Displaying for your choice its lavish store,  
To ground your thought or kite it through the sky.  

Kaleidoscopic words of shifting forms;  
And blustering, leaping, turbulent words that rage;  
Words straight as shot-purveyors of precision—  
And undecided fluttering words on planes  
Of almost-meaning—weightless butterflies;  

Cargoes of samplings from the tongues of Time  
(The very words poetic thought found sound.)  

This Mardigras of words where thought is king.  
These unrelated members own no rule  
Except to serve--to shape the inherent arc  
That launches thought into transcendency.  

_—S. C. Joughin, Hackettstown, N. J._

### _Spell-Bound_
A movie about a screen siren who casts her charms on men should be _hex_-rated.  

_—A. S. Flaumenhaft, Lawrence, New York_


### ADDENDA: _Names_

Unusual names [II, 2] can be delightful: _Larry
Derryberry_....

_—Reinhold Aman, Milwaukee, Wisconsin_

...embarrassing: _Siflis; Hartupee; Marcy Tinkle;_
_Edward L. Wiwi_....

_—Jack Grieshaber, Cincinnati, Ohio_

... irresistible: _Tordis Isselthwaite_....

... contradictory: _John Senior, Jr_....

_—Constance Finkel, University City, Missouri_

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _WORDS AND WOMEN_ 
Casey Miller and Kate Swift, Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1976

_Prejudice_ is the name for the animosity between or among people on the basis of religion, color, nationality, sexual proclivity, language, wealth, health, employment, intelligence, taste, hirsuteness, education, height, weight, age, behavior, opinions, and, as we all now know, sex.  In other words, any of the multitudinous, multifarious elements that serve to distinguish us from one another can serve as a basis for our prejudices.  

_Propaganda_ is the name for the process of persuading people to behave in a certain way.  The authors of this book discuss one kind of prejudice only--sexist--and hold that the English language itself, by its very grammar, serves as a self-perpetuating medium for sexist propaganda.  True, other, cultural factors--particularly such practices as a woman's loss of her name upon marrying--are mentioned; but the focus is on language.  

The argument is irrefutable, though it is sometimes a little difficult to separate Miller/Swift's purely descriptive approach from a surely destructive reproach.  For example, they cite the treatment of _manly/manful/mannish_ vs. _womanly/womanlike/womanish_ in _The Random House Dictionary_.  At first, the reader is put off by the authors' comment: &ldquo;The broad range of positive characteristics used to define males could be used to define females, too, of course, but they are not.  The characteristic of women-- weakness is among the most frequently cited--are something apart.&rdquo;  [p. 59] Put off because one assumes that it is the lexicographers who are being taken to task.  But on the following page appears this: &ldquo;Lexicographers do not make up definitions out of thin air.  Their task is to record how words are used, it is not to say how they should be used.&rdquo;  Thus, it emerges that Miller/Swift have it in for the language, not for the lexicographers.  

That's a great relief, for no lexicographer ought to tangle with these two ladies, whose argument is all the more telling for the volume of evidence they adduce from all kinds of writing.  Who can doubt that English--though not, to be sure, English alone--reflects still the traditional anti-female biases of its speakers' culture.  Even those who object to the awkward, often silly distortions and contortions resorted to in an attempt to achieve &ldquo;equality in language&rdquo; will be compelled to admit, upon closing this book, that the language is rife with constructions, syntax, grammar, and lexicon that, even if not any longer deliberately anti-female, certainly perpetuates an inequality, willy-nilly, that women have fought to correct with considerable success. The problem that emerges and that is central to Miller/Swift's argument is that notwithstanding the advances made in the liberation of women, the very language they must use tends to propagandize against their freedom and purpose.  

In ranging far and wide for good and bad examples with which to support their cause, Miller/Swift sometimes slip, as when they praise the _American Heritage School Dictionary_ for defining _sage_ as &ldquo; 'A very wise person, usually old and highly respected,' in contrast to the 'mature or venerable man sound in judgment' of a widely used college dictionary.&rdquo;  The college dictionary happens to be right and the _AHSD_ wrong in this instance, for, while there is no reason why a _sage_ must be male, the unassailable fact is that all sages have always been male, and we would defy Alma Graham or anyone else to unearth evidence (outside of science fiction) that the word has ever been used to refer to a female.  

There is some consolation for all of us (Miller/Swift, too): language does change and that for that reason alone we may look forward to a future of diminished prejudice. However, it must be emphasized that by that very token people should stop using etymologies of modern English words in order to &ldquo;prove&rdquo; that their &ldquo;real&rdquo; meaning is the original one.  Etymologies are interesting and can be useful in determining the linguistic and semantic changes that a word has undergone, but it is as ridiculous to fasten on an obsolete meaning as the &ldquo;true&rdquo; meaning of a word as it may be to fasten on its current meaning: words are _symbols_; they are not things they symbolize.  

It may seem that because of the sensitivity of the subject, any adverse remarks in a review of a book on sexism in language will be construed as an attack on feminism itself, notwithstanding protests to the contrary (especially by a male reviewer).  But the only possible criticism that this reviewer might offer is about the authors' intensity, which frequently results in nothing more than a switching in the order of explanations and arguments.  One must therefore be careful to read to the end of each analysis in order to find the authors' mitigation of their criticisms, which are usually directed at the medium rather than the message.  

To the best of our knowledge, no comparable study-- certainly, no comparably responsible, sober, comprehensive study--has been done by anyone else, and this work is welcome particularly because it should serve to lay to rest, once and for all, the facetious inanities perpetrated on us by those who, under the guise of humor, create linguistic absurdities that tend to perpetuate vicious sexist propaganda.  _[—LU]_


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

Bravo to Bruce Price for his insightful and witty article on Nounspeak [II, 4].  He may be a little too categorical, however, in stating that, unlike Germanic, &ldquo;the Romance languages virtually forbid it.&rdquo;  True, the practice is not indigenous to Romance, nor is it as versatile.  (That is, with the debatable exception of Esperanto--of largely Romance lexicon but generally Germanic syntax--in which one can agglutinate nouns almost ad lib. E.g., the nouns _pluvo_ 'rain,' _mantelo_ 'coat,' _fabriko_ 'factory,' and _loko_ 'location' are easily combined to form a perfectly comprehensible chain: _pluvmantelfabrikloko_.  But such a process is typical of the language and leads neither to obfuscation nor affectation.)  French has been quite hospitable to noun pairs for some time--with or without hyphens, often capriciously--and is becoming even more so as the language suffers from the spread of its own equivalent of Newspeak, ironically dubbed _Hexagonal_.  Except for some chic Anglo-American calques like _auto-&eacute;cole_ 'driving school,' such pairs differ from the Germanic variety in that the qualifying noun always follows the qualified, not vice-versa.  Hence _homme_ 'man' + _grenouille_ 'frog' for 'frogman.'  They can be broken down into (at least) three types:  > 

1.  True appositions, in which the second (qualifying) noun plays the role of a predicate adjective; as in _soldat citoyen_ 'citizen soldier,' _homme orchestre_ 'one-man band,' et al.  

2.  Metaphorical appositions, as in _homme grenouille, guerre &eacute;clair_ 'lightning war,' i.e. 'Blitzkrieg,' _roman fleuve_ 'saga,' lit.  'river novel,' _homme sandwich_ 'sandwich man,' i.e. in the ambulatory, publicity sense, et al.  

3.  Syntactical ellipses, in which simple juxtaposition replaces anything from a preposition to an entire phrase. Thus, _caf&eacute;-concert_ (for a _caf&eacute;_ where one can also hear a _concert_ of sorts), _bloc-notes_ 'note-pad,' _coiffeur hommes_ 'men's barber,' _pause caf&eacute;_ 'coffee break,' the slang _arr&ecirc;t pipi_ 'rest stop,' et al.  One even hears (and reads) nowadays such innovations as _trajet-bureau_ 'office distance,' i.e. 'travel time from office to home.'    

Another favorite ellipsis is of relatively recent vintage, namely the omission of the preposition _de_ in such expressions as _la question salaire_ 'the salary question' for _la question du salaire_, etc.  As a result, three-noun chains are now quite possible in French, however much they may make purists cringe.  One may well hear office workers discussing the _question pause caf&eacute;_, or historians analyzing the _concept guerre &eacute;clair,_ for instance.  

Given the fundamental difference between this type of chain and the Germanic, it is hard, offhand, to envision any four-noun examples.  But who knows what wonders of verbal shorthand may yet lurk over _Hexagonal's_ horizon? _[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]_


#### EPISTOLA {Francis E. Throw}

One of the horrible examples that illustrate and enliven your brief note about apostrophes [II, 4] invites a small quibble that leads directly to a somewhat more extensive tangential comment to supplement your summary--not to disagree with it.  Certainly the punctuation mark in _Drink with the Urdang's_ is a catostrophe; and the one in _Ham 'n Eggs_ is a prepostrophe unless balanced by an a[fter] postrophe to mark the omission of the _d_.  (Perhaps the best way to avoid the smell of &ldquo;n&rdquo; you rightly deprecate in the logical _Ham 'n' Eggs_ would be _Ham-n-Eggs_, in which the two hyphens announce that the compound has been manufactured for the occasion and the absence of apostrophes implies that the process of contraction has been completed so the omitted _a_ and _d_ are no longer missed.)  

My quibble is to deny the need to add an '_s_ in _St. Paul United Methodist Church_ (despite its Florida address), though the addition would undeniably be legitimate. The apostle is not thought of as possessing the church in any literal sense, but the use of _St. Paul's_ here would be just as correct as the use of _Shakespeare's picture_ in reference to a recent print that could never have belonged to the playwright.  The possessive, expressed either by an '_s_ or by an _of_, has less literal implication of ownership than our grade school teachers may have led us to assume.  Conversely, it is legitimate to speak of the _Adams mansion_ (without an apostrophe) whether the Adamses own it now or not; the house is associated with the Adams family in other ways too.  Such adjectival use of a noun-- either a common or a proper one--is firmly established in English.  

This freedom to either use or omit the '_s_ is quite common, though the degree of freedom varies widely from one situation to another.  At one extreme, St. Paul's municipal auditorium (if there is one in the Minnesota city) could be called the _St. Paul Municipal Auditorium_ but hardly _St. Paul's M.A._ At the other, one could not speak of _Mr. St. Peter's wife_ without an apostrophe, though a number of _St. Peter wives_ (or, with a slightly different sense, St. Peters' wives) might be met at a family gathering. But an association of teachers can equally well be called a Teachers' Association (because the association belongs to those who belong to it) or a Teacher Association (in which _Teacher_ is used as an adjective telling what the Association consists of or is for the benefit of); probably the choice in this case is based less often on logic than on the degree of aversion to punctuation marks.  None of this, of course, is any defense for the traveler who reports having visited _St. Peters_ while in Rome.  

Incidentally, the cowbird letter by W.M. Woods [II, 4, 16] contains a misstatement, though this does not affect his argument.  The cowbird is not &ldquo;a relative of the European coocoo, or cuckoo, or whatever&rdquo;--regardless of its egg-laying habits--though &ldquo;some immigrant, probably of German origin&rdquo; might well have been misled as indicated. The cowbird is one of the blackbirds and hence is an icterid, along with the meadowlarks and orioles.  My own speculation, offered as a less amusing and less imaginative competitor to that of Woods, is that the association between cowbirds and cows may have been much closer in the days before spraying reduced the tick population on the latter. _[Francis E. Throw, Wheaton, Illinois]_


#### EPISTOLA {B.H. Smeaton}

The linguistic term Mr. Cimring is fishing for [II, 4] is presumably _clipping_.  (In usage manuals, such as Fowler or Treble & Vallins, the broader rubric _curtailed words_ is used.)  The most thorough treatment of English clipping (to this writer's knowledge) is in Hans Marchand, _The Categories and Types of Present-Day Word-Formation_ (Ch. IX).  

Even the term &ldquo;curtailed words&rdquo; does not cover all types of familiar designation, since some also _add_ (affective) elements instead of subtracting, or subtract and add at the same time (cf. _Johnny_ and _John-Boy; Joe_ and _Joey_, for Joseph; and _Chevvy_ and _Chev_ for Chevrolet).  

Cimring's felicitous phrase, &ldquo;over-familiarity with language,&rdquo; is particularly applicable in the case of many popular place-name forms.  Note, for example, the preciosity of the tourist who feels he must refer to Las Vegas as _Vegas_, as though this made him a member of some sort of in-group.  _Frisco_ (or sometimes, in writing, &ldquo;'Frisco&rdquo;) is also a favorite of the pseudo-sophisticate (San Franciscans themselves cannot abide the appellation).  

Not all local folk are upset by the pop name for their town, however--sometimes, indeed, it is known only in the immediate area (_Pally_, for example, for Palo Alto, California). In other cases the derived name has all but replaced the official one.  _L.A._ has been in free alternation with &ldquo;Los Angeles&rdquo; for decades now, to no one's distress (and in blissful unawareness, certainly, of the settlement's name at the time of founding--&ldquo;El Pueblo de Nuestra Se&ntilde;ora la Reina de los Angeles de Porci&uacute;ncula&rdquo;).  

To anyone who wants to carry on with it I offer here the beginnings of a list of Western Canadian place-names that have undergone surgery, for better or worse:  

British Columbia has, of course, _Van_ for Vancouver, and, in a less-than-inspired wordplay, _O.K. Falls_ for Okanagan Falls (to add to the complexity, the falls are no longer there).  Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, famed for John Diefenbaker and its federal penitentiary, is (not surprisingly) _P.A._ Winnipeg, Manitoba, fulcrum of the nation, is called _The Peg_ (reinforced, perhaps, by another Manitoba place-name, _The Pas_ [*oe pa]?).  And in Alberta, whence I write, there are _The Hat_ (Medicine Hat); _The Bridge_ (Lethbridge); _Rocky_ or _Rocky Mountain_ (for Rocky Mountain House); and _Pincher_ (Pincher Creek).  

To return to clippings proper, and to keep VERBATIM readers up to the minute, I close with the following note: Rhodesians, according to a recent news dispatch, now have one they could do without, namely, _the Terrs_ (general for 'the terrorists'). _[B.H. Smeaton, The University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada]_


#### EPISTOLA {Stanley H. Brams}

The discussion of Nounspeak [III, 1] prompted me to retrieve a choice collection of occupational titles which have long languished in my files, gleaned from the packinghouse industry.  

Certain employes in that industry are, among other classifications, known by such job titles as _catch basin skimmer, expeller operator, tallow washer, melter operator, deodorizer, evaporator man, glue bone residue man, inedible renderer, smoker, expeller, lard draw off man, dry sausage handler, temperature man, receive and feed man, put in tongue protector, cheek and temple chiseler, neck boner, beef shackle remover, burry sheep facer, jaw bone chiseler, cold calves splitter_ and _bell puller_.  

Please do not ask me what any of these job titles mean. _[Stanley H. Brams, _Labor Trends_, Southfield, Michigan]_


#### EPISTOLA {Caldwell Titcomb}

I was glad to see that someone like A. Ross Eckler submitted [III, 1] a good many more examples of words with the five vowels in sequence.  This does not, however, exhaust the list.  I can add _larcenious_ (for the more usual _larcenous_), _aerious_ (which the 17th century used for _aerial_), and _caesious_.  Of course these and the others can be made to contain _six_ vowels in order by adding the adverbial suffix -_ly_.  

As to the shortest words with the five vowels used only once, another seven-letter example is _eunomia_, listed in the _Oxford English Dictionary Supplement_.  Without resorting to the French _oiseau_, I can even supply a six-letter example that English took over from Greek: _eunoia_ 'alertness of mind,' listed in _Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary_.  

In his discussion of the Gratuitous Negative [II, 4], Norman Shapiro went seriously astray in citing as an instance _I can't stay but a minute_ for _I can stay but a minute_.  Both sentences are entirely correct, _but_ being used in its meaning of _except_ in the former and of _only_ in the latter.  What is of particular interest is that the latter usage descends from a stage of English when the _but_ (for _except_) was combined with a negative _ne_ or _n_' before the verb, e.g. _He n' is but a boy_.  Thus we find John Lydgate writing in the early 15th century, _They nentende nyght nor day/ But unto merthe_, and William Caxton, later in the century, penning, _I ne entende but onely to reduce thauncient rhyme to prose_.  Eventually the lightly-pronounced _n_ vanished, and the negation was subsumed in the _but_, which thus came to mean _only_ as well as _except_.  

Bruce Price, in his article &ldquo;Noun Overuse' [II, 4], committed a howler in referring to &ldquo;Sir Quiller-Couch.&rdquo; The titles &ldquo;Sir&rdquo; and &ldquo;Dame&rdquo; must be immediately followed by the given name (with or without the family name). &ldquo;Lord Olivier&rdquo; is correct, but it has to be &ldquo;Sir Laurence&rdquo; and not &ldquo;Sir Olivier.&rdquo;  

Robert St. Clair's book review [II, 4] erred in saying, &ldquo;What is important about this _historic_ account....&rdquo;  He ought to have said _historical_--the two adjectives are no more synonymous than _classic_ and _classical_.  

Finally, Axel Hornos [III, 1] might like to know that for &ldquo;Ouch!&rdquo; the Japanese are just as likely to exclaim &ldquo;Itai!&rdquo; as &ldquo;Aita!&rdquo; Both interjections make use of the same ideograph. _[Caldwell Titcomb, Brandeis University]_


#### EPISTOLA {Frank Willard Riggs}

In light of a statement by John J. Ruster [II, 3] that &ldquo;it is a peculiarly Celtic trait [to reckon] people and things in sets of twenty,&rdquo; I think it worthwhile to note modern Danish ordinal numbers, which have an obvious historical root in a base-20 system.  These numbers are: _ti_ (10), _tyve_ (20), _tredive_ (30), _fyrre_ (40), _halvtreds_ (50), _tres_ (60), _halvfjerds_ (70), _firs_ (80), _halvfems_ (90), and _hundrede_ (100).  Until very recent decades, 50 through 90 were rendered with the suffix -_sindstyve_.  _Halvtredsindstyve_, for example, yields a morpheme-by-morpheme translation as _half (halv), three (tre), times (sinds), twenty (tyve)_. &ldquo;Half-three&rdquo; is equivalent to 2&frac12;, so what we have in the number is an equation, 2&frac12; x 20 (=50).  The western-oriented Swedes, who speak a very similar language, dispensed with this system, substituting for 50, for example, _femti_, or _five-ten_, which yields another equation, 5 x 10 (=50).  The Norwegians have followed suit, and I suppose it is only a matter of time before the Danes do likewise.   _[Frank Willard Riggs, Orem, Utah]_  


#### EPISTOLA {John W.P. O'Brien}

Ed Fitzgerald, Radio Station WOR, New York:

>Question: &ldquo;What do you call transposing initials, Ed?  
It isn't Bowdlerism, is it?&rdquo;  
Ed: &ldquo;No, that's cutting down.&rdquo;  
[of certain mocking writers]: &ldquo;They were bitten by
the Mencken-Nathan syndrome.&rdquo;

Pegeen Fitzgerald, WOR, New York:
> &ldquo;[I once saw] a statue of a female woman in the park.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;[He] had an ear and an eye for the light touch.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;The midi didn't catch on but the long coat kinda semi got a foothold.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;...the astrological sign you were born over.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;That organization is largely, completely self-supporting.&rdquo;  

Jack O'Brian, WOR, New York:

>&ldquo;Ed [Sullivan] had little forensic talent.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;He creates the best roast beef.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;...the enormity of the probity of 'Sherlock Holmes.' &rdquo; 

_[John W.P. O'Brien, Flushing, New York]_


#### EPISTOLA {James J. Kilpatrick}

If James D. White had been in San Francisco on election night, June 8, he might have added one more splendid specimen to his collection of malapropisms in California. This came from a TV commentator who assured his voters that &ldquo;California voters have today dipped their toe into a very mixed bag.&rdquo; _[James J. Kilpatrick, Woodville, Virginia]_


#### EPISTOLA {T.E.D. Klein}

While I'm not sure that all Mr. White's examples are precisely what I think of as &ldquo;malapropisms&rdquo;--some are simply scrambled metaphors, while others sound rather bullish (in the Irish sense)--I submit two further examples of inventive speech, both from the same high school student of mine in Dexter, Maine: &ldquo;That really hits the nail on the spot&rdquo; and &ldquo;No, not by a long short.&rdquo; _[T.E.D. Klein, New York, New York]_

_The mistress of modern malapropisms was, of course, the late Jane Ace, who, with her writer-husband, Goodman Ace, co-starred in the 1930s and 1940s on the radio program_, Easy Aces.  _Such gems as_ You could have knocked me over with a fender, Don't just sit there like a bum on a log, _and_ I've worked my head to the bone trying to think of her name _readily demonstrate the malapropinquity of the Aces.  There is no doubt that Jane had that certain_ Je ne sais pas. [_Editor_{LU}]


#### EPISTOLA {Hugh T. Kerr}

It is true that the _Authorized King James Version_ of the Bible uses both _ghost_ and _spirit_, and that modern English usage prefers the latter (except in the phrase &ldquo;to give up the ghost&rdquo;), as noted by Mabel C. Donnelly [III, 1].  But the biblical vocabulary for psychic, spiritual, mental, and emotional states is vastly more complicated, and rich, than a single citation (Mark 1:8, 10) can suggest.  

Biblical dictionaries on the subject can be exasperating, and concordances soon reveal the complexities involved. Hebrew uses at least two &ldquo;spirit&rdquo; words (_ruach_ and _nephesh_), while Greek has three (_pneuma, psyche,_ and _nous_).  But the use of these words in the Bible often seems arbitrary, and so translation into English can be confusing. In addition to _spirit_ and _ghost_, we can have _wind, life, breath, soul, mind,_ etc.  Try this text on your aeolian harp: &ldquo;You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind...&rdquo; (Luke 10:27).  

Just to add further to the verbal maze, the biblical view of personality was psychosomatic (and distinct from Platonic dualism--&ldquo;the body is the prison-house of the soul&rdquo;).  So in both the Hebrew and Christian Scriptures, what we would call psychic or spiritual states are freely ascribed to physical organs and other parts of the human anatomy.  Blood, heart, head, hands, feet, eyes, breast, mouth, reins (kidneys), liver, bowels, etc. are all invoked as ways for expressing mental, spiritual, and emotional states.  Here the _Authorized King James Version,_ in my view, is much to be preferred to the more pallid modern English translations.  I list some examples:

{{< column >}} 
{{<row >}}<i>Authorized King James</i>{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}<i>American Revised Standard</i>{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.  (<i>Psalm</i> 26:2)    {{</row >}}

{{<row >}}Prove me, O Lord, and try me; test my heart and my mind.{{</row >}}

{{<row >}}My beloved put in his hand  by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him.  (<i>Song of Songs</i> 5:4)   {{</row >}}               

{{<row >}}My beloved put his hand to the latch, and my heart was thrilled within me.{{</row >}}

{{<row >}}Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth....  (<i>Lam</i>. 2:11){{</row >}}  

{{<row >}}My eyes are spent with weeping; my soul is in tumult; my heart is poured out in grief.{{</row >}}

{{<row >}}Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering.  (<i>Col</i>. 3:12){{</row >}}

{{<row >}}Put on then, as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassion, kindness, lowliness, meekness, and patience.{{</row >}}
{{<row >}}{{</row >}}
{{< /column >}} 

Two minor matters: (1) _Holy Ghost_ is still preferred (to _Holy Spirit_) among many in the so-called Holiness churches, including--so I'm told--the serpent-handlers of West Virginia.  Perhaps in this instance we have the association of snake-bite as the testing of faith (and victory over death) with _ghost_ as the accepted word for 'the soul of a deceased person' (_OED_).  (2) _Giving up the ghost_ must be related to common expression of concern when someone sneezes.  _God bless you!_ and _Gesundheit!_ are holdovers from the primitive belief that a person's vital breath (spirit, wind, life, soul, ghost) is expelled during a sneeze. _[Hugh T. Kerr, Editor, THEOLOGY TODAY]_


#### EPISTOLA {Kenneth Seeman Giniger}

I do not know what church, if any, Ms. Mabel C. Donnelly of the University of Connecticut at Hartford, author of &ldquo;Giving Up the Ghost&rdquo; [VERBATIM III, 1], attends, but, in the Anglican Communion throughout the English-speaking world as well as in many other Protestant denominations, the liturgy continues in the great tradition of both the King James version of the Bible and the _Book of Common Prayer_ and uses the term &ldquo;Holy Ghost,&rdquo; as in &ldquo;Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.&rdquo;  

Ms. Donnelly is correct in that the Roman Catholic liturgy expresses a preference for _Holy Spirit_ rather than _Holy Ghost_, but the very existence of a Roman liturgy in the English language is a contemporary development.  The _Book of Common Prayer_, according to the best reference work on Christianity, _The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church_, &ldquo;has remained practically unchanged ever since&rdquo; 1662. _[Kenneth Seeman Giniger, New York, New York]_


#### EPISTOLA {M.R. Paskow}

Re: &ldquo;The Enigmatic Eggplant&rdquo; [II, 4].  Actually there are three English names, the third being _Guinea squash_. This may be a disparagement of the Italian farmers who just cultivated the eggplant commercially in the United States, or perhaps (I guess at this) a reference to the West African region whence it was transmitted to Spain by Arab traders.  

[I cannot find _Guinea squash_ in any of the dictionaries I have consulted but it is noted in _Hortus II_ as is _Pekin eggplant_.]  

_Aubergine_ may have entered French through Catalan as the Catalonian pronunciation of _al berginia_ is a bit nearer the French than the Spanish _al berenjena_.  _Aubergine_ has been used for the name of an artist's color and was a popular color of cut French velvet at the turn of the century.  

A distinctive type of eggplant grows in China and has been raised there since antiquity.  China may have been the place of its first cultivation. 

Among the Japanese there is an old saying: &ldquo;He who sees an eggplant, a hawk, and Fujisan on New Year's Day is blessed forever.&rdquo; _[M.R. Paskow, Sonoma, California]_


#### EPISTOLA {Ed Rehmus}

Might I suggest that if _aubergine_ [II, 4] derives ultimately from Arabic _al-badhinjan_ we take a second look at the Hindi _bharta_ and consider the possibility that it could be an even more ultimate source for the Arabic word itself?  What is the exact breakdown of _al-badhainjan_?  Is it 'the indian egg'?  The Arabic for 'egg' is _bayda_ (_badha_?). I don't know the Arabic for 'plant' but even if it is something like _injan_ or _hinjan_ the entire Arabic word could still be folk etymology for a word borrowed from the Hindus, perhaps even from Sanskrit.  There are many examples of Afro-Indian correspondences (e.g., Sanskrit _simha_/Bantu _simba_: &ldquo;lion&rdquo;).  

Price's &ldquo;Noun Overuse Phenomenon Article&rdquo; [II, 4] is both welcome and telling.  Perhaps its appeal is primarily to the poet, but everyone could profit from it.  There are some who might say that it is not nouns so much which are at fault as the failure to use more evocative ones, but that is skirting this issue.  

Noun overuse is the result of several invidious modern trends.  One is the direct result of teaching adjective avoidance in our English classes.  Another is that NOT stringing nouns together takes time, that modern commodity which is so poorly rationed.  Good writing calls us to go back over what we have written, crossing out the dross, replacing it with a more acceptable style.  

Perhaps we use fewer verbs because we do less. Sitting in an office all day and before a TV set all evening is scarcely conducive to thinking in terms of dynamically active verbs.  But of course it is the use of verbs that is the allopathic antidote to excessive noun usage.  Our overemphasis on commerce and technology slides us into dreary non-creativity.  Even to use adjectives properly requires training in English usage.  It's easier to run nouns together than to worry about choosing between difficult alternatives such as, say, _continuous_ and _continual_.  

For it isn't only more verbs and adjectives that we crave.  We should sweat more over grammar.  We should explore more carefully all the other parts of speech and we should cease to neglect our idioms.  

If only we were to connect the noun strings with hyphens that would be a start.  Our writing might not suddenly become clearer, but it would draw attention to noun overuse with an end to facilitating its excision.  

Good sentences thrum to an inner rhythm.  They don't just galumph along any old way.  They describe real processes. They don't list unwieldy impedimenta over which we stumble as over a marine's obstacle course.  As Price points out, that is what makes sentences go clunk-clunk. We should remember Poe's &ldquo;Unity of effect&rdquo; which means that the writer chooses only words that contribute to his whole thought, that enhance that thought or at least that do not distract us from its purpose.  

This, however, requires discernment and word-sense, so maybe not everyone should be entitled to call himself a writer simply because he can link words to one another the way a monkey might string bunches of grotesquely unmatched beads together.  

As usual, _poeta nascitur non fit_.  Why not put all our starving poets to work rewriting the garbage turned out by the whole politics-advertising-Academia-technology-military-industry-institution-corpus?   _[Ed Rehmus, San Francisco, California] _ 


#### EPISTOLA {Dick Creed}
Perhaps we look too hard for an explanation and become
uncharitable.
 
Those who first said _I could care less_ are misguided, but their motives are pure.  Through faulty perception, they _see less_ as a negative.  Coupling it with _couldn't_, they reason, would be to utter a (shudder!) double negative.  

I would not dismiss them as H.N. Meng did: &ldquo;people who couldn't care less about what they are uttering.&rdquo;  They care, but their care is misguided.  They worship in the same pew with those who ask, &ldquo;Whom shall I say is calling?&rdquo;  

True, their error is picked up and perpetuated at the expense of correctness, but who is to say how many more errors would be made and perpetuated if they did not try to be super-correct? _[Dick Creed, Winston-Salem Journal]_


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Sinnott}

The little boy whose parents used to read him a story each night at bedtime complained about the stories saying: &ldquo;Why do you always bring that book which I don't like to be read to out of up for?&rdquo; _[Robert Sinnott, Norwell, Massachusetts]_


#### EPISTOLA {Grant Sharman}

E.E. Rehmus, in &ldquo;The Mysterious Origin of the Tarot&rdquo; [III, 1], gives &ldquo;Mandarin _tsarng_&rdquo; _as fitting the formula t-r-_.  

Apparently he does not know that the _-r-_ merely encodes the second Mandarin tone according to the ingenious system of National Romanization devised by novelist Lin Yutang and linguist Y.R. Chao.  

(The full four-tone set is: _tsang, tsarng, tsaang, tsanq_.)   _[Grant Sharman, Hollywood, California]_


#### EPISTOLA {W.M. Woods}

I am collecting citations to trace the demise of the strictly intransitive verb.  I am not ready to pin it down yet, but I think the tendency to find a transitive use for previously intransitive verbs--to make up a transitive form, if necessary--has been going on from the very beginning of English.  

Our Germanic-based language is a little uncomfortable with the strictly intransitive verb, the verb without a direct object.  German itself treats as a reflexive or insists on a direct object for verbs that in English are intransitive. In English, we can say, &ldquo;Sit down.&rdquo;  In German we must say, &ldquo;Seat yourself.&rdquo;  I could give hundreds of other examples in other &ldquo;tonguages&rdquo; to show the general aversion to verbs without a direct object, at least in our branches of languages.  

I cite the following: _Function.  The firing pin functions the primer, the primer functions the igniter, the igniter functions the booster, the booster functions the main charge_.  (From Army TM's of WW II.) _Respond, Respond an ambulance to this location_.  (The Captain on the TV program _Emergency_, speaking on his radio.)  

I solicit from your readers other examples of hitherto strictly intransitive verbs bent around into transitive shape. I need proper citations, source, author, date, etc., pinned down. _[W.M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee]_

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v3n2_1976-09)