---
title: "VOL Vol III, No 4 [February 1977]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---



## Mail Lib
_Clair Schulz, Clinton, Wisconsin_

Several years ago Johnny Cash recorded a song that
lamented the plight of a boy who suffered ridicule
because his father had chosen to name him Sue.  If I correctly
interpreted the amused expressions of those I observed
listening to the song, people regarded it as a novelty
record designed to create laughter in the same manner that
the boy's name brought giggles from his peers.  I found
little in the story to smile about for it sounded all too personal
to be taken as mere whimsy.

From the first grade through graduate school there
has been a conspiracy to change my sex.  In grade school
teachers needed three weeks each year before they stopped
lining me up with the girls.  During the first roll calls in
high school I had to wave the teachers' eyes away from
the girls' side of the room when they called my name (except
in physical education; that teacher thought the computer
had made a mistake).  My classmates, ever sensitive
to the adolescent sense of masculine identity, called me
&ldquo;Ernie,&rdquo; a name that even some of the teachers picked up.
However, in college I discovered that nicknames as well as
swords have two edges: two friends dubbed me with the
name of a famous hair coloring product.  And I cannot recall
a single professor to whom I was a stranger failing to
begin a semester by searching the room for a &ldquo;Miss
Schulz.&rdquo;

But stereotyping by name is not limited to education.
Nowhere does it stick deeper or grow with more pernicious
root than in the incorrectly labeled mail I have received
over the years.

At one time the malady was not so obvious.  While I
was in high school I occasionally received written inducements
from secretarial and beautician schools.  The offers
themselves were much easier to toss aside than my sister's
requests for me to restyle her hair or type letters for her.

Going to college seemed to expand the possibility of
my name reaching more mailing lists.  I began to attract
catalogs from dress manufacturers and cosmetic companies.
Offers to subscribe to women's magazines filled my mailbox.
Semiannually I received a large envelope that was
explicitly directed to &ldquo;today's modern coed.&rdquo;  These envelopes
contained coupons for products that could remove
my blemishes and unwanted hair, improve my figure,
lengthen my eyelashes, replace my baggy pantyhose, and
eliminate my personal hygiene problems.  I decided it was
time to take action.

I tried placing _Mr_. in front of my name in the return
address.  People apparently discarded or discounted the
envelope.  Then I began signing my entire name to letters,
but that was also futile.  _Clair Alan Schulz_ came back _Clair
Ellen Schulz_.  Once I wrote to the most persistent offenders
and simply stated, &ldquo;Please remove my name from your
mailing list.&rdquo;  The letters continued to arrive.  I wrote again
and changed the emphasis: &ldquo;Please remove my mail from
your naming list.&rdquo;  This also had no effect.  I am now considering
sending them a letter containing a fictitious change
of address for the nonexistent person they have created.

I have rejected my friends' suggestions to use initials
for I have no desire to be called _C. Alan_ or _C.A._ or even
_Al_.  Initials depersonalize; consider how sterile authors
would appear if they hid behind abridgments like E.
Waugh or J. Cary.  My name is distinctive and I wish to
retain it.  What I wish to eliminate is the liberties that
strangers take with it.

I suppose I owe it to the efforts of Gloria, Betty, Kate,
Bella, et al., that I am now receiving mail addressed to
_Ms. Clair Schulz_.  It is comforting to know that even though
my winged assailants are not certain as to whether I am
married, single, or divorced they at least seem convinced
of my sex.

Some would encourage me to file complaints of blatant
sexism against the disciples of preconceived notions, but
I have not reached the breaking point yet.  I'm waiting for
something I can turn into a cause cel&eacute;bre like the receipt
of a brochure from an abortion clinic or a catalog from
Frederick's of Hollywood.  Then I will seek an act named
sue.

### Author's Query

For a project, entitled _Materials for a History of
American Translation_, supported by preliminary grants
from the American P.E.N. Translation Committee and from
the Translation Center of the School of the Arts, Columbia
University, and to consist of

>(1)  Register of Translators &amp; Areas of Competence/Preference,
>
>(2)  Index of Translators &amp; Their Translations,
>
>(3)  Descriptive Bibliography of Critical Writing on Translation, and
>
>(4)  Translation Courses &amp; Programs in Academic Institutions,

I shall be grateful for all data and information pertaining
to (1) individual translators and their body of work-bibliographies
of work completed during their careers and
of works in progress, and (2) data on critical writing by
translators and on translation (books, articles, essays, reviews,
prefaces, introductions, treatises, commentaries,
etc.), especially in areas relatively neglected or little translated
into English.

Copies of (1) the project outline, (2) questionnaires
for each category, and (3) projected cross-indexed entries
are available on request.

*[Stefan Congrat-Butlar]*

_Translation Index, 175 West 87 Street (#24A), New York, N.Y. 10024_.

## Aunt Minnie's Chicken Talk
_William Bancroft Mellor, New York, New York_

It is reasonably certain that my Aunt Minnie never saw
a cock-fight in her life, and it can be stated with equal
certainty that she is completely unaware that about
150,000 American zealots this weekend—and every weekend
during the cocking season—will be busily engaged in
pursuing or watching this sub rosa activity at hundreds of
pits scattered about the country from coast to coast.

Yet, like most others in the United States who are
equally unaware of a subterranean sport which finds its
outlet alike in plush pits on Long Island estates and in
makeshift arenas covertly operated in the Tennessee hills,
or deep in the New Jersey pine barrens, gentle little Aunt
Minnie's speech is liberally and habitually salted with
pungent phrases that stem directly from the cockpit.

&ldquo;Well!&rdquo; she will exclaim when her favorite grandnephew
outruns his playfellows.  &ldquo;He certainly showed
_them_ a clean pair of heels!&rdquo;

Like most of the rest of us, Aunt Minnie is ignorant
not only of the origin of the phrase but of its real meaning
as well.  She would be highly indignant if she were told
that she was actually calling the boy a coward—but that is
what the phrase originally meant.

Gamecocks have fought since the days of ancient
Rome in metal spurs, which cockers call _heels_, and the
bird which did not fight, which kept its heels unbloodied
and ran away from the other rooster, was said to have
shown his opponent _a clean pair of heels_.

Although the cockpit is as remote from the lives of
most of us as a brontosaurus wallow, our language has
been richly endowed by The Sod, and few of us get
through a single day without recourse to at least one
phrase from the lexicon of cocking.

Even Aunt Minnie would recognize the origin of some
of these frequently used phrases—the word _cockpit_ itself,
commonly employed in connection with boats or airplanes;
_cocky_, meaning 'brash' or 'conceited'; _cock-sure_ 'over-confident';
_pit against_ 'to set someone against an adversary';
and _game_, 'courageous.'

_Stand the gaff_, an expression used to denote the
ability to bear up bravely in the face of adversity, is another
which most people would spot as referring to the
spurs or _gaffs_ worn by a cock during a fight, and when
we advise a belligerent friend not to _get his hackles up_,
we are dimly aware that the expression is associated with
the great feathered ruff which stands out on a gamecock's
neck when he spots another male fowl in his vicinity.

_Show the white feather_, a phrase denoting cowardice,
is another which some will recognize as stemming from the
cockpit, though few know its exact meaning.  It refers to
the white fluff found at the base of the tail in many strains
of game fowl, particularly those descended from the breeds
which found their way here 100 years ago from the North
of England—the Whitehackles.  When the tail of one of
these birds is drooped during a fight, and the cock thus
acknowledges defeat, the white fluff, normally covered by
the saddle and tail feathers, shows plainly.

Less easily recognized by Aunt Minnie and others unfamiliar
with the parlance of the pit are the origins of such
expressions as _coming up to scratch_ 'to measure up to a
standard,' and the slang expression, _in the bag_, both of
which, however, are in everyday use.  In the cockpit, the
_scratch_ is a line drawn by the referee in the dirt of the pit
floor, behind which the cock is placed at the beginning of
the fight.  If he fails to rush eagerly up to the mark to meet
his adversary, he is said not to _come up to scratch_: he is
an inferior chicken, fit only to be consigned to the stewpot.
Although not one in a thousand users of the expression
realizes it, _in the bag_ also comes from the exciting world of
cocking.  Until comparatively recent years, it was common
to transport game chickens to the scene of battle in cloth
bags rather than in the comfortable and elaborate carrying
cases now in vogue, and the roosters were not removed
until the fight was about to begin.  A cocker, confident of
the prowess of his feathered warrior, would say that victory
was _in the bag_ for him.

Similarly, _he died kicking_ does not, as might be supposed,
refer to the muscular spasms frequently suffered by
creatures which succumb to sudden and violent death; it,
too, comes from the pit.  It referred originally to the gamecock
which continued to fight, kicking out with his steelshod
heels, even as he was expiring under his enemy's
death-dealing blows.

The prize ring also owes many of its expressions to
the cockpit: the _count_ was used in the pit hundreds of
years before it became the method of determining the outcome
of boxing bouts; _referees_ and _handlers_ exercise the
same function in both sports, though cocking is the older,
and the practice of sponging a tired fighter's head was
common in the cockpit long before the lowly fist fight became
a formalized sport.

The word _cocktail_ also stems from the cocking world,
although some lexicographers would have us believe it was
first applied to a drink invented by a Colonial New England
barmaid, who stirred it with a cock's tail feather.  It is
much more likely that the word is a corruption of the
phrase _cock-ale_, a noisome brew used by handlers as far
back as the reign of Henry VIII to strengthen and stimulate
a gamecock when he was being conditioned for battle.
This &ldquo;cock-ale&rdquo; contained soft gruel, stale beer, port wine,
chopped oysters, and other assorted ingredients which were
supposed to make the rooster a raging tornado in the pit.
Tempted by the alcoholic content of the brew, in spite of
its less attractive elements, the conditioners of that day
used to sneak a nip for themselves now and then, and by
all contemporary accounts, the beverage was no less potent
than a ten-to-one vodka Martini is today.

The list of cockers' terms currently in use is large:
_running out on a fight, flying the coop, cutting a wing,
dead game_, and many others all stemmed from the same
source.  And then there is _cock of the walk_, referring to one
who is supremely confident of himself and who dominates
all of those around him.  This relates to the ancient, and
still common, practice of putting game cocks out on country
&ldquo;walks&rdquo; where there are no other roosters, in order to
harden them physically and to stimulate the development
of their egos to the point that they will not tolerate the
presence of any other male fowl.

The combative instinct is so highly developed in game
fowl that cocks, once they have attained maturity, cannot
be reared together in flocks like common chickens but must
be separated and placed either in individual pens or on
farm &ldquo;walks&rdquo; where they are allowed to roam free with a
small flock of hens, unchallenged by any male competition.
Hence, _cock of the walk_.

_He blew up a storm_, a phrase common in the West
and Middle West to describe a man who has achieved a
sudden and spectacular success in business or other activities,
also comes from the pit.  It describes the cock
which fights with a spectacular, wing-flapping style that
blows up a small hurricane of dust from the pit floor.

And the expression, _keep your pecker up_ (be of good
courage) doesn't merit an X rating, as one might suppose:
it refers to the gamecock's bill, which, when the bird is
tired and near defeat, keeps sinking lower and lower toward
the ground.

All ready for the fights now.  Aunt Minnie?

***

It's no trick to fix wicks or mix wax;
I'm sick of thick chicks in slick slacks;
For kicks, I stack sticks,
Pick flax, or pack bricks,
Sack tacks, or ax ticks, or track yaks.

_[William Alsop, North Granby, Connecticut]_

## Prurient Prudes
_Laurence Urdang, Editor,_ VERBATIM

It is curious how people who may otherwise give the
outward appearance of sanity and common sense are often
found to be totally unaware of the difference between
cause and effect.  This phenomenon can be observed among
organizations more frequently than in individuals, perhaps
because most individuals have to think for themselves,
whereas organizations seem to be dominated by the same
individuals functioning as a committee.  The result is no
different from that seen in mob psychology, where individuals
will collectively undertake the most stupid, destructive
activities that no single individual would condone,
let alone engage in.

History can point to many examples: the Inquisition;
the Salem witch-burnings; the political witch-hunts of the
1950s; the police behavior in Chicago during the Democratic
National Convention in 1968; the Kent State riots,
and so on.

Sophistication and education are not barriers to such
actions.  Those who deplored the Nazi book-burnings of
the 1930s engage in figurative book-burnings of their own:

>A... conservative women's group, the Austin
Awareness League, has picked a ... target for
criticism: the sexual slang they found in the _Random
House Dictionary_ proposed for high school use.
>
>The Anchorage, Alaska, School Board has voted to
remove 1975 editions of the _American Heritage
Dictionary_ from all elementary schools in the
municipality on the grounds that it contains definitions
of &ldquo;vulgar, slang words&rdquo; that are &ldquo;better left in the
gutter.&rdquo;  The board's action drew strong criticism from
the city assembly, which after a unanimous vote sent
off a stern letter opposing the ban.
>
>But board members complained that city fathers
should stick to fiscal matters and not interfere with
the board's &ldquo;right to set school policy ... and make
philosophical decisions.&rdquo;  The board had, incidentally,
rejected a school administration recommendation not
to ban the dictionaries entirely but merely to more
closely supervise their use by youngsters.
>
>[from _Library Journal_]

It seems ridiculous to have to point out to these &ldquo;protectors&rdquo;
that the words they object to seeing in the pages
of these dictionaries:

(1)  were not invented by lexicographers;

(2)  were undoubtedly well known to the students;

(3)  represent records of the speech and writing of
many speakers of English;

(4)  were unlikely to be found by the two groups
unless they were looking for them (hence, knew
where to look);

(5)  and wouldn't be found by students unless either:

(a)  they knew the words and knew where to
look; or

(b)  they just happened to be reading through
the dictionary one day and found them.

The last possibility strikes any reasonably intelligent person
who knows kids as extremely unlikely.  Of the other
possibilities, numbers (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5a) are
well-known _facts_.  So what has gone wrong?  Aren't we contending
with groups of prurient prudes who go around
looking up filthy words in dictionaries and then complain
when they find them?

Let us examine the only other possibility, notwithstanding
how remote it may be: A youngster sees word _X_
scrawled on a wall (probably in the schoolyard!).  He
doesn't know what it means and goes to the dictionary.
There he finds that _X_ is a word for some part of the body
or a bodily function and that it bears the label &ldquo;_Taboo_,&rdquo;
&ldquo;_Obscene_,&rdquo; &ldquo;_Vulgar_,&rdquo; or some other, similar label.  This
alerts him to the fact that _X_ is a word that shouldn't be
used in polite society.  He is then faced with the choice of
not using it or of using it.  If he doesn't use it, no one will
say anything.  If he does use it, say to a teacher, he will
rapidly learn that he should have paid attention to the
label in the dictionary.  It is very doubtful that he will be
asked where he learned the word, for no teacher could
possibly be so naive as to ask such a question: anyone who
did so would be drummed out of the corps, for, as everyone
knows, such words are learned in the &ldquo;street,&rdquo; not from
dictionaries.

Dictionaries may be used to fulfill a variety of functions,
including doorstop, paperweight, and kindling.  The
language makes the dictionary, not vice versa.  The dictionary
provides accurate information about the pronunciations,
meanings, etymologies, spellings, and, in most cases,
appropriate usage levels of the words listed in it.  It is not
infallible and can reflect only the best and most accurate
judgment of the scholars who prepared it.  They don't create
the language, they describe it, with as much detachment
as they can summon.  Moreover, because of the way
dictionaries are arranged, the user must know the word
about which he is seeking information before he can find
it.  As far as is known, no general dictionary offers a special
section where the taboo words are listed together, as a sort
of a vocabulary-building device for extending the user's
mastery of obscenities.

What the prurient prudes may be objecting to is the
notion that if the objectionable words appear in print, that
gives them a patina of acceptability or respectability.  What
arrant nonsense!  The daily newspapers and TV are filled
with reports of murder, incest, arson, torture, theft, treason,
genocide, prostitution, sexual deviation, deceit, treachery,
rape—all possible manifestations of crime and moral turpitude—yet
students are encouraged to be informed about
&ldquo;current events,&rdquo; and would find it difficult to avoid learning
about them.  Surely, a hard-to-find dirty word in a dictionary
is the last source of information that is likely to
corrupt a student.

It all boils down to one thing: style.  According to
some moralists, style in language and style in behavior are
not unrelated, and they are probably right: being polite
has its virtues.  But eliminating the word _murder_ from the
language will have no effect on those bent on murder, and
whether you call an act sexual intercourse, copulation, cohabiting,
coitus, sexual union, the reproductive process or
by any other name, it's still the same activity.  The real
question is, Which term is appropriate to the given social
context? and with all the mincing, puritanical Board members
around, their children will never be able to learn that
from the one most simple, innocuous, impersonal, accurate,
authoritative source—the dictionary.

## Clerihew

Said Lady Mary Wortley Montagu,
When rebuked for omitting an _accent aigu_,
&ldquo;I leave diacritics
To Continentals and Semities.&rdquo;

J. Bryan, III
_Richmond, Virginia_

## Ooglification in American English Slang
_Roger W. Wescott, Drew University_

The coinage _ooglification_ is my expansion of the
American slang term _oogly_, meaning either 'extremely attractive'
or 'extremely unattractive.'  The reason for the
paradoxical meaning of this adjective is that it is in reality
two adjectives.  The first of them, which has an alternative
form _ogley_, is derived from the verb _ogle_ and means 'worth
ogling' or 'deserving of being stared at.'  The second is a
deformation of the adjective _ugly_.  In each case, the stressed
vowel or vowel sequence of the standard form has been
converted to _oo_, as in _boohoo_.  This process is one which
structural linguists call replacive infixation: it is familiarly
illustrated by the substitution of _e_ for _a_ in the plural of the
noun _man_ or by the substitution of _i_ for _o_ in the past tense
of the verb _do_.

As it happens, almost any English vowel or vowel
sequence may be converted into _oo_ as one way of &ldquo;slangifying&rdquo;
the word in which it occurs.  Examples follow:

| _vowels(s)_ |          | _common form_  | _slang variant_       |
| ----------- | -------- | -------------- | --------------------- |
| short       | a        | _skedaddle_    | _skidoodle_           |
|             | e        | _cigarette_    | _cigaroot_(1)         |
|             | i        | _diddle_       | _doodle_              |
|             | o        | _goggle(s)_    | _google(s)_           |
|             | u        | _guzzle_       | _goozle_              |
| long        | a        | _Scandinavian_ | _Scandinoovian_(2)    |
|             | e        | _sleaze_(3)    | _slooze_              |
|             | i        | _divine_       | _divoon_              |
|             | o        | _oaf_          | _oof(us)_             |
| short       | oo       | _push_         | &ldquo;_poosh_&rdquo; |
|             | ow or ou | _anyhow_       | _anyhoo_              |

(1): _Cigaroot_ may also be explained as a blend of _cigarette_ with _cheroot_. 

(2): _Scandinoovian_ may also have the form _Scandihoovian_.  (Compare _hoodoo_ for _voodoo_.)

(3): _Sleaze_ is itself campus slang for &ldquo;loose woman.&rdquo;  The form _slooze_ may be influenced by _flooz(e) y_, &ldquo;prostitute.&rdquo;

Not all vowels are equally susceptible to ooglification.
Those that seem most susceptible are: short o (as in
_noodle_ for _noddle_), short u (as in _poof_ for _puff_), long o
(as in _gool_ for _goal_), and ou = ow (as in _snoot_ for _snout_).

Sometimes even &ldquo;blurred&rdquo; vowels in unaccented syllables
are subject to ooglification.  An example is _bazooms_ [^4]
for _bosom(s)_.  Here the stress has shifted from the first to
the second syllable.  A plausible explanation may be that,
when _-oo_ occurs as a slang suffix rather than an infix (as
in _superoo_ for _super_ or _smasheroo_ for _smash(er))_, the primary
stress of the word shifts from the first syllable to the
last.

The burlesquing effect of replacive -oo- may help explain
some otherwise puzzling pronunciations.  A number
of foreign languages contain proper names spelled with
-u- and pronounced with short -oo-, such as _Buddha_ or _Guggenheim_.
Because of the doubled consonants following the
stressed vowels in these names, one would expect them to
be pronounced with short vowels in English, as in _pudding_
or _snuggle_.  Instead, however, they are nearly always pronounced
with the long -oo- of _boo_ or _goo_.  It may be that
such unexpected pronunciations represent a less than subtle
derision of alien families and titles.

In any case, American slang seems to me not just
oogly but ooglific.  If any _Verbatim_ readers share my feeling
and wish to share ooglified forms with me and with
other readers, I hope they will pass them along.

[^4]: Here the _ba_- may have been reinterpreted as a slang prefix.
Compare _bazoo_, &ldquo;mouth,&rdquo; in relation to _zooed_, &ldquo;drugged.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {W. K. Viertel}

Another item for your collection of malapropisms:

It was reported on our local radio station that someone
was arrested for driving while intoxicated and for
&ldquo;driving in an erotic manner.&rdquo;

Not in the same category, but interesting:

The unit of female beauty is the milli-helen, which
is defined as the amount of beauty required to launch one
ship. [_W. K. Viertel, Canton, New York_].

## Permission, Admission, Remission and the Missionaries
_Laurence Urdang, Editor, VERBATIM_

Aristides, editorial writer for the venerable, respectable,
learned, occasionally stuffy, always erudite
AMERICAN SCHOLAR, joins the funeral procession (chief
mourners: Ted Bernstein, Edwin Newman) for the English
language: the Winter 1976/77 issue contains a rehash of
the same old drivel.  Safely ensconced in the cowardly concealment
of his pseudonymity, Aristides contributes his
comments on the language in much the same way that a
Mad Bomber makes anonymous phone calls and the classic
kidnapers leave messages composed of pasted-up letters
cut from magazines and newspapers.

His polemic against the current decline in expressiveness
in the language is prompted, in this specific instance,
by _6,000 Words_, published by G. &amp; C. Merriam Company
as a supplement to _Webster's Third_, but from the tone of
his article, it would appear that the subject has been
rankling in his intestines for many moons.  Since, for such
ax-grinders for the &ldquo;purity&rdquo; of English, the past holds more
than the present or future, his point of departure is the
respectable Mencken.  But one is given to wonder whether
Aristides would have been quite as enthusiastic had he
reached his present state of old-fashioned respectability
contemporaneously with the publication of Mencken's
works on language, in the early 1930s.

Reflecting incredible naivete for one who writes, albeit
pseudonymously, with such learndness, Aristides moans:

> I should prefer a more prescriptive dictionary, one
that notes, where called for, that an entry is a &ldquo;cant&rdquo;
word, to use the term Dr. Johnson used in his
_Dictionary_.  I prefer this not out grundyism, but
because I doubt if a language can long survive in
health under a policy of (to use another new entry
from _6,000 Words_) &ldquo;open admissions.&rdquo;  _6,000 Words_,
then, is nearly useless as a guide but excellent as a
record.  Like the period it indirectly chronicles, it is
itself a curate's egg.

Aristides' writing, too, is a curate's egg.  To pick a few
nits: (1), _grundyism_, in the sense used, should have been
capitalized; (2), a dictionary, being in alphabetical order,
can hardly be said to _chronicle_ anything, directly or indirectly;
and (3), a dictionary is, by definition—since
Aristides is so fanatic about precision—a _record_: its use as
a guide to levels of usage is a secondary function, imputed
to it largely by its users and abusers.

Dictionaries today tend to be somewhat encyclopedic,
if not by virtue of entries that, for some unknown reason,
many scholars consider nonlexical (e.g., proper names),
then because they contain information about the lexicon
that is felt to be encyclopedic (e.g., usage notes, synonym
and antonym lists, synonym discriminations, illustrations,
etc.).  Johnson's _Dictionary_ contained no illustrations.
Shouldn't modern dictionaries be criticized for having
them?

Aristides continues by speculating on the opinion of
our culture that a future historian would have if he were
to depend on _6,000 Words_ as his sole evidence.  To begin
with, the straw man being set up, like most straw men, is
utterly without substance.  Why not acknowledge that
_6,000 Words_ is merely a supplement and include the main
work, _Webster's Third_, as well?  The main work &ldquo;suffers&rdquo;
from the same descriptivism as its supplement.  If only
modern historians had available to them a &ldquo;Webster's
Third&rdquo; and a &ldquo;6,000 Words&rdquo; for Etruria and for ancient
Egypt, Babylonia, India, China, Arabia, the Americas,
Anatolia, Europe, and Palestine!  What incredible wealth
would be found in those pages!

Even with the relative paucity of documents available
to modern historians of ancient cultures, linguists have
little difficulty in sifting, given a sufficient quantity of
evidence, the level of usage, the slang, the colloquial, the
taboo, the scatalogical.  The wealth of information that
could be gleaned about those cultures by the discovery of
a large dictionary, intact, would be immeasurable.  It would
be impossible to have concocted more timely evidence than
that presented in _The New York Times_ on December 30,
1976:

> Then a colleague, Dr. Giovanni Pettinato, who is a
language expert, found what amounted to a dictionary
of the new language, called Eblait[e], that defined
each word in Sumerian, a language that is known to
archeologists.  When this key was used, the tablets
revealed that the palace was not just a minor seat of
government but the center of a huge empire....
>
>[&ldquo;Ruins Show Urban Life Rivaling Egypt's&rdquo;]

_Webster's Third_ and _6,000 Words_ are by no means
perfect examples of the art of lexicography, for they contain
inanities and infelicities that resulted, apparently, from
their editors' slavish attention to a philosophy of defining
that could have improved from re-evaluation as the work
progressed.  But that is a subject for another article.  The
only subject germane to this argument is that pertaining to
the basic principle of descriptivism, which modern lexicographers
have accepted as a tenet.  The skill with which
they execute their art is irrelevant to this discussion.

Aristides writes, in his closing remarks:

>In writing about language, in considering the state of
the lingo, there is always a tendency to assume a
prelapsarian time—a linguistic Eden where language
was once clear and crisp and fitted exactly its function.
Bad language has, of course, always been with us:
language meant to obscure, to deceive, to defraud.

These statements belie the lamentable lamentations that
precede them.  Worse than that, the second comment has
little, if anything, to do either with the first or with the rest
of the article, for, if the truth be acknowledged, &ldquo;language
meant to obscure, to deceive, to defraud&rdquo; is very rarely
&ldquo;bad&rdquo; language, even in the ambiguously implied senses of
_bad_ employed in the general tone of the article: on the
contrary, &ldquo;language meant to obscure...&rdquo; is most often
the language of Nixons, Hitlers, and others who couch their
nefarious thoughts in the very sort of eloquence Aristides
probably admires.  Moreover, the first sentence of the above
quotation belongs in _this_ article, not Aristides'.

What can be concluded from his farrago of fuzzy
logophobia?  The learned Aristides, like many lesser critics,
falls into the trap of trying to exorcise the language—admittedly
a fashionable position these days—and the lexicographers
who honestly record its fortes and foibles in their
methodical, scholarly way.  Instead, his target ought to be,
more properly, the speakers of the language and their practice
of the art of its use.  Lexicographers, for the millionth
time, don't _make_ the language, they _report_ on it.  The
shortcomings of their attitudes and abilities are one thing;
the language is another.  Aristides' attitude is reminiscent of
that of the (erstwhile) dictionary editor, long since attracted
to a career outside lexicography, who rejected
_basket case_ as an entry for _The Random House (Unabridged)
Dictionary_ on the grounds that he found the
metaphor &ldquo;disgusting.&rdquo;

It is _style_, Aristides, that you rail at, not the words of
the language themselves.  Infelicitous, ungrammatical, solecistic,
unsemantic, unskillful, and just plain bad style in
the use of language is what drives all of us to distraction.
It isn't the words but how they are chosen and put together
that constitute deathless prose (or poetry).  Some of
us are better at choosing and putting together than others.

It is entirely likely, too, that those who are responsible
for the coinages so severely criticized by Aristides have a
different view of the world from that which traditionalists
have set forth—though their view, in turn, probably differs
substantially from that of their forebears.  An example may
be seen in the use of the word _like_—not the _like_ of _Do like
I do_ but the _like_ that occurs in utterances like (_like_) _man_,
_I was_ (_like_)) _walking down the street and suddenly_ (_like_)
_there was this cat I hadn't seen for_ (_like_) _two whole years_.
In such contexts, it is possible that _like_ serves two functions,
one, a simple syntactic one to replace _er_ or _um_, the
other a semantic one to express the speaker's hesitancy at
expressing what might be construed as an incontrovertible
fact without the &ldquo;disclaimer.&rdquo;  Such insecurity, if, indeed,
that is what it is, may stem from a felt lack of education,
or, because it is so characteristic of a certain level of
speech, from a desire to be with an in-group, or merely
from habit.  Other examples of a more lexical and less complex
nature may be attributable to a different metaphoric
view of life that, just because it is unconventional and unfamiliar,
becomes subject to the darts of fuddy-duddyism.

Language, like time and the river, changes continuously,
and we can never use it in exactly the same way
twice.  As such, it can be only approximation as a &ldquo;medium
of expression,' for not only does it change, but we and our
emotions and everything we use language to describe
change.  The wonder of it is that we can understand each
other at all.  _Plus &ccedil;a change, plus c'est autre chose_.

Of one thing we can be sure: just as today's older
generation of English speakers condemns the speech of its
youth, today's youth, when they become tomorrow's older
generation, will condemn their offspring's speech.  And, for
another prediction, we shall always have those among us
who, like Aristides, have their gaze fixed firmly on the past.

_Who is Aristides?  Why did he select such a nom de
plume?  Does he aspire to identification with Aristides the
Just (d. 468 B.C.)?  Hardly, for that Aristides was a statesman.
With Aristides of Bithynia (b. 129? A.D.)?  Unlikely,
for that Aristides, a sophist, was known to be exceedingly
vain about his eloquence, comparing himself to Demosthenes.
With Aristides of Athens (fl. 150 A.D.)?  Not likely,
for that Aristides, author of an apology for the Christians,
bequeathed us nothing of value.  With Aristides of Miletus
(fl. 150 B.C.)?  Less than likely, for that Aristides wrote
fiction, and ours would have us treat his writings as fact.
With Aristides of Thebes (fl.350 B.C.)?  Probably not, for
that Aristides was a painter.  With Aristides Quintilianus
(fl. 150 A.D.)?  Scarcely, for that Aristides is the author of a
valuable treatise, &ldquo;On Music,&rdquo; and ours appears deaf to the
music of the spheres_.

### The Citation File

In an article in _The Sunday Times_ [London], October
10, 1976, appeared an article, &ldquo;Dowagers and the black
Governor,&rdquo; by Jillian Robertson.  It dealt with the appointment
of the first black (native Australian), Sir Doug
Nicholls, to a high governmental position, as Governor of
the State of South Australia.  What interested us were the
Australianisms it contained, given here with their glosses:

_abo_  an informal term for aborigine.

_aborigine_  a native of Australia before the arrival of
white settlers.

_Cumeroogunga_  district where the Yoti Yoti tribe
lives.

_fair dinkum_  the real thing.

_goanna_  any of several large monitor lizards.

_indiginee_  new name given to _aborigines_, presumably
to help avoid the stigmas associated with the older
term.

_poor fella_  condescending term for an aborigine.

_real beaut_  very satisfactory; most acceptable.

_wichetty grubs_  larvae resembling long, fat, white
caterpillars without legs, regarded as a delicacy by
the aborigines.

_Yoti Yoti_  a tribe of aborigines.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _[Crazy Talk, Stupid Talk: How We Defeat Ourselves by the Way We Talk—and What To Do About It](https://www.abebooks.com/9780440015543/Crazy-Talk-Stupid-Defeat-Way-0440015545/plp)_
Neil Postman, (Delacorte Press, 1976), xviii + 269 pp.

It is uncertain whether anything is to be gained in devoting
space to a review of this book, but a couple of manhours
have been spent reading it and thinking about it, so
it might merit a few man-minutes to writing the review
and some more to reading it.

It may be assumed that the title is intended to shock,
and it does.  The shock wears off with each repetition of
each phrase in the text, and the reader is left with the feeling
that this is a work that the author, who has made many
serious and worthwhile contributions to the study of language,
dictated into a portable tape recorder while running
from one classroom to another.  The style is breathless,
headlong.  If it were possible to determine such a condition
from a written document, one might venture to assume
that the author had written it while under the influence of
a heavy dose of &ldquo;speed.&rdquo;

The main theme seems to be the importance of recognizing
and maintaining &ldquo;semantic environment.&rdquo;  This is
nothing more than &ldquo;appropriateness&rdquo;: in other words, when
you are at the embassy, murmuring &ldquo;Good evening, Mr.
Ambassador&rdquo; when you move down the receiving line, you
don't follow the greeting, in the same tone of voice and
with a smile on your face, with &ldquo;Your fly is open&rdquo; or &ldquo;My
grandfather was hanged for horsestealing.&rdquo;  Either (or both)
may be true, but both are inappropriate to the occasion.
With myriad examples interspersed with mediocre jokes
and occasional inanities, it takes the very articulate author
xviii + 91 pp. to get the point across.

Postman sees nothing wrong with mixed metaphors or
with clich&eacute;s; he is seeking a higher good: proper semantic
environment.  Inappropriate metaphors, however, are another
matter:&ldquo;... a metaphor whose configuration nowhere
coincides with the realities of any actual situation
in which he finds himself.  The technical name for such a
process is paranoia.&rdquo;  Is that the linguist's view of the true
nature of paranoia?  a misapplication of a rhetorical device?
Such a warped simplification may come as a surprise to
linguists and psychiatrists alike.

The author seems to suffer from a modern ailment
common among those who have discovered that a glib approach
will gain listeners and readers: as long as you set
forth your ideas with authority, it matters little what you
say, for people will believe you, and you will acquire disciples
and acolytes.

For this reason, though not this reason alone, _Crazy
Talk_ is a dangerous book.  As the reader progresses (if
&ldquo;progress&rdquo; is not misapplied here—the feeling is more like
that of a nightmarish plunge over a cliff), he is ineluctably
drawn to the conclusion that the crazy, stupid talk of the
title isn't what the author is writing _about_ but what he is
_writing_.  Examples of silliness abound: &ldquo; 'I love you' is a
very important sentence and is probably spoken a thousand
times everyday in California alone&rdquo; (p. 155); &ldquo;...what
about the _Miss in Miss Jones_ (what exactly is Jones missing?)&rdquo;
(p. 65); &ldquo;If fanaticism is falling in love with an
irrefutable answer, then a neurosis is falling in love with
an unanswerable question&rdquo; (p. 145).  &ldquo;And so we have
here a sort of paradox.  On the one hand, we must naturally
assume that others are using words to mean what we
would, and that such meanings have some stability.  But
on the other hand, we must remember that this is only an
assumption, that at any given moment a coin of the realm
may not be worth quite what we imagined.  And, naturally,
our purposes will be short-changed.&rdquo;

This is linguistic philosophy couched in the language
of the stand-up comedian.  The writing style is a good example
of the kind of inappropriateness scored by the
author.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: _[On Being Blue](https://www.amazon.com/Being-Blue-Philosophical-Inquiry-Paperback/dp/1590177185)_ 
William Gass, (David R. Godline, 1976), 91 pp.

I often wonder why publishers and editors, with only
rare exceptions, are usually ignored.  The rare exceptions
are Alfred Knopf, Bennett Cerf, and Maxwell Perkins.  It
is as often the publishers and editors who are responsible
for good books being made available as it is the authors
who wrote them.  It takes some talent and not much money
to design and manufacture a book artistically, one that provides
as much aesthetic pleasure visually and tactilely as it
does in its reading.

_On Being Blue_ is such a rare combination, though, at
$8.95 for a 91 -page book, one must be prepared to back
up his sybaritism with cold, hard cash.  Without further
ado, let me give the publisher his proper kudos for a book
featly done.

_On Being Blue_, subtitled _A Philosophical Inquiry_,
could, without distortion, have been subtitled &ldquo;A Philological
Inquiry&rdquo; (in the etymological sense of _philological_);
it is a sensitive aesthetic experience that, had it been
typeset with ragged right lines, would have been construed
as free verse.  It is a paean, an encomium to the
color blue in its infinite shadings, spectral and moral,
emollient and painful, serious and facetious.  As the reader
of this review must surmise, _On Being Blue_ has an inspiring,
almost hypnotic effect.

>The blue lucy is a healing plant.  Blue John is skim
milk.  Blue backs are Confederate bills.  Blue bellies
are Yankee boys....
>
>Children collect nouns, bugs, bottlecaps, seashells,
verbs: What's that?  What's it doing now?  Who's this?
and with the greed that rushes through them like rain
down gulleys, they immediately grasp the prepositions
of belonging and the pronouns of possession.  But how
often do they ask how cold it is, what color, how loud,
rare, warm, responsive, kind, how soft, how wet, how
noxious, loving, indiscreet, how sour?

The book abounds in four-letter words (besides _blue_).
It is a sensuous, erotic book that seems to say &ldquo;Color me
blue.&rdquo;  It ranges from Democritus to Demosthenes to Henri
Bergson to Henry Miller to Henry James.

>...while there is time and you are able, because
when blue has left the edges of its objects as if the
world were bleached of it, when the wide blue eye
has shut down for the season, when there's nothing
left but language....

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [_A Civil Tongue_](https://www.amazon.com/Civil-Tongue-Edwin-Newman/dp/0672522675) 
Edwin Newman, (Bobbs-Merrill, 1976), 207 pp.

Mr. Newman's new book is presented by the publisher
as &ldquo;high comedy in a serious cause.&rdquo;  The cause—an effort
to warn against &ldquo;a smog of jargon&rdquo; that is settling on our
land—is indeed a serious one, as those of us who care about
such things will without doubt agree.  Comedy, on the
other hand, is more subjective.  Often there are some who
will laugh at the joke itself, while others may find the
manner of its delivery amusing.

Wisely, Mr. Newman undertakes to formulate at the
very beginning a summary of the point he is bent on making.
&ldquo;A civil tongue,&rdquo; he writes, &ldquo;means to me a language
that is not bogged down in jargon, not puffed up with false
dignity, not studded with trick phrases that have lost their
meaning.  It is not falsely exciting, it is not patronizing,
does not conceal the smallness and triteness of ideas by
clothing them in language ever more grandiose, does not
seek out increasingly complicated constructions, does not
weigh us down with the gelatinous verbiage of Washington
and the social sciences.  It treats errors in spelling and
usage with a decent tolerance but does not take them
lightly.&rdquo;

There you have it in a nutshell.  To speak with a civil
tongue means to say what you mean, openly, clearly and
with due regard for the beauty and the integrity of the
language.

Why are so few of us able to do that?

The author, who ruefully refers to criticisms of numerous
departures from perfection in the use of the language
in his earlier work, _Strictly Speaking_, has clearly been
more careful this time around.  One wishes, however, that
he had not followed the above definition of purpose with
a comment about &ldquo;a stream of sound that disk jockeys produce,&rdquo;
not because it might be difficult for all disk jockeys
to produce a single stream of sound but rather because
the statement will lead inevitably to Congressional _bloks,
ad hok_ meetings and music that is out of _synk_.  These
things are highly contagious, as Mr. Newman is the first
to point out.

_A Civil Tongue_, rather than adding new types of
smog to the basic pollutants studied in _Strictly Speaking_,
expands the list of ingredients in the old one.  We are now
regaled with the overuse of the word &ldquo;major&rdquo; in the _New
York Times_ (_major tests, major enemy categories, major
social implications, major states, major rail lines ad infinitum_)
as well as 650 _major_ items in a single energy
message from Gerald Ford.  And we find it difficult not to
laugh at _compositionwise, environmentalwise, economywise,
energywise, inferiorize, rigidize, overstrategize_ and
_parameterize_, among other epidemics.

What appears to be involved here is a major job of
collectionizing for the purpose of shocking us publication-wise
into remedial action.  And it must be admitted that
the net result, funny or not, does, at the very least, make
us aware that English is rapidly becoming an endangered
species.

In terms of cause and comedy, there is reason to feel
that Mr. Newman on occasion sacrifices the former for the
latter.  It is one thing to attack the media, the bureaucracy,
the professions, etc., for their mindless proliferation of
dumbspeak.  The guilty ones in these realms do, or at least
should, know better if only for the reason that their callings
demand it.  But when he devotes a whole chapter to the
grammatical errors, malapropisms and vocabulary deficiencies
of sports figures, we must believe he is holding
them up to ridicule for our amusement.  This can border
on the cruel, so we shall limit ourselves here to a single
example for illustrative purpose: &ldquo;...said the (fight) manager:
'It's problemental.' &rdquo;  Criticism in the chapter on
Howard Cosell and the like is another matter.

And speaking of the media, Mr. Newman declares at
one point: &ldquo;My vendetta against the term media arises not
only for the reasons already given but because it implies a
go-between, one who takes orders and carries messages,
one who is employed by others for their purposes.&rdquo;  This
declaration almost qualifies the utterer for inclusion in the
sports chapter, not only, to use Mr. Newman's phrase, &ldquo;because
the word _media_ is plural and could hardly imply _a_
go-between,&rdquo; but because when one is employed by others
it would hardly be for other than their own purposes.

Because _A Civil Tongue_ will be read by many who
without it might be unaware of the peril to which the
English language is being exposed, the book provides a
valuable addition to the current lists.  And it cannot be
denied that it is easy to read and to enjoy.

_[Martin Panzer, New York, New York]_

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [_The Mammoth Book of Word Games_](https://www.abebooks.com/9780805502763/Mammoth-book-word-games-Manchester-0805502769/plp) 
Richard B. Manchester, (Hart Publishing Company, 1976).

Walter Raleigh, not the one who spread his cloak in
the mud for Queen Elizabeth to step on, but the one who
didn't, once remarked:

>I wish I loved the Human Race;
>
>I wish I loved its silly face;
>
>I wish I liked the way it walks;
>
>I wish I liked the way it talks;
>
>And when I'm introduced to one
>
>I wish I thought What Jolly Fun.

I feel the same way about most word games.  The real
reason, of course, is that I am no good at them; I can't
show off by doing a London _Times_ crossword puzzle in
four minutes flat.  But just in case you are one who _does_
like word games, you should have Richard B. Manchester's
_The Mammoth Book of Word Games_ in your library, or at
least in that of your children.  The whole family will find it
Jolly Fun (there are answers in back, too).  Mr. Manchester
has accumulated enough challenges to keep you sharpening
your pencil for hours; the front cover does not exaggerate
when it notifies you that the 510 lubberly pages
(8&frac12;" &times; 11") provide &ldquo;OVER A FULL YEAR'S ENTERTAINMENT.&rdquo;

The first entry is perhaps a bit simpler than most, but
it gives you the idea.  You are asked to find equivalents
containing the word &ldquo;light&rdquo; for a list of twenty-five expressions.
&ldquo;_A tower having warning beacon for ships at
sea_,&rdquo; for instance, is a ... Ah!  You are already catching
on.  At another point, you are asked to reduce big words to
little maxims: &ldquo;Aberration is the hallmark of _homo sapiens_
while longanimous placability and condonation are the indicia
of a supramundane omniscience&rdquo; turns into ... but
there!  I won't give Mr. Manchester away.  There are Word
Mazes, consisting of vocabulary puzzles that I am reluctant
to penetrate for fear of running into a Minotaur somewhere
inside.  There are Threezies, where you list all the words
you can think of containing certain three-letter sequences.
(Mr. Manchester says that at least nine words contain the
sequence OTO.  I could not get beyond _motor_.)  There are
enough cryptograms to fill a crypt.  (I plan to create an insoluble
cryptogram some day by substituting two other
letters for what I contend to be the shortest verse in English-well,
half in English.  The wife of the British Ambassador
is hostess to the wife of the Spanish Ambassador,
and their conversation runs as follows:

>&ldquo;T?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;C.&rdquo;

It should make a great cryptogram, but I haven't got
around to it yet, and neither, I gather, has Mr. Manchester.

Cryptograms lead on to Jumbles-emigrants, one assumes,
from the lands where the Jumblies live; these are
anagrams on various themes.  There follow Quizzes, which
test background knowledge (I didn't dare try them); Picture
Quizzes, where you are wrong if you put _porcupine_
under the picture of an anteater; Crossword Puzzles,
clearly not edited by Will Weng; Across-tics (the pun is
self-explanatory); Blankies, which seem to be Jumbles
sitting around the fire telling stories; and Initialettes, which
in an earlier day were called Categories or Guggenheims.
There is more besides.

Word games are an excellent introduction to the delights
of English.  If you have offspring still on the morning
side of pubescence, I hope they will have an opportunity to
savor this book before intenser drives supervene.  Indeed,
whatever your own level of verbal sophistication, you cannot
lose by thumbing through these word games; for,

>You may be introduced to one
>
>That makes you think What Jolly Fun.

_[Willard R. Espy, Author, An Almanac of Words at Play]_

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [_A Dictionary of American Idioms_](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/dictionary-of-american-idioms_maxine-tull-boatner/1610973/item/291666/?gclid=Cj0KCQjwpcOTBhCZARIsAEAYLuVDdPuDwjZVKDi-2mWpwW7PSHO1-RLie6JC3oFHZQiMXGPbDbQfi0EaAiVVEALw_wcB#idiq=291666&edition=1259678) 
Maxine Tull Boatner and John Edward Gates, revised edition ed. by Adam Makkai, (Barron's Educational Series), xiii + 392 pp.

This book was first published in 1966 under the title
_A Dictionary of Idioms for the Deaf_.  The present edition
has been provided with a preface by Professor Makkai,
who has also &ldquo;added more than 250 modern idiomatic
phrases to the collection.&rdquo;  It is difficult to guess exactly
what the publishers had in mind when they chose for the
cover a crude cartoon drawing of a bald eagle dressed in
checked cap and trousers.  The allusion is, one supposes,
to the American-ness of the idioms, although most of the
phrases in the book are probably not exclusively American,
either in use or by origin.  The cover does serve to
tell the reader something about the book, however.  Balloons
issuing from the eagle's beak claim that this dictionary
contains over 4000 common idiomatic expressions,
including slang, proverbs, and clich&eacute;s, and that everything
is completely up-to-date, excellent for foreign speakers, and
valuable to students of American English.  The last two
claims are ambitious.  If one has set out to produce a dictionary
for foreign learners and serious students of the
language, one has assumed responsibilities that are not
lightly discharged, especially if the subject is such an uneasy
and ill-defined one as idioms.  A really useful dictionary
for foreign learners of English would certainly require
a much more scrupulous and systematic editorial
effort than has gone into this rather casual compilation.

Professor Makkai's preface makes some basic points
about idioms.  &ldquo;An idiom ... is the assigning of a new
meaning to a group of words which already have their own
meaning.&rdquo;  Some examples are _to blow one's stack, to fly
off the handle, what's more, of course, to get up, like a
breeze, time off, this is it_.  He distinguishes two types of
idiom.  The _lexemic idiom_, like _hammer and tongs_ ('violently')
can easily be identified with one of the familiar
parts of speech (_hammer and tongs_= adverb).  Longer
idioms, like _to be caught between the devil and the deep
blue sea_, &ldquo;do not readily correlate with a given grammatical
part of speech&rdquo;; these he terms _phraseological idioms_.
The main characteristic of both types (and, obviously, of
proverbs and sayings, which constitute a third type) is
their grammatical rigidity.  &ldquo;Their form is set and only a
limited number of them can be said or written in any
other way without destroying the meaning of the idiom.&rdquo;
That is, idioms do not permit certain simple operations—
the pluralization of nouns, the inflection of verbs, the insertion
of an adverb before a verb, etc.—which can be
carried out on ordinary literal phrases.

Thus, transitive verbs in idiomatic expressions frequently
will not passivize (_the cowboy kicked the bucket_,
but not *_the bucket was kicked by the cowboy_).  In this
case, as with many phraseological idioms, the passive transformation
destroys the idiom by literlizing it (_the bucket
was struck by the cowboy's boot_).  One wishes the Professor
Makkai had had more space in the preface to devote
to this feature of grammatical defectiveness and the invariance
and variability of idioms, because these matters
are not adequately covered in the individual dictionary
entries.

The body of the dictionary is well laid out, with useful
run-on entries (e.g., _fence-sitter_ under _sit on the fence_),
&ldquo;compare&rdquo; and &ldquo;contrast&rdquo; references that draw attention
to related expressions (_get lost_, compare _drop dead; give
up_, contrast _hold on to_), register labels for _slang, informal,
formal_, and _literary_, and usage notes that give information
about the context in which the idiom is used (as a
command, to show surprise, to express disapproval, etc.).
In the usage-note category-certainly the most helpful feature
for foreign students of English—the editors have seen
fit to label some phrases &ldquo;clich&eacute;s,&rdquo; some &ldquo;trite phrases,&rdquo;
and some &ldquo;hackneyed phrases.&rdquo;  One wonders why _get
down to brass tacks, one foot in the grave, smell a rat, slip
through one's fingers_, and _shot in the arm_ are clich&eacute;s,
while _sleep a wink_ is trite and _pay the piper_ hackneyed.
One wonders also whether any of the three labels, even if
they had been clearly differentiated, do much more than
express a subjective judgement.  As someone has said, &ldquo;A
clich&eacute; is an idiom which I do not like.&rdquo;  How much more
useful is the kind of usage note one finds at _on end_-&ldquo;Used
with plural nouns of time.&rdquo;  It is typical of the casual editorial
approach that this note is a half-truth—one cannot
say &ldquo;I've been waiting for you for seconds on end.&rdquo;  Still, it
is this attempt to supply information about context and use
that is essential when one is defining idioms.  A major
shortcoming of this dictionary is its failure to do so consistently
and in sufficient detail.

An alarming amount of space in the dictionary has
been given to paraphrases of the illustrative sentences.  The
sentences themselves are appropriately colloquial and simple
embodiments of the preceding definitions.  The paraphrases
are at best needlessly repetitive and too often approach
absurdity.  For example, at the entry _on one's chest_,
with this peculiar second-person definition—

>Hidden in your thoughts or feelings and bothering
you; making you feel worried or upset; that is
something you want to talk to someone about...

the illustrative sentence and paraphrase read:

>&ldquo;Well, Dave,&rdquo; said the coach, &ldquo;You look sad-what's on your chest?&rdquo;
>
>(The coach asked Dave what was making him disturbed.  Did he want to talk it over?)

The paraphrase is pointless, but the illustration is worse
since its probable effect is to conjure up an image of the
athletic Dave's hairy chest.  (This is, of course, an elementary
lexicographical blunder-to put a metaphorical
phrase in a literalizing context.  It is a pastime of lexicographers
to invent such monsters, e.g. _When she went on
vacation she packed absolutely everything.  She even took
a megaphone, for crying out loud!_)

The illustrative sentences and paraphrases develop a
different sort of nonsense when they occur, as they unfailingly
do, after definitions of straightforward terms or names
for tangible material things.  For example:

>_credit card...Mr. Smith used his credit card to buy gasoline_.
>
>(Mr. Smith bought gasoline and showed the man a card with his name.)
>
>_panel truck...The flowers were delivered in a panel truck._
>
>(The flowers were brought in a closed truck.)
>
>_parish house...The ladies served a spaghetti supper in the parish house._
>
>(The ladies had a spaghetti supper in the church social building.)

One doubts that these entries-and there are an enormous
number of the same type-really qualify as idioms according
to Professor Makkai's definition (they are simply names
for particular kinds of cards, trucks, and houses); perhaps
that is why these illustrations and paraphrases seem almost
comically futile.

These few objections to details are related to much
more serious questions about the character and purpose of
this book.  One is not told how this collection of idioms
was assembled.  Were the entries selected on the basis of a
citation-reading program?  What sources were used?  Were
the idioms selected according to some judgement of frequency?
Were the invented illustrative sentences based on
citations?  The book was originally compiled for the deaf
(and for that original purpose perhaps the illustrative sentences
and paraphrases had a real pedagogical value); why
was it not rethought and restructured for a more general
readership-or at least for a specific readership-before it
was published in its present form?  One doesn't have the
answers to these questions, but it is hard to avoid the
suspicion that they would help to explain why there is so
little evidence of editorial responsibility in this dictionary.

_[Thomas Hill Long, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire]_

## The Seating of Zotz
_Walter C. Kidney, Essex, Connecticut._

Read widely and you end up with a magnificent but
not totally useful vocabulary.  For my part, I find no application
for such words as:

_gumphion:_ death's-head banner displayed at funerals;

_ergastulum:_ house of correction for Roman slaves;

_dob-dob:_ member of the hoodlum element in a
lamasery;

_verbunkos:_ dance performed to persuade people to
enlist in the Hungarian army.

What a waste.  And I regret any chance to drop into my
conversation the months of the Maya year, just for their
Dunsanian sound.  The Maya had 18 twenty-day months,
plus five or six official days of bad luck.  The year began
with _Pop_, which fell between the _Nameless Days_ and _Uo_.
_Uo_ fell between _Pop_ and _Zip_, and so on.  Even more Dunsanian,
suggesting a play for grades 6 to 8, was _The Seating
of Zotz_, the correct name for what otherwise would
have been _20 Zip_.

Some 15 years ago I worked on a job ideal for collecting
such glittering trash, the _Random House Dictionary_
project.  Much of my time was spent in technology, and
my working day was a shower bath of _bruzzes, brobs,
froofs, snaths, downrights, chime hoops, larry cars, equation
kidneys, cullin stones, crizzle glazes, glost fires, muffle
furnaces, blue billy, sugar of lead, butter of arsenic_, and
_Victoria Green Mother Liquor_.  The sea yielded _futtock
shrouds, euphroes, baggywrinkles_, and _paravane skegs_.  Lists
of standard paint colors included _Cream Dream, Pewke_, and
_U.S. Army Pansy_.  My Japanese sword mounts won
satirical attention from John Ciardi.  Heraldry was mine too,
a whole private language.  I learned not to use _or_ 'gold' in
definition examples because my colleagues would always
fire them back with penciled &ldquo;Or what?&rdquo; 's.  But I did enter
the various ways of describing a disk.  Depending on the
tincture, a disk is a _bezant, plate, torteau, hurt, gulp, guze,
ogress, pellet, gunstone_, or _fountain_.  Crosses can be-among
other things-_crosslet, potent, avellan, moline, paty,
formy, fitchy_ or _paty or formy fitchy at the foot_.  An _escutcheon
sem&eacute; of cross-crosslets is crusily_, and if the cross-crosslets
are _fitchy_ it is _crusily fitchy_.  An escutheon is
sometimes divided by _dancetty, urdy, undy, embattled_, or
_embattled grady_ lines, and can be _barry, bendy, paly,
barry-bendy, paly-bendy, paly-wavy, lozengy, chequy_, etc.
The sun is in its _splendor_, the moon is in her _complement_
or _detriment_, the pelican is in her _piety_, the lion is _gardant
passant_ and _ducally gorged_, and royalty is represented by
_opinci, yales_, and _enfields_, one of which has _swivel-mounted
horns_.  How the Scottish dragon with flames issuing from
_both_ ends is blazoned I never did discover.

Meanwhile a friend in biology was encountering the
_sarcastic fringehead_, the _confused flour beetle_, and the
_free-living flatworm_.

Some of these things did get into the dictionary, but
in most cases there was nothing to do but pause, admire,
and dismiss them gently.

## Traveler's Credo
_Mary E. Gross, St. Petersburg, Florida._

I believe in Bolivia  
and in Lago Titicaca  
in Oraru  
in Potusi  
and also in Chuquisaca.  

Tombouctu I can take on trust  
Saskatchewan I rely on  
prize Ararat  
laud Zanzibar  
sing praise to ancient Isfahan.  

Now you, my bold Bolivian  
may name your fancy loud and clear  
Sopchoppy town  
fair Chincoteague  
Oshkosh Dime Box or Rensselaer.  

## Dash It All
_Ethel Grodzins Romm, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich_

For centuries we've labored over hyphenation by historic
principles, as in any traditional dic.tion.ar.y.
We're now coping with the new hyphenation by breathing
principles, as in a dic.tio.na.ry improved by modern linguists.
Their work, however, flowers in bound volumes
only.  On the pages of the smaller dailies across the land
we are enjoying hyphenation by computer according to
_Hatai!_ principles.  A recent morning offered _dau-ghter_ in
our local daily.

My hometown newspaper in Middletown, N.Y., was
the first daily in the world to be printed cold-type on offset
presses.  That printing innovation of 1956, since adopted
by more than half of America's papers, has led to the
widespread use of computers for scanning typewritten copy
and setting type.  Computer typesetting is never monitored
by live editors.  Without them, hyphenation may return to
the pre-linotyping, anything-goes, days of yore.

When the computer was an infant, it could do only
simple things, such as separate the _-ly_ in adverbs: _mad-ly,
glad-ly_.  Naturally it also wrote _butterf-ly_, but that was understandable
and altogether forgivable; why burden it
with an instruction required only rarely: &ldquo;Divide at _ly_ except
-_fly&rdquo;?_

Having passed kindergarten, the computer secretly
promoted itself to junior high.  The first clue was the
morning it wrote _dau-ghter_, although it had been taught
to divide -_er_, like -_ly_.  The new choice was the subject of
much breakfast discussion.  We reasoned that _daughter_ is
a long word to shoeborn into the end of a narrow newspaper
column, that at -_er_ the word still wouldn't fit, and
the computer must have used-in doing its best to fill the
line-what appeared to be an arcane magnetic principle not
immediately apparent.  We felt we might be watching the
birth of inanimate intelligence.

I must report that the _Times Herald Record_ computer
has grown smarter.  It has dispensed with most historic
as well as inhalation principles and does largely what
it knows best: it counts; then very matter of factly it chops
off the word, _Hatai!_  Here are three examples:

>[Ann Landers] Dear Glad: So am I.  I hope somebody out there listens.

>Witnesses said the violence was sparked off when a
group of blacks tried to set fire to a Zulu boardingouse
and the tribesmen retaliated.

>Nixon's intended gifts of his San Clemente home could
give him a big tax deduction for six years.  Sort of a &ldquo;squeezing
citizens&rdquo; home.

The computer counts so well that very few words are
now hyphenated in the paper, a great saving of space.
And the new syllabication has enlivened the news, sometimes
turning it into far-out poetry.

But for certain readers, it's not good news.  Pulling
apart words into their syllables may be the most efficient
way for poor readers to figure out printed matter.  There
are hordes of marginal readers today who, for many other
reasons, have already given up reading newspapers.  Dashing
the language any which way is, for them, no joke.

***

In a front-page article in _The Wall Street Journal_
[Nov, 9, 1976] about &ldquo;Winners &amp; Sinners,&rdquo; the _N.Y. Times_
house organ dealing with grammatical and stylistic goodies
and baddies in _The Times_, the information appears that
_The Philadelphia Bulletin_ has a similar bulletin.  To quote
the _WSJ_: &ldquo; 'The big problem is finding the time to sustain
it,' says Sam Boyle, the Bulletin's assistant managing editor
responsible for Second Guessing [the title of the house organ].
'It may not look like it's hard to put out, but believe
me, it is.' &rdquo;

We'll take you at your word, Sam.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [_A Discursive Dictionary of Health Care_](http://scm.oas.org/References/Ref_doc_web_page/A_Discursive_Dictionary_of_Health_Care.pdf)
U.S. Government Printing Office, (Washington, 1976), 182 pp.

This is a truly staggering book, which-as the title
page proudly announces—was &ldquo;Prepared by the Staff/for
the use of the/Subcommittee on Health and the Environment/of
the/Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce/U.S.
House of Representatives.&rdquo;  Truly.  And the
chairman of the CIFC is Harley O. Staggers of West Virginia.

The dictionary is a serious work designed to help
untangle the jargon and technical terms associated with
the national health program and national health insurance,
currently still under debate.  It is an immediate joy to see
that the compilers have a sense of humor in what otherwise
would be a dry work indeed.  One first notices this
in the Contents list, for page 169, &ldquo;Abbreviations and
acronyms (alphabet soup expanded).&rdquo;  In an otherwise
straightforward Introduction, we are disarmed momentarily
by being told that,

>The definitions which have been prepared are not
in any sense official or final.  They are not necessarily
the definitions which the Committee will give to
these terms when they are used in the actual
writing of national health insurance law.  Nor is
any part of the dictionary completely exhaustive:
available time and energy have necessarily
limited the effort.

For this information we have to thank Paul G. Rogers,
the chairman of the Subcommitee on Health and the
Environment.

In spite of the fact that presumably none of the members
of the &ldquo;professional staff&rdquo; chosen to prepare this dictionary
have had prior experience in lexicography, they
have done an admirable job in their attempts to give expansive
information on the fleeting meanings of terms
used by the medical, legal and insurance professions—as
they relate to the congressional debates on national health
insurance.  Approximately one thousand headwords and
over one hundred abbreviations and acronyms are defined.
(There is some amusing padding, such as the entry _dictionary_—an
attributed quote from Ambrose Bierce's _The
Devil's Dictionary:_ &ldquo;a malevolent literary device for cramping
the growth of language.  This dictionary, however, is
a most useful work.&rdquo;)  The text is enhanced by numerous
anatomical illustrations taken from woodcuts originally
prepared for two 16th-century books by Andreas Vesalius
(_De Humani Corporis Fabrica_ and an _Epitome_, both published
in 1543).

For the most part, the definitions tend to reflect the
jargon and ostensible confusion of the primary sources of
the headwords themselves.  (H.W. Fowler and Sir Ernest
Gowers, where are you now that they really need you!)
For example, the definition of _prior determination_ is &ldquo;similar
to prior authorization but less restrictive in that payment
will be made if prior authorization is not sought, provided
that it would have approved the service as needed.&rdquo;
Within the same letter, we discovered that _ping-ponging_
is &ldquo;the practice of passing a patient from one physician to
another in a health program for unnecessary cursory examinations
so that the program can charge the patient's
third-party for a physician visit to each physician.  The
practice and term originated and is most common in
_Medicaid mills_.&rdquo;  Some entries are invaluable cross-references:
&ldquo;_poor_ See _poverty_.&rdquo;

Some &ldquo;naughties&rdquo; are revealed, as we learn from the
entry _kiting:_ &ldquo;increasing the quantity of a drug ordered
by a prescription.  Either the patient or pharmacist may
kite the quantity of the original prescription, for example,
by adding zeros to the number shown on a prescription.
When done by a pharmacist, he then provides the patient
with the quantity originally prescribed but bills a third
party, such as Medicaid, for the larger quantity.&rdquo;

Just one more.  The entry _elephant policy_ refers us
quickly to _trolley car policy:_ &ldquo;a facetious name for an insurance
policy which is so hard to collect benefits upon
that it is as though it provided benefits only for injuries
resulting from being hit by a trolley car.  Typically used by
mail order insurance.&rdquo;

If this dictionary had not already been written it
would be virtually impossible to invent it.  Nevertheless,
sorting out jargon is a respectable occupation.  In all fairness,
quite a few entries are lucid and valuable to a better
understanding of inevitable bureaucratic opacities.  But one
cannot escape the lingering impression that this is a classical
(and possibly unique) example of jargon breeding
jargon.  Thus the introductory disclaimer, already quoted,
perhaps implies a nervous lack of faith and justification in
what has been accomplished.

The compilers certainly must be given generous credit
for telling it like it is.  But what it is is frightening.

_Edward R. Brace, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire_

## Little Error Spells Big Mistake

1\.  &ldquo;The Crime of the Ancient Mariner&rdquo; (Coleridge)....

2\.  &ldquo;Wife of Samuel Johnson&rdquo; (Boswell)....

3\.  &ldquo;The Glisteners&rdquo; (De la Mare)....

4\.  &ldquo;The Pickwick Capers (Dickens)....

5\.  &ldquo;With Rue My Art Is Laden&rdquo; (Housman)....

6\.  &ldquo;The Old Lady Shows Her Metals&rdquo; (Barrie)....

7\.  &ldquo;I Wandered Lovely As a Cloud&rdquo; (Wordsworth)....

8\.  &ldquo;Home Thoughts from a Broad&rdquo; (Browning)....

9\.  &ldquo;In the Time of the Braking of Nations&rdquo; (Hardy)....

10\.   &ldquo;When I Was One-Ann, Twenty&rdquo; (Housman)....

11\.   &ldquo;Richard Gory&rdquo; (Robinson)....

12\.   &ldquo;A Noiseless Patient Spied Her&rdquo; (Whitman)....

13\.   &ldquo;Death of the Tired Man&rdquo; (Frost)....

14\.   &ldquo;Abraham Lincoln Balks at Midnight&rdquo; (Lindsay)....

15\.   &ldquo;I Have a Rendzvous with Beth&rdquo; (Seeger)....

16\.   &ldquo;God's Whirled&rdquo; (Millay)....

17\.   &ldquo;A Belle for Adano&rdquo; (Hersey)....

18\.   &ldquo;A Table for Critics&rdquo; (Lowell)....

19\.  &ldquo;Fanny and Zooey&rdquo; (Salinger)....

20\.  &ldquo;Critique of Pure Treason&rdquo; (Kant)....

A.S. Flaumenhaft

_Lawrence, New York_

(Answers are on page 420.)


#### EPISTOLA {Alan M. Perlman, Wayne State University}

Below are some examples of one of our more recent
(i.e., unlisted in Wentworth and Flexner's _Dictionary of
American Slang_) derivational morphemes in action (all are
from the _Detroit Free Press_):

>Maybe Her Mom's a Clothesaholic [1/25/76, title of
Ann Lander's column]
>
>Mom-to-Be's Candyholic [2/12/76]
>
>So who cares if the majority of the telephone calls we
indulge in are non-essential and time-wasters?...
>
>&ldquo;It's someone to talk to, isn't it?&rdquo; I was once told by
another phonoholic.  [columnist Bob Talbert, 3/11/76]
>
>Anyone, but especially impulse buyers, can become a
credit-cardaholic.  [7/11/76]
>
>Fasting also may be the answer for foodaholics who
find one forkful of food too much, a thousand not
enough.  [medical columnist Lindsay Curtis, M.D., 7/
15/76]

Should the process become truly productive, I propose
the label _aholicism_, 'The irresistible impulse to use the suffix
_(a)holic_ to describe irresistible impulses.' [*Alan M. Perlman, Wayne State University*].


#### EPISTOLA {Harry Cimring}

The &ldquo;person&rdquo; versus &ldquo;man&rdquo; hysteria continues apace.

Ellen Cooperman of Babylon, Long Island, plans to
carry her campaign to change her name to Ellen Cooper-person
all the way to the Supreme Court, despite the opposition
of Justice John Scileppi.  &ldquo;I would like my name to
reflect my humanitarian beliefs,&rdquo; explained Ms. Cooperperson,
divorcee, mother of a 9-year old son, and owner of
Feminist Productions, a film company.

Firstly, shouldn't that be &ldquo;hu-person-itarian&rdquo; beliefs?

Secondly, she likes to use the term &ldquo;herstory&rdquo; in place
of _history_, a cutesy, but highly illogical neologism: the
feminine possessive pronoun, _her_, is from Middle English;
the masculine possessive pronoun, _his_, is from the Old
English; _history_ is from Latin and Greek _(historia)_, further
derived from _histor_ or _istor_ 'knowing or learning.'  The
personal pronoun _his_, which was never present in _history_,
further disappears in the form _istor_.

Thirdly, if she will, let Ms. Ellen C. play around with
the word _hysteria_, from the Greek _hystera_ 'womb.'  I hope
she is not about to alter that to &ldquo;hersteria.&rdquo;  After all, what
is more feminine than womb, no matter what word the
Greeks had for it? [*Harry Cimring, Los Angeles, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Claire W. Belyea}

&ldquo;Wow!&rdquo;, or perhaps &ldquo;Oba!&rdquo;, &ldquo;Orv!&rdquo;, &ldquo;Ya!&rdquo;, or even
&ldquo;Ajaib!!&rdquo;  My first two issues of _Verbatim_ contain delights
beyond imagining, to be savored and cherished, and reducing
me to a state which can be described accurately only
by the earthy phrase &ldquo;off my gourd.&rdquo;

I must argue, though, with Mr. Hornos' &ldquo;_Ouch! he
said in Japanese_ [III, 1].  Human languages may be familiar
but little is known, really, of foreign animal talk.  It is vital
to know, therefore, if Mr. Hornos' animal sounds
are phonetic—which seems unlikely—and if not, just how
are these foreign animal sounds pronounced?  Unlikely, because,
in the case of Greek dogs, a non-Greek-speaker
could only wonder if Greek dogs say &ldquo;ow ow&rdquo; as in the
German &ldquo;auf,&rdquo; or &ldquo;oh oh&rdquo; as in French &ldquo;aux.&rdquo;  Greeks pronounce
the letters alpha upsilon, or au, as &ldquo;aff&rdquo; or &ldquo;av.&rdquo;
But in fact what Greek dogs actually &ldquo;say&rdquo; is gamma alpha
upsilon, or &ldquo;_&gamma;&alpha;&upsilon;_ _&gamma;&alpha;&upsilon;_ &rdquo;—phonetically &ldquo;grraff grraff,&rdquo; a more
accurate representation of &ldquo;bow wow&rdquo; than exists in other
languages.  (Greeks somehow do manage to roll their
gammas, producing a sound similar to the &ldquo;gr&rdquo; in the
French word &ldquo;grand.&rdquo;) But, please, help! If &ldquo;popo&rdquo; is not
phonetic, how will I ever know the sound of a Japanese
dove?  For that matter, how _would_ one say &ldquo;Ajaib!&rdquo; to an
Indonesian?

Mr. White (&ldquo;Mrs. Malaprop's Bicentennial&rdquo;) [II, 1],
would have enjoyed a recent TV interview with a New
England Patriot player who claimed they had won their
game by keeping right on top of their P's and Q's.

I'd also like to acquaint you with a local landmark.
Upon entering the original building of the Boston Public
Library, newcomers are transfixed by the baffling message
&ldquo;TIXE NA TON&rdquo; painted on the glass of the inner door.
Obviously this would not merit a second glance by Mr.
Fowkers (&ldquo;Esrever Hsilgne&rdquo;) [III, 2]; others remain mystified
until leaving the building when the sign miraculously
rights itself.

I have the pleasure of looking forward to a chunk of
solid pleasure four times a year when _Verbatim_ is delivered.
THANK YOU for it—in every language. [*Claire W. Belyea, Cambridge, Massachusetts*].

## Little Error—Answers

1\. Rime  
2\. Life  
3\. Listeners  
4\. Papers 
5\. Heart 
6\. Medals  
7\. Lonely  
8\. Abroad  
9\. Breaking  
10\. One-and-Twenty
11\. Cory  
12\. Spider  
13\. Hired 
14\. Walks  
15\. Death  
16\. World  
17\. Bell  
18\. Fable
19\. Franny   
20\. Reason


#### EPISTOLA {Barbara Marsh}

Reading the latest issue sends my mind on many
trails.  My all-time favorite was a listing in the San Diego
phone book for _Augusta's Topsoil Hair Products Manufacturing
Co._  By its address, I judged that it was a hair-straightener.
I dialed the number, said that I had seen the
listing, and was curious about the product.  A voice replied,
&ldquo;Well, ma'am, we thinks we has a ve'y fine product fo' the
hair and scalp, and we wanted a nice-soundin' name fo' it—
y'know, lak 'Wildroot.'  So we named it _Topsoil_.&rdquo;

Many years as a proofreader left me wondering why
restaurateurs never bothered to learn the French they consistently
misused; why an extra &ldquo;r&rdquo; always crept into
_sherbet_; why _avocado_ could assume so many guises, the
commonest being &ldquo;avocoda&rdquo;; why _chili_ was so often
&ldquo;chile&rdquo;; why _au beurre_ was &ldquo;au burr&rdquo;; why _b&eacute;arnaise_ was
&ldquo;bernaise.&rdquo;

The one that set me back most, however, was an advertisement
for a language school that promised, &ldquo;You will
be able to parse any irregular verb in three weeks.&rdquo;  Thinking
it was just a slip of the tongue, I changed _parse_ to
_conjugate_.  It came back to be corrected-_parse_ was what
they wanted!  (That is one language school I shall never
attend.)

Elections seem to do strange things to commentators—
&ldquo;It is apparently going to be close if they do not succeed
at all,&rdquo; and to candidates—&ldquo;Help us begin to put a stop to
the end of spending.&rdquo; [*Barbara Marsh, San Diego, California*].

***

..._And why is it that restaurateurs can't even spell the
name of their occupation?  It appears as &ldquo;restauranteur&rdquo;
more often than not!_

—_Editor_


#### EPISTOLA {Edwin H. Hammock}

Your request for comments [III,2] about professionals
and their use (misuse) of their language strikes a familiar
chord with me.  As a stenotype court and convention reporter,
I often reported in technical areas where it soon
became apparent to me that I knew more about the day-to-day
vocabularies of many people than they themselves
knew.  Almost all doctors mispronounce _gynecology_—so
often now that many American dictionaries show the &ldquo;doctors'
choice&rdquo; as an alternate.

Here's an old medical anecdote which may be new
to this generation:

>Q  Describe the injury as you saw it.
>
>A  He had an extravasation of serous fluid into the
soft tissues of the optic region causing extensive
discoloration.
>
>Q  Do you mean he had a black eye?
>
>A  Yes.

Engineers do very well with _sine_, but usually fall flat on
_cosine_. [*Edwin H. Hammock, Columbus, Ohio*].


#### EPISTOLA {Nick Raptis}

On &ldquo;The Enigmatic Eggplant&rdquo; [Etymologica Obscura,
II, 4], the modern Greek encyclopaedia and dictionaries
offer the following:

>1.  _&Mu;&epsilon;&lambda;&iota;&nu;&tau;&zeta;&alpha;&nu;&alpha; (melintz&aacute;na)_ derives from the Italian _melenzana_.  (Ref.: John Stamatakos, _Dictionary of the Modern Greek Language_.)
>
>2.  _&Mu;&epsilon;&lambda;&iota;&nu;&tau;&zeta;&alpha;&nu;&alpha;_ _(meliz&aacute;na)_ or _&mu;&epsilon;&lambda;&iota;&nu;&tau;&zeta;&alpha;&nu;&alpha;_ (as in 1.) is the
colloquial for _&tau;&rho;&upsilon;&chi;&nu;&omicron;&sigmaf; &epsilon; &mu;&epsilon;&lambda;&iota;&zeta;&alpha;&upsilon;&alpha; (trychnos emeliz&aacute;na)_, which in Latin is _solanum melongena_.

I think that we modern Greeks owe our _&tau;&rho;&upsilon;&chi;&nu;&omicron;&sigmaf; &epsilon; &mu;&epsilon;&lambda;&iota;&zeta;&alpha;&upsilon;&alpha;_ to _al-badhinjan_ of the Arabs.

On &ldquo;Talking Turkey&rdquo; [II, 3], in modern Greek your
turkey is our &gamma;&alpha;&lambda;&lambda;&omicron;&sigmaf; (y&aacute;llos), which means, 'the French
bird' or 	&#92;?&#92;&iota;&alpha;&nu;&omicron;&#92;?&#92; (thi&aacute;nos), which means 'the Indian bird.' 

[*Nick Raptis, Athens, Greece*].


#### EPISTOLA {Vincent Smith}

You may have already noted that the Dodge dealer
in nearby Old Saybrook, Connecticut, has what at first
blush would appear to be an unfortunate name for someone
in his trade: _Risko_, which he uses instead of dodging
the issue by using &ldquo;Seaport Motors&rdquo; or some other evasion.
However, &ldquo;Esrever Hsilgne&rdquo; would spot the advantages of
word of mouth advertising when he drives in the lot to see
the owner's 1937 cream convertible Bentley with his vanity
plates spelling his name backwards.

Your &ldquo;roast beef reporter&rdquo; could only have seen this
week a placard in Newport's finest Greek cafe, Odyssey,
that proclaims theirs is &ldquo;ah just.&rdquo; 

[*Vincent Smith, Newport, Rhode Island*].


#### EPISTOLA {Aaron M. File}

Professor Fowkes might consider mixing Sucrets with
his Tums and spelling both backwards. 

[*Aaron M. File, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania*].


#### EPISTOLA {Betty Anthony}

It takes quite a time for your magazine to reach me
so if my remarks seem to refer to several past numbers, I
hope at least they are still pertinent.

I doubt very much that the expressions of &ldquo;spitting
image&rdquo; meaning &ldquo;likeness&rdquo; comes from &ldquo;spirit and image&rdquo;
as Mr. Meng suggested in his letter in III, 1.  Even the
French have the same expression for similarity, e.g., &ldquo;C'est
son p&eacute;re tout crach&eacute;.&rdquo;  More likely the origin is to be found
in &ldquo;spit&rdquo; meaning an ejection from the mouth combined
with primitive belief that progeny of the gods were born
through the mouth [e.g., Zeus and his brothers were all
first swallowed and then spit out again by their father,
Kronos].  It was also believed, in primitive cultures, that
certain birds were impregnated through their mouths.  One
of the _Panchatantra_ tales, I can't check it here in Greece
on my barren island, tells of a bird—peahen?  magpie?—who
informed on her master's wife when she had intercourse
with a lover (or failed to inform?).  In any case, this bird
was cursed ever afterwards to being impregnated only
through the mouth as punishment.

For that matter, all creation came symbolically
through the mouth: &ldquo;In the beginning was the Word and
the Word was God....&rdquo; 

[*Betty Anthony, Hydra, Greece*]


#### EPISTOLA {Gloria Dawkins}

As Robert A Fowkes points out in his delightful
article [III, 2], reading backwards can be fun.  By sheer
good luck, I happened to marry a man whose name spelled
backwards is _Snikwad_, a name he immortalized (for our
children) in a series of cartoons depicting the adventures
of the Snikwad family.  One of these same children, by the
way, was so charmed with the discovery that _Lipton's_
spelled backwards is _Snotlip_, that none of us to this day
has had the heart to point out the mistake.

Anagrams are fun, too.  A year or two ago we got
hooked on Arthur Swan's Wit Twisters in _Saturday Review_
and began making up our own for inter-family amusement.
An early example is:

>&ldquo;I can't be __ __ __ __ __ __ ,&rdquo; his mother stated,
>
>&ldquo;For all the __ __ __ __ __ __ he's created.
>
>I'd ne'er have __ __ __ __ __ __ the little guy
>
>If that randy ram hadn't __ __ __ __ __ __ by.&rdquo;

Unfortunately, as time went on, our messages began
to get rude and coarse-possibly a sign of waning interest.
In an effort to liven things up, I have lately been trying to
combine the limerick form with the original idea.  This has
proved more difficult than I had anticipated and, so far,
all I have been able to come up with are these feeble
efforts:

>There was an old __ __ __ __ from Duluth
>
>Who drank vastly of  __ __ __ __ and vermouth.
>
>She  __ __ __ __ quite a fuss,
>
>When kicked off the bus
>
>And her gestures were grossly uncouth.
>
>An ugly old  __ __ __ __ named McDwight
>
>Trained his  __ __ __ __ to attack me on sight,
>
>So I've hired some nuns
>
>To hurl state currant buns
>
>At his hounds as they  __ __ __ __ out at night.

Perhaps your readers can come up with something
more electrifying—chances are I've been dragged down by
the low standards of the Snikwad side of the family. 

[*Gloria Dawkins, Unionville, Ontario, Canada*].


#### EPISTOLA {John B. Newman}

I am surprised that the learned author of _Esrever
Hsilgne_ [III, 2] didn't know (or note) that Kay Boyle once
wrote a short story entitled _Kroy Wen_.  But he might be
interested in knowing that the craze he writes of serves
still another purpose:  creating delightful euphemisms.
Thus, I have a friend who berates his children if they
should _traf_ in public.  And, speaking of _Serutan_, this same
friend tells me that its manufacturers are about to market
a soft drink, _Sip_. [*John B. Newman, Queens College, New York*].


#### EPISTOLA {Jerry Mendel}

In reference to a letter from Hugh T. Kerr [III, 2],
he certainly picked examples that show just the opposite of
what he wanted to prove: that the King James version of
the Bible is preferable to modern translations:

>_My beloved put in his_     _My beloved put his_
>_hand by the hole of the_   _hand to the latch, and_
>_door, and my bowels_       _my heart was thrilled_
>_were moved for him_.       _within me._

As they say in the Army: you do, and you'll mop
it up!

It has been painfully obvious for a long time that the
King James version was out of date and long overdue for
rewriting.  It is fashionable nowadays to say that the King
James version is still the best, but I submit that this is just
snobbishness.  I suppose every religion has to have a book
that most people do not understand and must be explained
to them by an elite, but the King James Bible had gotten
to the point where even the elite could not make sense
out of it.

On the subject of _ghost_, the Catholic Church did one
sensible thing this century when it replaced _Holy Ghost_
with _Holy Spirit_.  The word _ghost_ has so many silly and
laughable connotations that this change was centuries overdue.
As always, this sensible change was balanced by the
sudden idea that we have been misspelling for years the
name of the man who built the Ark.  Now it is spelled _Noe_,
not _Noah_.  All I can conclude is that maybe the Church is
trying to convert over to Spanish. 

[*Jerry Mendel, Plainfield, New Jersey*].


#### EPISTOLA {Lester Saferstein, M.D., Kansas City, Missouri}

In the September issue Hugh T. Kerr writes of &ldquo;ghost
and spirit&rdquo; pointing out that one wishes a person who
sneezes &ldquo;God bless you&rdquo; or &ldquo;Gesundheit&rdquo; as a matter of
concern that he might be &ldquo;giving up the ghost&rdquo; or that his
soul or breath of life might be departing his body.

It is also likely that the association of sudden death
with a sneeze had its origin when, prior to improved medical
therapy, many people went on to the last stages of
syphilis acquiring thereby a weakened aorta.  A sudden
surge of increased blood pressure accompanying a sneeze
often caused that great vessel to burst, and death followed
quickly.

Thus the person who said &ldquo;God bless you&rdquo; had good
reason to fear that the sneezer might suddenly lose his
spirit and his life even though he did not know why.


#### EPISTOLA {Katherine Adamson}

B.H. Smeaton's letter on clipping inspires me to offer
my list of Australian diminutives [spellings improvised].
_Aussie_ is familiar to Ameriacns, but that mainlanders go on
holiday to _Tassie_ may not be.  (Both are pronounced with
a _z_, by the way, as is _mossies_ for mosquitoes.)  While
teaching, I learned about _bickies_ at morning tea (biscuits,
our cookies), was asked if I had taken a _sickie_ after a one-day
absence, and discussed the girls' _cozzies_ at the Swimming
Carnival.  (Has anyone ever figured out why Americans
wear bathing suits to go swimming and some other
nationalities wear swimming costumes for bathing?)

On a camping tour I heard references to the _littlies_
and _oldies_ in the group.  We stopped at a _Leaguie_ 'Leagues
Club' and played the _pokies_ 'poker machines.'  One of the
teenagers was from _Sainty_ 'St. Mary, N.S.W.,' whose football
team is well known—the _Sainties_ in her speech.  Reveille
took the form of the leaders going around the tents
calling &ldquo;Wakey, wakey,&rdquo; in the same abominably cheerful
voice that accompanies &ldquo;Rise and shine.&rdquo;

Some of those sounded fine to me; others caused a
mild shudder.  But I never got used to _Chrissy_ and _pressy_.
I would wait, muscles stiffened to receive the blow, for a
user of either to mention a _Chrissy pressy_.  It never happened.

I should add about _sickie_ that it isn't a straightforward
synonym for _sick day_.  One takes the latter to nurse
a cold, the former to go to a ball game, and an absence of
less than two days, preferably three, will be interpreted,
even on the administrative level, as a _sickie_. 

[*Katherine Adamson, Columbus, Ohio*].


#### EPISTOLA {Phylis Feinstein}

How did Harry Cimring in &ldquo;Trite 'n' True&rdquo; [Vol. III,
No. 2] ever miss _Light 'n' Lively?_ 

[*Phylis Feinstein, Silver Burdett Company, Morristown, New Jersey*].


#### EPISTOLA {B.R. Mullin, M.D.}

Apropos of malapropisms: on the menu of the Back
Door restaurant of Dalton, Pennsylvania, are lamb chops
&ldquo;cooked to your likeness.&rdquo; 

[*B.R. Mullin, M.D., Rockville, Maryland*].


#### EPISTOLA {Skip Eisiminger}

Archie Bunker in the Classroom

Teachers of vocabulary may have more reason to
thank Norman Lear's Archie Bunker than criticize him and
his abuses of the language.  Most errors made by this popular
television character can be categorized as malapropisms
though he is occasionally guilty of a spoonerism (e.g.
&ldquo;hard-pore cornography&rdquo;).  A collection of Mr. Bunker's
slips of the tongue can form the core of an entertaining and
informative vocabulary class.

My own procedure has been to distribute the sentences
and then ask what was the word the character
should properly have used; what does the proper word
mean, and, if necessary, what does the word which the
character used mean?

Here are a few you might try:

>&ldquo;I've been _impudent_ ever since I got laid off.&rdquo;

>[To a Jewish visitor:] &ldquo;_Shaboom_!&rdquo;

>[To a policeman:] &ldquo;You can't get no _judasprudence_
these days.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;You've got to control your _carnival_ instincts, Gloria.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;Edith's _mental pause_ is causing her dizziness.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;I gave the [accident victim] mouth-to-mouth
_restitution_.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;Don't go out in the rain; you'll catch _utopia_.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;Listen, Meathead, don't take things out of _contest_.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;It ain't _German_ to this conversation.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;I've never used a _lollipop_ in my speech in my life.&rdquo;

[*Skip Eisminger, Clemson University*].

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v3n4_1977-02)