---
title: "Vol IV, No 1 [May 1977]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Deciphering The Four-Letter Word in a Medieval Manuscript's Satire on Friars
*Carter Revard, St. Louis, Missouri*

The English may now reclaim from the Scots the
honor, if such it be, of being the first to put the popular
quadriliteral into writing.  As one might expect, however,
they used a bastard form of the word, and they wrote
it only in cipher: thus, even though the poem containing
this coded occurrence has been in print for a hundred and
forty years, the Victorian scholar who printed it with full
knowledge of what he was printing, but who left it to his
readers to decipher the medieval scribe's code, could certainly
have felt that the public would not be corrupted by
the word, and it was left to D. H. Lawrence and others to
curl the aspidistra permanently.

As for the Scots claim to primacy in this matter, it rests
on the shoulders of William Dunbar, whose poem of ca.
1502 was the first instance which the editors of the OED's
*Revised Supplement*, Vol. I. (1972), could find of a written
use of the word.  However, a British Museum manuscript,
Harley 3362, contains among its many jokes, proverbs,
riddles, and pious poems a group, on folio 24r (old numbering
p. 47), which vigorously vituperate friars.  Certain lines
of this invective are written in a cipher or code, and when
deciphered one word among these is *fuccant*, which in context
is indubitably our word, though it has been given a
mock-Latin form (with participial *-ant*) in keeping with the
macaronic language of the lines in which it occurs.[^a1]

These lines were first printed in 1845 by Thomas
Wright, in his *Reliquiae Antiquae* (Vol. I, pp. 91-92).  Since
they have not been reprinted, I shall present them here, before
discussing their contents, date, and some problems concerning
them.

>
>1  fflen flyys and freris/populum domini male caedunt,  
>       &thorn;ustlis and breris/crescentia gramina ledunt.  
>       Xriste, nolens guerras, / sed cuncta pace tueris,  
>       Destrue per terras / breris flen fly&#92;?&#92;es & freris.  
>
>5  fflen fly&#92;?&#92;es and freris / Foul falle hem &thorn;ys fyften &#92;?&#92;eris,  
>       ffor'non &#92;?&#92;at her ys / louit flen fly&#92;?&#92;es ne freris.  
>       Fratres carmeli / nauigant in a both apud Eli;  
>       Non sunt in celi / quia gxddbov xxkxx&#92;?&#92;t pg ifmk—  
>       Omnes drencherunt / quia sterisman non habuerunt.
>
>10  ffratres cum knyuys / go&thorn; about and txxkx&#92;?&#92;v  
>         nfookt xx&#92;?&#92;xkt.
>
>    Ex Eli veniens presenti / sede locatur,  
>       Nec rex nec sapiens, / Salomon tamen vocatur.  
>       Pediculus cum sex / pedibus me mordet vbique;  
>
>14  Si possum capere / tokl tobl debet ipsem habere.

Lines 1-6 here attack friars generally, while lines 7-10 verberate
the Carmelite Friars of Ely particularly.  Wright
made the interesting point that in his day, &ldquo;two lines...
are still popular among schoolboys in the following
modified form: *Tres fratres coeli navigabant roundabout
Ely; Omnes drownderunt qui swimaway non potuerunt*,&rdquo;
and he further remarked that &ldquo;the expressions concealed by
the cypher...are rather gross, and do not speak much for
the morals of the Carmelites of Ely.&rdquo;[^a2] This remark set me to
examining the cipher, of course, and I succeeded in decoding
it.  It merely involves substitution of the next letter in the
alphabet, so that if the encipherer began with an *a*, he
would write *b*, if with a *b*, he wrote *c*, and so on.[^a3] Thus, in
line 8, *gxddbov xxkxx&#92;?&#92;t pg ifmk* is written for *fuccant uuiuis
of Heli*, with *fuccant* formed on the same lines as *drencherunt*
in the next line (9).  The friars of Ely, according to the
poem, will never get to heaven, because they are *fuccant*
the wives of Ely.  To this elegant criticism the rhymer ads
that they will all drown because they have no *steersman*—
no doubt a double entendre—and further, that friars with
knives are going around and swiving men's wives, this being
of course the same assertion made by most critics of the
ubiquitous medieval friars, as for instance in Chaucer's
General Prologue to the *Canterbury Tales*, where he describes
the Friar as having his hood *ay farsed ful of knyves* /
*And pynnes, for to yeven faire wyves*.

We observe that our medieval scribe has enciphered
not only *fuccant*, but also *suuiuit*.  Obviously these words
were synonymous at this time, and the modern version had
not yet pushed out the older *swive* as yet.[^a4] But this brings us
to the important question: Just when was the poem written,
or at least when was it written into the manuscript?

Inspection of the script and hand shows that it could
have been almost any time in the middle or later fifteenth
century.  Use of &thorn; (thorn) and &#92;?&#92; (yogh) would seem to rule
out a dating in later sixteenth century, but it is not possible
to assign a precise date on palaeographic grounds alone, and
I have not had time to look for historical references or other
evidence that might pin down the date of transcription.
Wright said the date was &ldquo;of the fifteenth century,&rdquo; and this
is Max F&ouml;rster's opinion also (*Anglia* vol. 42, 1918, pp. 198,
207), though F&ouml;rster specifies that the MS. is of the latter
part of the century, i.e., ca. 1450-1500.  And editors of the
*Middle English Dictionary* have also assigned a date of ca.
1500 to the MS.; in my opinion, the date is palaeographically
more likely to have been ca. 1450-75 than 1500.  In
any event, it is almost certainly as early as Dunbar's poem,
and very probably earlier by some years.

But a final problem must be spoken to: Why did the
scribe encipher those passages?  One might simply think he
was keeping these naughty words away from uninitiated
eyes, and perhaps that is the case.  But if so, then why did
he also use the cipher in line 14 (the last one given above)
for the words describing what he will do to the lice biting
him if he can catch them?  Those words, as we see by deciphering
*tokl tobl*, are just *snik snak*, and it is hard to see
why the poet or scribe should have thought them obscene
enough to put the figleaf of his cipher over them.  Perhaps,
of course, *snick-snack* was accompanied by an obscene gesture,
of a sort not hard to imagine, and the audience would
have rolled in the aisles at the thought of doing that to a
body-louse.

Which brings us, surely, to the realization that the
cipher is meant not to conceal as much as to reveal.  Like a
bikini, it is meant to draw attention rather than baffle it.
*Snik-snak* put straightforwardly onto the page is not half so
funny as *tokl-tobl* becomes, when one has the *Aha!*  pleasure
added to the *Yeah!*  one: it is the slight stammer of the humorist
before he gets the right word out, making the joke
funnier.  Now, I might be wrong: but the cipher is so *very*
simple, and the whole point of a riddle is to have an
answer, after all.  So it is my opinion that the medieval
scribe here was not really showing how shameful the words
seemed to him but adding a little extra spice to the joke of
using the words about friars.  Instead of *obeying* a taboo,
that is, the scribe was *exploiting* it: this is a case of what
Allen Walker Read (in *Language* vol. 40 no. 2, April-June
1964, pp. 162-66) has called &ldquo;a type of ostentatious taboo.&rdquo;
In fact, what the scribe was doing is very like what we do
when we print &ldquo;f—k&rdquo; while expecting that every reader will
know that the word meant is—well, you-know-what!  We
have lately enriched our vocabularies in this area, too, with
the word *bleep (bleeping)*, which has replaced earlier
*blank, blankety-blank*, not to mention *s.o.b.* and the like.
Who knows?  We may soon see, with returning censorship,
ciphers replacing these acronyms and replacements.

***

[^a1]: I was able to inspect the manuscript (Harley 3362), and here
acknowledge the kindness of the staff of the Students Room of
the British Library in providing access as well as the marvelous
services and facilities for study which make it such a
pleasure to work there.

[^a2]: *Reliquiae Antiquae* Vol. I, p. 91.

[^a3]: A cipher very similar to this occurs in B.M. MS. Sloane 351,
fol. 15, from which Wright prints it (*op. cit.* Vol. II, p. 15).
Wright says this MS. also is &ldquo;of the fifteenth century.&rdquo;

[^a4]: The definitive history of the obscenity symbol, including its
etymology, is now being worked out by several scholars, notably
Allen Walker Read.  It may well be of Flemish origin.
Certainly one would want to know the details of how it entered
English and why it came to replace *swive*.  It appears that
the latter word was indeed perceived as a gross term, and its
written appearances seem confined primarily to invective or
comic contexts; the first *OED* citation for *swive* is for the
gerund *swiving*, used in the &ldquo;Song of Lewes&rdquo; (written ca.
1265 A.D.) as a term of contempt: the poet says that Richard
of Cornwall spent all his treasure on *swiving*, and clearly it
was not just uxorious activity that the poet had in mind.
Chaucer used *swive* only to describe adulterous or clandestine
fornication, and one can see how a word in such a smelly role
will easily give way to another more foreign and vigorous: it
is much easier and funnier to swear in a foreign language, as
Americans have found with the British *bloody*, for instance.

***

*VAN GOGH, VAN GOGH, VAN GOGH*

*It seems rather rough*
*On Vincent Van Guff*

*When those in the know*
*Call him Vincent Van Go*

*For unless I'm way off*
*He was Vincent Van Gogh.*

*Joe Ecclesine*

*Rye, New York*

*Gloria in extremis*....

The County Council of Buckinghamshire, England, has
struck a low blow against women's lib.  The municipal
parking garage has restrooms, side by side, marked
&ldquo;Gentlemen&rdquo; and &ldquo;Disabled,&rdquo; respectively. 

*Sic transit, Gloria Steinem.*

## The Seat of Our Affections
*Clair Schulz, Clinton, Wisconsin*

It is impossible to say when I first developed this fascination
with bodies, but once implanted in my brain there
was no ousting it.  Some may call it an unnatural interest in
an unpleasant subject and they may be right.  But that won't
stop me from recording the results of my impassioned study
of anatomy.

Those who expect to find the confessions of a voyeur or
a coroner here had best look elsewhere; my interest in the
body pertains to the sentiments that go with it for it is the
passions that attend the body that give it life.  Even Frank
enstein realized this.  If he had found his creation devoid of
emotion, he would have stamped *Reject* on his forehead and
torn him limb from limb (being careful to tear along the
perforations).

What began as a casual inquiry during my collegiate
days has now become an avocation.  It has sharpened all my
senses, above all the sense of hearing.  Most people are not
even aware that I possess this sensitivity.  As long as conversations
stay away from bodies, I appear to be just another
disinterested party.  But let someone drag in a torso or limb
and slap some emotion on it and I will digest every morsel.

Traditionally, people have assigned the emotions to
three parts of the body: the stomach, the heart, and the
head.  The stomach is the source of gut reactions and it occasionally
serves as a gateway to the heart.  The heart, because
of its association with the soul, has become a symbol of love
and spirit in expressions such as &ldquo;Peg o' my heart&rdquo; and
&ldquo;She's got a lot of heart,&rdquo; variations of the latter being given
so much mileage by comedians that one could attribute the
death of burlesque to heart failure.  And, when someone
says, &ldquo;She's got a good head on her shoulders&rdquo; or &ldquo;Let's put
our heads together,&rdquo; he is obviously referring to the center
of the intellect.

For years the three lived in harmony, each carrying out
its separate duties and each being content in its own realm.
Oh, occasionally there are some rumors of an uprising.  A
dish of ice cream might cause the stomach to go to a person's
head or excitement carry the heart as far as the throat,
but they soon fade away.  They've always known their place.

But now a usurper has appeared.  It was there all the
time, but few paid any attention to it.  Gradually, in degrees
so small as to be imperceptible to most people, it has crept
into the language and now rivals not only other parts of the
body for dominance but also challenges all the words in certain
individual's vocabularies for frequency of use.

How does it manifest itself?  In many forms.

Perhaps it appears most frequently in situations of
anger.  My research has shown that very often during crises
one person will request another to place some unidentifiable
*it* in a specific location.  Paradoxically, if this proves ineffectual,
this same person who made the request will often ask
the other person to kiss this portion of his own anatomy in a
gesture of apparent goodwill.

Or it could be something just short of anger that causes
its invocation.  If a series of events brings about a feeling of
irritation within a person, he is likely to say that any person
or thing is causing him discomfort.  At one time this arbitrarily
placed affliction was said to take root in the neck.
Lately, the sensors seem to have dropped about two feet.

It seems not only sensitive to varying levels of exasperation
but to changes in temperature as well.  Indeed, it can
readily claim the title of the Body's Thermometer.  Apparently,
it reaches 32&deg; faster than any other part of the body.
The nose was formerly considered to be a reliable instrument,
but I can't recall its accuracy being tested since a cold
November day when a little girl I know looked up long
enough from her hula hoop to tell her mother, &ldquo;I'm freezing
my nose off.&rdquo;  The increased dependence upon the newer
device may result in more people being accused of wasting
time by standing around while checking the temperature
with their fingers.

Not only has this part developed into the body's
weather station; it also strives to become its classroom.  At a
time when learning was believed to originate in the brain it
was not unusual to hear a parent say to a child, &ldquo;If you
don't mind me, I'm going to give you a good hit across the
side of the head.&rdquo;  Despite the pleading of educators against
training by punishment, threats are still used to control
conduct or to suggest correction.  However, current usage
indicates that certain traits can be taught without risking
cranial lumps or welts on the backs of hands.  The foot now
serves a tutorial purpose once reserved for the hickory stick,
although the sector of the body receiving the instruction has
not been altered.  The word *good* remains in the incantation
delivered by the teacher and it usually is followed by the
word *swift*.  Some football coaches have found films of the
activity *too* swift, and so they have employed slow motion
techniques to illustrate the importance of keeping the head
down and follow-through to their field goal kickers.

This movement to take over the functions of the head
seems to be gaining momentum.  There was a time when
people, in describing periods of emotional stress, would say
that they were working or worrying their heads off.  No
more.  This change of address for the sentiments has resulted
in a substantial decrease in the number of mothers who ask
their children how hard they have been playing.

Even the location of the sense of humor has been
questioned.  Just as people centuries ago were certain where
the four humors of the body were to be found, modern man
seemed confident that gibes and gambols resided within
the chopfallen or chopful walls of the skull.  A person who
showed unrestrained amusement was said to be &ldquo;laughing
his head off.&rdquo;  The popularity of this saying is being threatened
by a similar expression, although it is doubtful that the
newer form will achieve supremacy because smiles are seen
only on faces.

Whether the head will retain its distinctive features or
whether it will lose its leadership and become assimilated is
a question posterity will answer.  There is no doubt that it
has lost ground.  I find myself cringing involuntarily when I
hear a forlorn gambler forgo the standard &ldquo;I lost my head&rdquo;
for a more desperate statement of despair.  And sometimes at
night I conjure up surrealistic scenes involving guillotines as
I consider how the course of French history would have
been altered had this interchange of linguistic function been
prevalent during the days of the Reign of Terror.

Despite these disturbing developments, I continue my
self-appointed role as the body's watchdog.  My research has
taken me to &ldquo;The Miller's Tale,&rdquo; and in the near future I
may be able to conclusively relate Chaucer with this newest
phenomenon.  It will be published as soon as I can account
for the lag of six centuries.

I listen, as before, but my friends say that lately I have
replaced my indifferent expression with one bordering on
bewilderment.  I have the feeling that they are tossing their
members into the conversation to see if the old eyes, ears,
nose, and throat man will come alive.  Perhaps they read my
face correctly; maybe they are humoring me.  All I know for
certain is that the next time I see a man holding his wrist
and asking the question &ldquo;Heads or tails?&rdquo;  I will be able to
sympathize with his confusion.


#### EPISTOLA {M. Carolyn Jones, Ph.D.}

I just read the first issue of VERBATIM on my
husband's subscription.  Generally, I enjoyed it.  However,
the lead article, &ldquo;Hear Finish Before (Pause) You?&rdquo;,
contains a serious error.

Cued Speech is not a sign language system as stated by
the author.  Cued Speech is the antithesis of sign language in
that it is a means of providing a visible analog to *spoken*
English.  Because the hand is involved, many persons who
have not read the very clearly written material by its inventor,
Dr. Orin Cornett, a Vice President of Gallaudet University
for the Deaf, naively assume it is a manual or sign
language system. 

[*M. Carolyn Jones, Ph.D., New Orleans, Louisiana*].


#### EPISTOLA {Charles Van Doren}

I was very interested in two pieces in the current
*VERBATIM*—the one on cockfighting and all its gifts to
English, and your comments on Aristides' comments on
*6,000 Words*.

As to the former, I am simply astounded.  As to the
latter, I have to say that I couldn't agree with you more
completely.  Why do supposedly intelligent people think that
dictionaries should be school marms?  I remember the flurry
when *Webster's Third International* first came out—and
Rex Stout's Nero Wolfe threw his copy into the fire!  How
unutterably silly.  And yet it keeps on going.

In fact, I like the vitality of English vocabulary
nowadays.  Mind, I say vocabulary, not usage; but as to
usage, in my memory of things (admittedly only half a
century) it has never been very good, overall, and I think
back to themes my father wrote in elementary school in
1900: even then, in a good school, the style was terribly
stilted (although &ldquo;correct&rdquo;), and I think I prefer liveliness
with error to correctness without life.  You may disagree. 

[*Charles Van Doren, Chicago, Illinois*].

## The Growing Use and Abuse of Literally
*Elaine F. Tankard and James W. Tankard, Jr.*

We have noticed a growing use of the word *literally* in
the past year.  Recently we heard a well-educated friend use
the word three times in the course of an evening's conversation.
*Literally* is also showing up more and more frequently
in the mass media, unfortunately with a growing lack of
precision.  Theodore M. Bernstein writes in *The Careful
Writer: A Modern Guide to English Usage* that &ldquo;literally
means true to the exact meaning of the words.&rdquo;  Many people
misuse the word to mean *figuratively* or *virtually*.  Others
just use it as an unnecessary superlative.

We have found examples in the following three categories
of usage:

>INACCURATE (AND OFTEN ABSURD):
>
>An official at the U.S. Government Printing Office
wrote, &ldquo;...we were literally swamped with your
orders.&rdquo;
>
>A brochure advertising calendars stated, &ldquo;...we know
that you are literally flooded with calendars from which
to choose...&rdquo;
>
>A TV commercial for a teriyaki sauce spoke of &ldquo;a flavor
that literally sparkles.&rdquo;
>
>In the James Bond film *The Man with the Golden Gun*,
one of the characters says the highest bidder for solar
energy &ldquo;will literally have the sun in his pocket.&rdquo;
>
>A noted Black author said in a speech, &ldquo;...for
generations the talents of Black people were literally
poured down the drain.&rdquo;
>
>A psychologist reviewing for a journal wrote that a
book was &ldquo;literally mind expanding.&rdquo;
>
>Another psychologist reviewing a book for the same
journal wrote that it presented a consensus that &ldquo;literally
scares the hell out of me.&rdquo;
>
>An editor for a different journal wrote the following
ponderous sentence: &ldquo;During the past few years,
scientific interest in and attention to the nonverbal
components of human behavior and the relationship of
human beings to their physical environment have
literally mushroomed.&rdquo;
>
>*The New York Times Book Review* contained this statement:
&ldquo;Following literally in the projected footsteps of
Harper & Row,...we headed out to California to see
if the grass was any greener.&rdquo;
>
>A minister told a city council his telephone &ldquo;has
literally rung off the hook&rdquo; since a newspaper
published a series about massage parlors.

>ACCURATE BUT UNNECESSARY:
>
>A psychologist reviewing for a journal wrote: &ldquo;This is a
most readable book.  It is literally exciting.&rdquo;
>
>A high-brow magazine wrote in a letter seeking
subscribers: &ldquo;After screening literally hundreds of
mailing lists, we came up with a relative handful of
names like yours...&rdquo;
>
>A labor leader said during a TV interview: &ldquo;We've just
literally got to reduce the work load.&rdquo;

>CORRECT:
>
>A news magazine wrote about Gary Gilmore: &ldquo;The
sentence of death was carried out, eighteen minutes
late, only after an extraordinary round of desperation
appeals — the last of which was turned down by the
U.S. Supreme Court as the prisoner literally sat facing
execution.&rdquo;

Sometimes a careful writer will use a word like *actually*
where a weaker writer would use *literally*.  The following is
from a short story by Ann Beattie in *The New Yorker*: &ldquo;It
hurt her badly, made her actually *dizzy* with surprise and
shame, and since then, no matter who the guests are, she
never feels quite at ease on the weekends.&rdquo;

The fact that we found only one instance in the &ldquo;correct&rdquo;
category makes us conclude that it is difficult to use
*literally* accurately.  We would argue that the word should
be saved for those rare cases when something that is usually
metaphorical or figurative is actually true.


#### EPISTOLA {Lester Noyes}

May I submit the title of an award received by a good
friend from Manzano AF Base, N.M., in July 1968: *Defense
Atomic Support Agency Suggestion Award Certificate*.

[*Lester Noyes, University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado*].

## Illicit Threesomes
*Elaine Von Bruns, Middlebury, Vermont*

Introduce a legal word couple to a third word and you
may set into language a newly meaningful relationship.

Sometimes the single will cling to one partner of the
couple, sometimes to the other.  And sometimes, if he's built
like one of the partners, only bigger, he'll break up the couple
and claim the other partner for himself.  In two of the cases
mentioned below, the newcomer brought along friends, linked
by hyphens.

Occasionally, the interplay will change the appearance
and even the character of the partners.  For better?  For
worse?  You be the judge.

| COUPLE                | THREESOMES                                                                                              |
| --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| *ball and chain*      | *ball and chain* STORE 'shopping mart for sadomasochists'                                               |
| *comb and brush*      | *comb and brush*-OFF 'a new way of parting'                                                             |
| *Thanksgiving turkey* | *Thanksgiving turkey* BED 'Pilgrim frolic'                                                              |
| *tar and feather*     | *tar and feather* BED  &ldquo;You've made your bed, now lie in it,&rdquo; said the Patriot to the Tory. |
| *draw and quarter*    | *draw and quarter* BACK 'occupations of an artistic athlete'                                            |
| *scotch on the rocks* | HOP *scotch on the rocks* 'game for the inebriated'                                                     |
| *running nose*        | *running nose* DIVE 'hangout for snifflers'                                                             |
| *dinner pail*         | *dinner pale* FACE 'nervous guest'                                                                      |
| *threadbare*          | *threadbear* HUG 'lukewarm welcome'                                                                     |
| *stop and go*         | *stop and go* -GO 'traffic signals from a lissome policewoman'                                          |
| *black-and-blue*      | *black and blue* LAWS 'the punishing edict of never on a Sunday'                                        |
| *milk and honey*      | *milk and honey*MOONERS 'Prohibition-era newlyweds'                                                     |
| *bow and arrow*       | *bow* TIE *and arrow* 'Robin Hood goes formal'                                                          |

... sometimes he bring along friends:

| COUPLE             | THREESOMES                                           |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| *fish and chips*   | *fish and chips*-OFF-THE-OLD-BLOCK 'back-home lunch' |
| *bird in the hand* | *bird in the hand*-ME-DOWN                           |

          
... and sometimes he comes between them and claims a
partner for himself:

| COUPLE             | THREESOMES                                                           |
| ------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| *cloak and dagger* | *cloak and* DAGUERREOTYPE 'old photo of Zorro'                       |
| *barbershop pole*  | *barbershop* POLTERGEIST 'spirit in the hair tonic'                  |
| *bottleneck*       | *bottle* NECROPHILIA 'unmentionable interaction with nonreturnables' |
| *sock hop*         | CAS*sock hop* 'fun for clergymen'                                    |
| *skin and bones*   | *skin and* BONSAI 'Japanese strip show'                              |
| *cash and carry*   | *cash and* CARRION 'profits from graverobbing'                       |

Do you know of any other swinging word couples-about-town?


#### EPISTOLA {Guy P. Pfeffermann}

I enjoyed reading &ldquo;Menu Barbarisms&rdquo; [III, 2].  Here
are two examples suggesting that the problems are international.
On a recent trip to South America I found the
following items on menus: *Aristu* 'Irish Stew'; *Pitipua*
'petits pois.'[*Guy P. Pfeffermann, Chevy Chase, Maryland*].

#### To Understand America (and Americans)....
*John O. Herbold II, Lakewood, California*

Story has it that in the early days of the 20th century a
college professor exclaimed: &ldquo;To understand America,
you must first understand baseball.&rdquo;  And he was probably
right, for outside of the horse (&ldquo;you can lead a horse to
water...,&rdquo; &ldquo;horse of a different color&rdquo;, &ldquo;cart before the
horse&rdquo; etc.,) no other single concrete noun has contributed as
many terms as has the &ldquo;horsehide&rdquo; sport.

Even Americans who have rarely seen a baseball game
will find themselves sprinkling many of the following terms
into their daily conversation:

>1.  He was born with two strikes against him.
>2.  He couldn't get to first-base with that girl.
>3.  He sure threw me a curve that time.
>4.  I'll take a rain-check on it.
>5.  He went to bat for me.
>6.  I liked him right off the bat.
>7.  He was way out in left-field on that one.
>8.  He's a foul ball.
>9.  I think you're way off base on that.
>10. It was a smash hit.
>11. Let's take a seventh-inning stretch.
>12. I hope to touch all the bases on this report.
>13. Could you pinch-hit for me?
>14. He doesn't even know who's on first.
>15. I just call 'em as I see 'em.
>16. He's only a bush-leaguer.
>17. Major League all the way.
>18. We'll hit 'em where they ain't.
>19. He was safe a mile.
>20. He has a lot on the ball.
>21. He really dropped the ball that time.
>22. We'll rally in the ninth.
>23. No game's ever over until the last man's out.

And is there any term in our language more synonymous
with failure than &ldquo;to strike out&rdquo;?

Had President Nixon stayed in office a while longer, it's
possible that football might have begun to approach baseball
in the number of terms used (*game plan, kick-off*, etc.);
but the Nixon *team* got its *signals crossed*, so now *it's a
whole new ball game*.

Baseball, like other occupations, has its own particular
terminology and nomenclature, understood only by the esoteric
few and not by the everyday fans (*fan* from *fanatic*).

For instance, your grandfather would speak of Christy
Mathewson's *fadeway* or Walter Johnson's *inshoot*.  Three-fingered
Brown threw an *outdrop*, and in those days you
might knock an opposing pitcher *out of the box* (though rarely
one of the aforementioned trio).

Your father spoke of Bob Feller *throwing heat*, while
Tommy Bridges had a good *deuce, jug, hook*, or *Uncle
Charlie*—all synonyms for the curve-ball.  Jim Tobin threw
a *butterfly* pitch because he *pulled the string on it*, thus
making it come in slow.

Today the pitches are pretty much the same, but the
terminology has altered some, largely because of the influx
of Black players.

The fast ball becomes *the express*; the hard curve is a
*slider*; and the off-speed pitch is simply referred to *as the
change-up*.

And whether you call a high, hard one thrown at the
batter's head a *purpose pitch*, a *knockdown pitch*, or a *bean
ball*, the message remains the same: *Metala en su oreja*
('stick it in his ear!').

As mentioned, the Black players have brought in some
colorful terms of their own.  A pitcher who throws hard can
*really bring it*.  The catcher for some strange reason is often
called a *back catcher*.  A good hitter is described as being a
*baaaaddd* hitter, and *nobody walks but the mailman*.  A
player who excels can *get it done*, and if he hits well, then
*he can really stick it*.

One never knows what some Black players are going to do
with verbs.  Some omit them altogether: *You out*.  While others
use the word *be* in its pure form: *You be out, brother*.

Chicano baseballers love to talk in slang terms, often in
Spanish.  Hitting the ball well means that you got good
*wood* on it.  But they have no real word for *bat*, so they call
it *lena* or 'wood.'  One of their most derogatory terms—often
directed toward umpires—is the word *guy* used in place of
the name.  &ldquo;Hey, guy, wise up, you cabeza de melon&rdquo;
('melon head').  If they really get upset, they'll call you *tonto*
('dumb') or *estupido* ('stupid').  When speaking English, the
Latin ball players can likewise be most amusing: &ldquo;Hit to me
the ball.&rdquo; &ldquo;His fast ball—he doesn't have any,&rdquo; and &ldquo;he
throws several quick.&rdquo;

I can remember losing one game to a Latin team when
a homerun got lost in the bushes enabling the Mexican team
to defeat us 11-9.  After the game I exclaimed, loud enough
for the victors to hear, &ldquo;We'd have won the game had it not
been for those dumb bushes.&rdquo;

A bit of Latin wisdom followed which I've never forgotten:
&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; replied the player who'd hit the homer, &ldquo;the
bushes—they are the same for everybody.&rdquo;

Everyone knows that the trite clich&eacute;s of the Grantland
Rice era have been largely eliminated.  Today a bat is a bat,
not a &ldquo;mace,&rdquo; &ldquo;club,&rdquo; &ldquo;willow,&rdquo; or &ldquo;stick.&rdquo;  The plate is no
longer a &ldquo;dish,&rdquo; &ldquo;pentagon,&rdquo; or &ldquo;home.&rdquo;  Umpires are umpires—not
&ldquo;arbiters&rdquo; or &ldquo;men in blue&rdquo;—and we no longer
are besieged with such terms as &ldquo;hot corner,&rdquo; &ldquo;keystone,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Texas Leaguer,&rdquo; &ldquo;flyhawk,&rdquo; &ldquo;maskman,&rdquo; and &ldquo;grasscutter.&rdquo;

And baseballers still retain two other traditional traits:
one, they abbreviate everything they can—DP, RBI, ribbie,
&ldquo;two,&rdquo; BP (batting practice), PFP (pitchers' fielding practice),
K (strike out), etc.  And two, they always use the historical
present tense in retelling tales of the past: &ldquo;I was
waiting on the on-deck circle, and Williams is hitting.  Well,
Cleveland has Bobby Feller going today, and he's mad at
Williams because Williams hit a homer off him the inning
before, so while I'm standing there....&rdquo;

An interesting note is that most of America's teens and
pre-teens are pretty basic in their language—a bat is simply
a bat, a pitcher's a pitcher, and so on.  Even the Japanese
have borrowed most of the American terms with slight alterations.
They play *dabulheddas*, and they have an outfield
consisting of a *left-o, cent-o*, and *right-o*, plus a *thard-o,
show-to, secand-o*, and *fast-o*.

But as mentioned, the American youngsters are not really
sports idol worshipers the way their fathers and grandfathers
were; and while sports may open many doors to
them, they also open numerous mouths in a big yawn.  We
find this to be pretty much &ldquo;par for the course.&rdquo; Oops!
That's a golf term, and that's &ldquo;one strike against it,&rdquo; all of
which makes it a mixed metaphor or something.

## The Sinister Side of the Language
*J. Frank Schulman, Houston, Texas*

Why does *left* get such a bad deal from language?  In
most languages *left* has unpleasant associations.

In English, *left* has associations of political radicalism.
It also means 'abandoned.' *Left-handed* means 'unflattering,
dubious, insincere.' *Right*, on the other hand, means 'correct,
good, or proper.'  The German words *links* ('left') and *rechts*
('right') have similar meanings.

In Latin, the word for *left* is *sinister*.  Sinister connotes
'evil, cunning, scheming.'  The word for *right* is *dexter*, from
which derives our word *dexterous*, meaning 'skillful, clever,
or artful.'

In French, *gauche* means, besides 'left,' 'awkward, tactless,
clumsy, lacking in social grace.'  *Droit*, 'right,' has the
usual meanings of 'correct, good, and proper,' and also means
'law.' Even more to the point is that *gauche* means the same
as *maladroit* ('bad right').  In German, *linkisch* means 'maladroit.'
*Gouache* also refers to a school of painting in which
paint was piled high on the canvas.  It was considered ugly
and in bad taste.

In Spanish, too, *izquierda* ('left') has the same unpleasant
connotations, including political radicalism, and *derecho*
('right') means 'law,' as it does in French.  The same is true of
the Portuguese words *esquierda* and *derecho*.

In no language does the word for *right* have these unpleasant
connotations.  The languages seem to have conspired
against the left-handed of the world.  Everything from can
openers to golf clubs is designed for the right-handed.  The
single exception seems to be the typewriter, the keyboard of
which favors the left-handed.  Perhaps Christopher Sholes,
its inventor, was left-handed.

One suspects there is a sinister plot by the linguists.  We
can speculate about the reasons for this moral distinction between
left and right.  The political difference comes from the
habit in France and Germany of Communists sitting on the
speaker's left in Parliament, and Fascists sitting on the
speaker's right.  Another reason may be that left-handed people
were considered peculiar, perhaps victims of some evil
force.  Until quite recently it was thought best to retrain left-handed
people.  They often became clumsy as a result.  A doctoral
dissertation concluded that serious psychological consequences
follow from this retraining.[^b2]

Clearly, the word *left* has been dealt a left-handed blow.
Is this right?

***

[^b2]: Dra. Bettina Katzenstein, University of Hamburg, 1930.


#### EPISTOLA {Wesley First}

Norman R. Shapiro had a number of interesting things
to say [III, 3], but for me his remarks about *bravo* were
not among them.  Shapiro writes, &ldquo;When an Italian shouts
*bravo*, for example, he isn't just voicing indiscriminate
onomatopoeia; he is using a bona fide adjective.  (Hence the
feminine, *brava*, to a deserving diva.)&rdquo; My problem with
that is not only a bit of puzzlement over *bravo* as onomatopoeia,
but also the fear that he is helping to perpetuate a
most unfortunate practice.

*Bravo* comes in two forms.  As an adjective, *bravo* is
indeed inflected; male and female were they created.  And
as an adjective, *bravo -a*, means, according to Cassell's,
&ldquo;able, clever, skillful; capable; honest; plucky.&rdquo;

But this is not the whole story.  *Bravo* also is entered in
this fashion: &ldquo;bravo! *inter*.  Bravo!  Fine!&rdquo;  This is immediately
followed by &ldquo;Da Bravo!  Courage!&rdquo;  Obviously, in its incarnation
as interjection, *bravo* is *not* inflected.  The divine
diva bows to the same *bravo* as does the towering tenor.

Among American dictionaries, *Random House* declares,
under the entry, *bravo: &ldquo;interj*. well done!  good!&rdquo;  *Webster's
Third* does have an entry for *brava*, which states: &ldquo;Bravo—
used interjectionally in applauding a woman.&rdquo;  The OED
Universal edition says: &ldquo;Bravo&rdquo; *int* and *sb*, 1761 [It. *bravo*
superl *bravissimo* (also used).] Capital!  Well done!  Hence,
as *sb*, a cheer.&rdquo;

To turn to the review of *The Phrase-Dropper's Hand-book*,
the commentator dropped one phrase all the way:
It's *Revenons &agrave;* nos *moutons*.  One hopes &ldquo;Revenons &aacute;
moutons&rdquo; is not in the book, but rather is a typographical
error.

Haven't we enough problems in our language? 

[*Wesley First, New York, New York*].

## The New Orthography
*Elln Perkins, San Diego, California*

One of the heart-warming scenes of *How Green Was
My Valley* has young Huw, driven by his schoolmaster's
sneering at a mispronunciation, finally erupt: &ldquo;I do not
think it a shame to have read more words than I ever heard
pronounced.&rdquo;  An inspiriting moment for those who love
language and learning.  Consider it also a key to coping with
the rapid progress of our loved language toward The English
of the Future.  Our high school students are pointing the
way.  For they do not think it a shame to use more words
than they have ever seen written.  All we need to do is loosen
up a few prejudices and follow their lead.

The commonest principle in creative spelling is the
phonetic one, of course.  *Mestup*, since that's what the rules
of spelling and punctuation are, has a certain logic, as do
*froogley* (&ldquo;These Japanese lived very froogley&rdquo;) and *next
store* (&ldquo;We lived next store to Joey&rdquo;).  G.B. Shaw himself
could not have done much better than *skwormed, angches*,
and *Pencil vanea*, all created, as are all the new spellings
herein, by students.  Or *perrigraff*.  For that one we have to
scrap our exhilarating mini-lecture on Greek roots, but it
never did much for *phycology*, either.  As our young writers
would be quick to say, &ldquo;*Ph, ps*, Greek, shmeek, you know
what they mean.&rdquo;  And if you are willing to discard mere
pickiness, you know what *taken for granite* and *scuenting*
mean, too.  Or why not the grand flair of *nateral fenoninum*?
One would swear, if I may quote, that's the way *it
supostube*.

These wholesome simplifications may arise from a widespread
opinion that the language is well enough supplied
with fancy forms and spellings.  However, disagreement is
the stuff of progress; happily, someone out there prefers the
gentility of *no doubtly*, the delicacy of *coughen*, and the
pure flourish, I guess, of *laight*.  There is a taste for the elegant
in the old U.S. of A. *surprizing le enought*.

We come now to what can only be seen as phycological
fenoninums.  Not being one of those head doctors whose title
I can no longer spell (conditioning, accidental or otherwise,
being what it is), I can but lay these before you as they
came before me.  They are exact in every detail of diction
and punctuation; I would not trifle with scholarly accuracy
in such a matter.

>1.  Although our societies are formed by man, he isn't
able to flunksuate with it's pace.
>
>2.  Everything was fine until one day a man and a lay
drove up in a van.
>
>3.  As a catholic priest one spends most of his time
teaching, praying, giving sermons, and absorbing
sins given out by daily confessors.  (This was not the
student whose paper included a paragraph on the
rituals of *whorship*.)

And moving ever deeper into the psyche,

>1.  The West's women's doubles team brought the team
back from a four-game deficate.

Perhaps properly trained researchers will get funding for a
study of these.  Surely they belong not to a teacher but to a
*shitisatris* (sp?).

Well.  To end on a positive—even exuberant—note, a
whole glorious welling up of creativity exists that cannot
really be classified, though by backing off enough one can
see it as a kind of simplification—beating the universe to the
ultimate entropy.  For example, there is the man who had
extra income aside from his job because &ldquo;*he was a member
of the notor republic*.&rdquo;  Not a *horrobile* mistake, but art in
language.  And a *chairtable* is not a piece of furniture but an
adjective meaning generous and kindly.  A *chesser-drawers*,
on the other hand, is furniture, as is a *chester doors*, but
you would have known that all right, even if I *hadaded* told
you.  *Tenashoes* equals *tenershoes*; a world of possibilities
opens up here.  And a *stewdress* works on an airplane, after
she *graduwayts* from training.

Maybe it's significant that these alternative spellings
developed in Southern California, where free spirits flower
like the gorgeous *bogangadilia*.  Let's hear from the rest of
the country.  Four cheers for the future and *uter caoues*!


#### EPISTOLA {Reinhold Aman}

An addition to John G. Caffrey's &ldquo;Menu Barbarisms&rdquo;
[III, 3]: A restaurant near Joplin, Mo. serves &ldquo;ho-made
bread.&rdquo; As *ho* is used by prostitutes for 'whore,' I am
puzzled whether this bread is made at the home of a *MoHo*. [*Reinhold Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin*].

## The Encompassing Circle
*Arthur J. Morgan, New York, New York*

It is one of those ironies which are not infrequent in
language that two such disparate, not to say opposed, expressions
as Ku Klux Klan and &ldquo;kike&rdquo; should share a
common derivation.  But let us trace them individually.

The vituperative and contemptuous appellation *kike*,
started, as such epithets often do, in a fairly innocuous way.
In the last century there were a great many Jewish peddlers
and tinkers traveling the byroads and hinterlands of the
country.  Many of these men were illiterate, at least in English.
When called upon to sign his name, being unable to do
so, the Jewish peddler often had to &ldquo;make his mark.&rdquo;

However, for religious reasons, he would not make a
cross, but offered to draw a circle instead.  The Yiddish for a
circle was *keikel*, which in time was corrupted to *kike*, and
as often happens with ethnic appellations, deteriorated into
a slur when its origin was forgotten.  (Cf. *gringo*, from
&ldquo;Green grow the lilacs, O,&rdquo; a song that was popular among
the American soldiers during the troubles with Mexico.
Many other examples could be given.)

Now, how about Ku Klux Klan?  Eric Partridge attributes
the first part, Kuklux, to a distortion of the Greek
*kyklos*, 'circle.'  The deliberate distortion, and the use of K's
and x's were intended to make the name more mysterious
and frightening, but it merely meant 'Circle Clan' to start.

But that very word *kyklos* was the origin of the Yiddish
*keikel*.  Most Yiddish words come from German, but circle
in German is *Zirkel* or *Kreis*; this word *keikel* goes back to
the Jewish dialect Yevanic, analogous to Yiddish, except
that the vocabulary was Greek, rather than German.  Like
Yiddish, the written language used Hebrew characters.

In fact, during the long years of the diaspora, the wandering
Jews have had a dozen dialects, written in Hebrew
letters, but with words derived from the language of their
current (or previous) hosts.  Thus a book which looks like
Hebrew may actually be in Persian, Arabic, Berber, Greek,
French or Provencal, Italian or Spanish.  The latter, called
Ladino, is still spoken and even written, today.  It's a wide,
wide circle.

## Who Do You Believe?

For those readers who consider &ldquo;incorrect&rdquo; grammar indefensible,
the first of the following letters provides an interesting
(if indefensible) rationale: it is a good example of
solecistic (as contrasted with syllogistic) reasoning.  The
second letter here reproduced expresses a rational approach
to the problem, puristic attitudes notwithstanding.

>Mrs. Dorrice R. Morrow
>
>Swarthmore, PA             November 13, 1973
>
>Dear Mrs. Morrow:
>
>We are aware that your dislike for the interrogative
&ldquo;Who are we pleasing?&rdquo;  is sometimes shared by others.
Some people insist that this sentence should read,
&ldquo;Whom are we pleasing?&rdquo;  But the use of the pronoun
in an interrogative sentence, as here, needs to be
distinguished from the pronoun in &ldquo;For whom the bell
tolls&rdquo; or &ldquo;to whom it may concern.&rdquo;
>
>When &ldquo;who&rdquo; is used as an interrogative pronoun, it
is unnatural English to use its objective form, even
when it is the object of a verb or preposition.  Noah
Webster said that &ldquo;Whom did you speak to?&rdquo;  is &ldquo;hardly
English at all&rdquo; but...&ldquo;is a corruption, and all the
grammars that can be found will not extend the use of
the phrase beyond the walls of a college.&rdquo;
>
>When the word stands before a verb, as in &ldquo;Who am
I trying to please?&rdquo;  the nominative form is preferred.
The form &ldquo;whom&rdquo; is required when the word follows a
preposition (&ldquo;To whom am I to send the letter?&rdquo;).
>
>The invariable form &ldquo;who&rdquo; in interrogative
constructions was found in older and early in modern
literary English.  Shakespeare used it.  Speaking of this,
the noted grammarian Curme says, &ldquo;The use of the
nominative *who* as object is never ambiguous since...
'who did they meet?'  indicates that *who*...modifies
the verb and cannot be the subject?&rdquo;
>
>Sincerely yours,
>
>The Editors

>Dear Mrs. Morrow:            May 29, 1975
>
>Thank you for calling to our attention the misuse of
&ldquo;who-whom&rdquo; in the Monitor.  Unfortunately, this seems
to be a fairly common error in today's world.  We do
not condone it in any way and try to be alert against it.
But we do not always succeed.
>
>We try to uphold the highest standards of proper
grammatical usage in the Monitor.  Alert readers are of
great help in motivating us to maintain our high
standards and we appreciate your concern.
>
>Sincerely,
>
>Dewey F Ray
>
>Chief of Copy Desk

The reference to George O. Curme draws one to his
two books, *Parts of Speech and Accidence*, Heath, 1935, and
*Syntax*, Heath, 1931: the latter contains the quotation cited
by &ldquo;The Editors&rdquo; of *The Christian Science Monitor*.  It is on
page 101 in a section that concludes with the comment, &ldquo;In
general, however, the use of *who* for *whom* is receding in
all functions in the literary language.&rdquo;  Such usage is also
called &ldquo;careless language&rdquo; by Curme.

A further comment appears in *Parts of Speech*: 'I don't
know *who* (instead of *whom*) he plays with.'

>The relative pronoun always has the case form
required by the construction of the clause in which it
stands....  In ['I will go with *whoever* I like,' *who* is
the object of the preposition *with*.  We should
withstand the strong drift here toward the modern
forms and use the more expressive older ones.
>
>[pp. 166-7]
>
>As we have in general abandoned the use of the old
inflectional endings in favor of modern means of
expression, there is also here in colloquial speech a
strong tendency to employ modern forms—...: '*Who*
(instead of *whom*) did you meet?'  '*Who* did you give it
to?'  ...In choice language the tendency is to
withstand the very strong drift here toward the modern
forms and use the more expressive older ones.  [p. 171]

There is no mistaking how Curme expressed himself,
and the quotation in The Editors' letter is an explanation of
why *who* replaces *whom* in certain constructions: it certainly
cannot be construed as having received the grammarian's
approval.

[*Incidentally*, VERBATIM *is planning to publish a
reprint of Curme's two books, one of the best and most
complete reference grammars of contemporary English, rife
with examples from literature.  It would help greatly if
readers could provide us with some indication of their
possible interest in having such works in their libraries.  Both
books have been out of print since 1963*.—Editor]

## Laws
*Gary S. Felton, Los Angeles, California*

*Agnes Allen's Law*.[^c1] Almost anything is easier to get
into than out of.

*The Bougerre Factor*[^c2] [pronounced &ldquo;bugger&rdquo;; same as
*The Soothing Factor*].  Characterized as changing the equation
to fit the universe (mathematically similar to *The
Damping Factor*) and has the characteristic of dropping the
subject under discussion to zero importance.

*Bromiley's Maxim*.[^c2] What's not worth doing is not
worth doing well.

*Diddle Coefficient*.[^c2] Characterized as changing things
so that universe and equation appear to fit without requiring
a change in either (combination of *The Bougerre Factor* and
*Finagle's Constant*).

*Fetridge's Law*.[^c3] Important things that are supposed to
happen do not happen, especially when people are looking
or, conversely, things that are supposed to not happen do
happen, expecially when people are looking.

*Finagle's Constant*.[^c2] A multiplier of the zero-order
term; may be characterized as changing the universe to fit
the equation.

*First Law of Experiment*.[^c2] In any field of scientific endeavor,
anything that can go wrong will go wrong.

*Fourth Law of Experiment*.[^c2] If in any problem you
find yourself doing an immense amount of work, the answer
can be obtained by simple inspection.

*Gumperson's Law*.[^c3] The vacant parking spaces are
always on the other side of the street; you can throw a
stubbed-out cigarette from a car window and start a raging
forest fire, whereas it will take an hour and a half to get a
blaze going in a fireplace loaded with dry wood and sloshed
with kerosene; grass seed planted in rich soil, fertilized and
kept moist, will not grow, although a few seeds may blow
onto the blacktop driveway, settle into a crack, and there
take root and flourish.

*Murphy's Law*.[^c4], [^c1] If anything can possibly go wrong
with a design, test, or experiment, it will.

*Nichols' First Law*.[^c1] Success occurs when preparation
meets opportunity.

*Nichols' Fourth Law*.[^c1] Avoid an action with any unacceptable
outcome.

*Parkinson's Law*.[^c5] The idea that work expands to fill
the time allotted to it, as by a worker's slowing his pace or
embellishing a task so that he does not finish it ahead of
schedule.

*The Peter Principle*.[^c6] In a hierachy, every employee
tends to rise to his level of incompetence.

*Rule of the Way Out*.[^c2] Always leave room, when
writing a report, to add an explanation if it does not work.

*Second Law of Experiment*.[^c2] It is usually impractical to
worry beforehand about interference; if you have none,
someone will supply some for you.

*Second Law of Experimental Psychology*.[^c7] Training
takes time, whether or not anything is learned.

*Smith's Law*.[^c1] One ought to finish what one starts.

*Colonel Stapp's Ironical Paradox*.[^c1] The universal aptitude
for ineptitude makes any human accomplishment an
incredible miracle.

*Third Law of Experiment*.[^c2] In any collection of data,
the figures that are obviously correct, beyond all need of
checking, contain the errors.

*Third Law of Experimental Psychology*.[^c7] Any well-trained
experimental animal, in a controlled environment
and subject to controlled stimulation, will do as he damned
well pleases.

*Zahner's Law*.[^c1] If you play with anything long enough,
it will break.

Some of these laws also have corollaries.  For a detailed
look at them please check the references.  I am eager to hear
from any readers who know more of these laws inasmuch as
*any compilation of exceptions to the rule will always be
incomplete* (*Felton's Law*).

***

[^c1]: Smith, J.  The lawful truth.  *Los Angeles Times*, Part 4, p. 1 (Jan. 13) 1977.

[^c2]: Aurelian, L. Science conquers all.  *Intellectual Digest*, 4:47 (Mar.) 1974.

[^c3]: Smith, H.A.  *A Short History of Fingers* (*and Other State Papers*).  Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1963.

[^c4]: Murphy's Law and its corollaries.  Unpublished anonymous manuscript available through the author.

[^c5]: Parkinson, C. Northcote.  *Parkinson's Law and Other Studies in Administration*.  Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., Sentry Edition, 1957.

[^c6]: Peter, L.J. and Hull, R.  *The Peter Principle*.  New York: William Morrow & Company, Inc., 1969.

[^c7]: Hebb, D.O.  What psychology is about.  *American Psychologist*, 29: 71-79 (Feb.) 1974.

## Exceptions to the Rule
*Gary S. Felton, Los Angeles, California*

All of us have grown up learning countless rules or laws
of nature and the universe.  We learn these rules or laws
well and find eventually that most of the time they hold up
and operate as expected.  Nevertheless, as with most things
in life, people encounter inconsistency about rules or laws
and the domains they refer to.  Often there is some exception.

One way offered to deal with, allow for, or rationalize
the exception is to state that there *are* some exceptions and
then, where applicable, learn them, understand them, and
accept them.  Another approach is to continue to analyze
exceptions and &ldquo;fit&rdquo; them into the rules.  Some people are
more earthy about such matters, however, and treat with
levity the fact that life is not always consistent and existence
is not always predictable.

One of the outgrowths of this latter approach is a number
of pseudo-scientific statutes or laws.  These statements
incorporate known experience with generalized expectancies
about existence and give us something to laugh about at
ourselves and our universe.  Such &ldquo;laws,&rdquo; as they generally
are referred to, usually are named after their discoverer.  In
giving us a fascinating and amusing look at ourselves, the
laws relate to several domains of our day-to-day experience,
particularly scientific research and the study of behavior,
and are presented below for interested readers.

## More -ine Adjectives
*Jay Dillon, Gladstone, New Jersey*

In her piece, &ldquo;Animal-Like [*sic*] Adjectives&rdquo; [III, 3],
Miss L.T. Jewell not only presents a corpus of some thirty-five
&ldquo;animaline&rdquo; adjectives, but cites also several amusing
examples of their journalistic use with reference to human
behavior, features, and affairs.  While I am unable quite so
readily to contribute to her stock of amusing usage, I have
managed in a few hours' time to more than quadruple her
corpus.

Forty-two of my new-found animaline adjectives refer
to birds:

>*alaudine* skylark W[^d1]
>
>*alcine* auk W
>
>*alcidine* auk, puffin, ect. W
>
>*alectoridine* crane, rail, ect. W
>
>*anatine* duck 1862-1893 OW
>
>*avine* bird 1881 OW
>
>*buteonine* buzzard 1865-1874 OW
>
>*charadrine* plover W
>
>*ciconi(i)ne* stork 1874-1893 OW
>
>*columbine* dove c1386-1835 OW
>
>*corvine* crow 1656-1886 OW
>
>*cuculine* cuckoo OW
>
>*cygnine* swan W
>
>*dacelonine* kingfisher W
>
>*didine* dodo 1885 OW
>
>*falconine* falcon OW
>
>*fringilline* finch 1874-1893 OW
>
>*fulicine* coot W
>
>*fuliguline* eider, etc. 1862-1893 OW
>
>*galline* domestic fowl 1868-1895 OW
>
>*garruline* jay, magpie W
>
>*hirundine* swallow 1831 OW
>
>*ibidine* ibis 1875 OW
>
>*laridine* gull, etc. 1877 OW
>
>*larine* gull OW
>
>*meleagrine* turkey W
>
>*milvine* kite 1727-1842 OW
>
>*nestorine* kea, kaka W        
>
>*phasianine* pheasant 1868 OW      
>                                                           
>*picine* woodpecker 1890 OW        
>                                                            
>*psittacine* parrot 1888-1895 OW     
>
>*ralline* rail 1885-1892  OW
>
>*sittine* nuthatch 1829 OW
>
>*strigine* owl W
>
>*sturnine* swallow 1809 OW
>
>*tetraonine* grouse, ptarmigan, etc. 1868-1885 OW
>
>*trochilidine* humming-bird 1885 OW
>
>*tringine* sandpiper OW
>
>*turdine* thrush 1890 OW
>
>*trochiline* humming-bird W
>
>*volucrine* bird 1881 OW
>
>*vulturine* vulture 1647-1886 OW

Fully fifty-four of my discoveries have to do with land
animals:

>*alcine* elk, moose W    
>
>*aspine* asp 1644 O   
>
>*dasyurine* dasyure (1839-47) OW
>
>*antelopine* antelope W     
>
>*bisontine* bison 1885- 1887 OsW    
>
>*bubaline* hartebeest 1827-1907 OsW  
>
>*caballine* horse 1430-1878 OW   
>
>*cameline* camel 1865 OW   
>
>*capreoline* roe 1835 OW   
>
>*cricetine* hamster W  
>
>*crocodiline* crocodile (1730-6)-1755 OW  
>
>*crotaline* rattlesnake 1865-1882 OW  
>
>*didelphine* opossum 1847 OW
>
>*gazelline* gazelle OW
>
>*giraffine* giraffe 1901 OsW    
>
>*hippopotamine* hippo-potamus 1883 OW  
>
>*hippotigrine* zebra W *hirudine* leech W  
>
>*hominine* man 1883-1959 OOsW                                        
>
>*hyenine* hyaena (1884-5) OW
>                     
>*hylobatine* gibbon OW
>
>*hystricine* porcupine 1883 OW
>                              
>*leporine* hare 1656-1877 OW      
>                              
>*lumbricine* earthworm 1890 OW     
>
>*rhinocerine* rhinoceros 1879 OW
>                                    
>*lyncine* lynx W           
>
>*rucervine* Indian swamp deer, etc. 1881-1891 OW
>
>*macropine* kangaroo 1888-1891 O      
>                               
>*macropodine* kangaroo, wallaby, etc. W   
>                       
>*megacerine* (extinct) Irish elk W   
>
>*megacerotine* (extinct) Irish elk 1884 OW   
>
>*megatherine* (extinct) American sloth W  
>
>*mephitine* skunk W   
>
>*moschine* musk deer OW  
>
>*musteline* weasel, mink 1656-1891 OW  
>
>*noctilionine* bat 1844 O   
>
>*ovibovinine* musk ox OW  
>
>*pantherine* panther 1656-1890 OW 
>
>*pardine* leopard (1859-1)  OW
>
>*procyonine* raccoon, kinkajou, etc. 1883 OW  
>
>*pteropine* bat 1844 O 
>
>*rangiferine* caribou, reindeer, etc. OW
>
>*rupicaprine* chamois 1827-1891 OW
>
>*salamandrine* salamander 1712-1888 OW
>
>*sciurine* squirrel 1842-1883 OW
>                          
>*sabelline* sable 1888-1891 O     
>
>*soricine* shrew 1781-c1878 OW 
>
>*talpine* mole 1860 OW
>
>*tapirine* tapir 1891 OW
>                              
>*tigrine* tiger 1656-1908 OW
>
>*tolypeutine* armadillo OW
>                        
>*vaccine* cow 1799-1881 OW     
>
>*vituline* calf 1656-1870 OW
>
>*viverrine* civet 1800-1885 OW
>                                       
>*zebrine* zebra OW

Insects account for six more such terms:

>*acarine* mite 1828 OW  
>
>*anopheline* mosquito 1920-1964 Os  
>
>*bombycine* silkworm W       
>
>*culicine* mosquito 1921-1964 OsW
>
>*formicine* ant 1885 OW
>
>*vespine* wasp 1843-1884 OW

Marine beasties supply ten animalines:

>*cyprine* carp 1828 O     
>
>*delphine* dolphin 1828 OW        
>                                  
>*delphinine* dolphin O      
>
>*homarine* lobster 1880 OW    
>                                       
>*manatine* manatee OW     
>
>*megapterine* hump-back whale W
>
>*octopine* octopus 1914 OsW
>
>*ostracine* oyster 1890 OW
>
>*phocaenine* porpoise 1890 OW
>
>*phocine* seal 1846 OW

Finally, beasts of the mind occupy the last three places
in my extended corpus:

>*basilicine* basilisk 1855 OW    
>                                            
>*sphingine* sphinx 1961 OW
>
>*sphinxine* sphinx 1845

I cannot pretend that the above lists are complete, or
even nearly so; the relative ease with which they were
compiled suggests that there are at least one or two hundred
more such terms lurking about, waiting to be unearthed by
someone with more time and interest than I can devote.

Miss Jewell's identification of *-ine* as &ldquo;Middle English,
[meaning] 'pertaining to' &rdquo; mystifies me.  For it seems to me
perfectly obvious, and, is readily confirmed, that English
adjectival *-ine* simply represents Latin -*inus*, and perhaps
occasionally French *-in*.  Moreover, the suffix appears not to
have been productive in English before Elizabethan times.
Thus, *-ine* is not Middle English at all, although it is collaterally
related to Middle English *-en* 'made of—, (*brasen,
golden, lether(e)n, wollen*), by way of Indo-European **-ino-*,
Common Germanic **-ina-*, and Old English *-en* (*braesen,
gylden, le&delta;ren, wyllen*).

Finally, it must be remembered that there is no consistent
morphological difference whatever between the
animaline adjectives and such other adjectives as *feminine,
genuine, marine*, and *sanguine*.  The distinction is purely a
semantic one, and it is not always easy to demarcate the
animaline from the other adjectives in *-ine*; does *hominine*
belong in the above list of land animals?  If Miss Jewell
includes both *caprine* and *hircine*, ought we to add, then,
*masculine* and *feminine*?  Ought adjectives in *-ine* for
fabulous beasts to be included?  What of *didine, megacerine*,
and other adjectives for animals prehistoric, extinct, or
both?  Ought I to have included *sylphine* and *nymphine*?  Miss
Jewell's *animal-like* and my *animaline* have thus far meant
whatever she and I have wanted them to mean; should
these words ever be used again, they will mean whatever
they are intended to mean, or are taken to mean.

***

[^d1]: *In this, and other lists below, the individual forms are followed by the common names of the species, genera, etc., to which they refer, the dates of the earliest and latest citations at hand, and sigla reporting each form's presence in one or more sources.  The absence of a particular siglum after a form shall signal that form's absence from the source referred to by that siglum.  The sources are the *OED* (O), its supplements (Os) and the second edition of *Webster's New International Dictionary* (W).


#### EPISTOLA {Kelsie Harder}

The reason that I don't subscribe to *The American
Scholar* is precisely what you say.  I haven't returned my Phi
Beta Kappa key, but I have been infuriated by some of the
articles, which I stingily glance over in the local library.  I
doubt, however, that your &ldquo;Permissions&rdquo; will go anywhere
in face of the present paranoia in the public's public.

Other less important comments: Off and on, mostly
off, I have made comments about my own name in ANS
Bulletins.  Schulz should not be so concerned.  He should feel
elated.  My mail, as you can suspect, comes much the same
way: Ms., Mrs., Mr., and Miss, and sometimes just zero.  It
gets me on all kinds of mailing lists, all of which I
thoroughly (no counter word) enjoy.  I have been involved
in Women's Lib groups—by mail—(no pun), gay groups,
and probably others because of the name.  One book on
names gives the full etymology of my name.  The editor then
acknowledges that I sent him the information, meanwhile
thanking graciously Miss Kelsie B. Harder, Executive
Secretary of the American Name Society.  I had neglected to
let him know.  I got a page and a half in the introduction.
Another good story corresponds with Schulz's, although
with a different twist.  When I was a student at Vanderbilt,
a professor called the roll, Miss Harder.  I replied, &ldquo;Mrs.
Harder,&rdquo; for I was married at the time.  He never called my
name again, just skipped it when he called the daily roll.
Furthermore, he gave me an &ldquo;A.&rdquo;  James Dickey was in that
class.  More on Dickey some other time! 

[*Kelsie Harder, The State University College at Potsdam*].

## Notes from the Compound World
*Caryl Johnston, Boston, Massachusetts*

According to the famed mytho-grammarian Maxim
M&uuml;tter, compounds (*snow-white, rose-red, upsy-daisy,
shaggy-dog*, etc.) are the harbingers of a new epoch of consciousness.
In contrast to the modern uncompoundish or analytical
tendency, they herald a new power or faculty which
M&uuml;tter termed &ldquo;magistic.&rdquo;  (The verb, *to magist*, means 'to
conceive, or to engage in the labor of conceiving, the gist of
something in an image.') Linguistic philosophers, who are
the kind of people who like to separate their words into distinct
and clearly-defined operable units (as, for example, in
the assertion that there are two apples in this cart, and three
oranges in that cart) simply balk at the 2 + 2 = 5 mentality of
most compounds.  (Take, for example, the notorious query:
&ldquo;What is the meaning of *applecart* in the statement: 'Don't
upset the applecart'?&rdquo;)  According to M&uuml;tter, it (the noncompoundite
intellect) &ldquo;is unable to split in one lightning-stroke
(*blitzkrieg*) the complex welter (*plexwelt*) of ideas, associations,
and images which compounds, denoting permanent
or transient actions, qualities, or states, represent.&rdquo;  The
mind is thus hurled, willy-nilly, into the very jaws of duality,
and forced to entertain simultaneously two dissimilarlycompatible
concepts, which, however, still fall far short of the
intended meaning.  It is precisely in this quality of falling-farshortedness
that compounds are so peculiarly noted, and for
which M&uuml;tter reserved only words of highest praise.

Some of M&uuml;tter's conclusions have been slightly modified
over the past century, due to the discovery of compounds
involving trinitarian, quadripartite, cinquefoil, or
even sextuplet conceptions.  Dr. Algol Blauhaus, a student of
magnitudes, has claimed to discern infinite digression in the
series of conceptions, and deals only with magistian infinity-factors,
a branch of the science which is still, so to speak, in
its infancy.  In any case, despite the constant unearthing of
new data, the basic compost made by M&uuml;tter has sprouted
what in this century has come to be known as the Society
for the Preservation of Ancient Compounds.  The name can
be somewhat misleading, as Society members seek not only
to preserve ancient compounds, but also avidly promote the
science of magistics.  They also openly encourage the assimilation
of infinite digressions.

This avowed and open activity on the part of SPAC members
is watched with panic on both sides of the Atlantic by
language technicians and computer specialists, people who
are somewhat derisively referred to by Society members as
*compeeps*.  (Panic: *ealu-scerwen*, 'terror as at the loss of ale.')
It has been pointed out by members of the pro-compound
party that a person who panics at the proliferation of compounds
is probably a *nincompoop* 'non compos mentis' if
not *ni&ccedil;ake&ccedil;a&ccedil;ma&ccedil;runakhas*, 'he who has short hair, nails,
and beard.'  The compeeps, in turn, call the compounders
*kunophron*, 'having the soul of a dog,' and *boukephalos*,
'with the forehead of an ox' (*Front-de-Boeuf*).

Debates on both sides of the compound fence are aired
over most stations, and compound-slung epithets frequently
jam the ears of the listening public.  From Hoboken ('smoke
pipe') to Derby ('village of wild beasts'), from Punjab ('five
rivers') to Algonquin ('those on the other side of the river'),
compound-keepers have been spotted, trapping and talontagging
possible topics before mating them.  Often
demonstrations on behalf of compounds are held, as the one
which we recently attended in Massachusetts, 'blue hills.'
(Incidentally, the five brothers Padavas were there, 'having
their mother for sixth (companion)'—*matri-&sacute;a&sacute;tha*.)  Professor
Leichen-Bleich ('pale as a corpse') spoke for the computer
people, calling the compounders *chairekakoi*, 'those who rejoice
in evil,' and *ethelorhetoroi*, 'pretending to be orators.'
He also denounced the whole compounded controversy as
being nothing more than an insipid quibble over *piqsirpoq*
and *qininqsug*, 'drifting snow' and 'snowdrift.'  The noted
Boston Brahmaness *Nih&ccedil;vasa-parama*, 'sighing a great deal,'
or 'regarding sighs as the supreme thing,' countered appropriately
for the Archaic Society by discoursing upon the
dekeeping-childlightsomeness which certain compounds
have, the *ambologera*, 'who puts off old age.'  She also spoke
feelingly for the kind of compound which has the *dakethumos*,
'that bites into the heart.'  Professor Leichen-Bleich,
attempting to pun upon Ms. Nih&ccedil;vasa-parama's multisibilance,
reminded her of the Spartan woman 'who shows
her thighs' (*phainomeris*); and, as for biting into the heart,
he'd just as soon be 'wounded by a thorn' (*akanthoplex*).  But
Herman Stockfest ('firm as a stump'), snorting visibly,
called the spokesman for the compeeps an old fly-flapper
(*proboscis*) and a shuffle-foot who spoke nothing but
fatback, a composite which seems to have carried the day as
no one could come up with an immediate Greek, Latin, or
Sanskrit equivalent.

Compounders and polysemiasts are urged to send samples
of their work to the Archaic Society, which is always
glad to supply interested members of the public with
compounds for new or old diseases, states, conditions, or
habits of mind.  Cremnophobics, for example, afraid of falling
from cliffs, should be happy to know they no longer
need to be classed with ordinary acrophobics.  Those with
an excessive fear of holy places should jot down *hagiophobia*,
and at long last 'fear of Friday the 13th' can take its place in
our growing family of componderables as the insidious triskaidekaphobia.
And finally, those of you who, like the compeeps,
cringe at compounds, can always take comfort that
*floccinaucinihilipilification* is just the word you've been
waiting for.


#### EPISTOLA {J.F. O'Connor}

I can contribute two additional Menu Barbarisms to
those listed by Dr. McCaffrey in the December 1976 issue.
Both were perpetrated by restaurants in the Washington,
D.C., area: *Tornado Rossini; Steak Joan of Arc*. 

[*J.F. O'Connor, Silver Spring, Maryland*].


#### EPISTOLA {C.A. Peddle}

Re: &ldquo; 'Ouch!' he said in Japanese&rdquo; [III, 1].  I dunno
about you academic types at all.  The only time I might use
&ldquo;ouch&rdquo; would be in reaction to a minor irritation, such as a
flu shot.  I certainly do not consider the word to convey
&ldquo;vocalized pain itself....&rdquo;  Were I to hit my finger or
thumb with a hammer while trying to drive a nail into
wood, I would use any of a number of expletives such as s—,
f*** or even AAAAAHHooouuuww!  But I'm damned if I'd
ever consider &ldquo;ouch.&rdquo; 

[*C.A. Peddle, San Francisco, California*].

## Self-referring Words
*Alexander J. Pollock, Northbrook, Illinois*

Self-referring sentences, notably the paradoxical &ldquo;This
sentence is false,&rdquo; are sufficiently familiar.  But the notion of
self-referring *words* was new, at least for me, when it occurred
to me the other day while I was waiting for an elevator.
Self-referring words denote or describe themselves—for
example, the word &ldquo;word&rdquo; is itself a word, and the word
&ldquo;useful&rdquo; is itself useful.

I was already intrigued by these words by the time we
were riding up on the elevator.  Other readers of VERBATIM
may wish to participate in answering three questions which
self-referring words raise:

1\.  How many of them are there?

2\.  Can we formulate general principles about them?

3\.  How widely are the categories &ldquo;self-referring&rdquo; and
&ldquo;nonself-referring&rdquo; applicable?

Having posed the questions, any logophile of spirit must
attempt answers.

It is obvious that the vast majority of words are not self-referring.
My current list follows:

1\.  Nouns

| THE WORD:         | IS ITSELF A: |
| ----------------- | ------------ |
| a.  *word*        | word         |
| b.  *term*        | term         |
| c.  *noun*        | noun         |
| d.  *substantive* | substantive  |
| e.  *symbol*      | symbol       |
| f.  *sign*        | sign         |

2\.  Adjectives

| THE WORD:                    | IS ITSELF:               |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| a.  *useful*                 | useful                   |
| b.  *English*                | English                  |
| c.  *fran&ccedil;ais* (etc.) | *fran&ccedil;ais* (etc.) |
| d.  *acceptable*             | acceptable               |
| e.  *unobjectionable*        | unobjectionable          |
| f.  *intelligible*           | intelligible             |
| g.  *meaningful*             | meaningful               |
| h.  *understandable*         | understandable           |
| i.  *thinkable*              | thinkable                |
| j.  *sesquipedalian*         | sesquipedalian           |
| k.  *ordinary*               | ordinary                 |
| l.  *analyzable*             | analyzable               |
| m.  *inflected*              | inflected                |
| n.  *polysyllabic*           | polysyllabic             |
| o.  *definable*              | definable                |
| p.  *expressible*            | expressible              |
| q.  *printable*              | printable                |
| r.  *writable*               | writable                 |
| s.  *pronounceable*          | pronounceable            |
| t.  *speakable*              | speakable                |
| u.  *utterable*              | utterable                |
| v.  *learnable*              | learnable                |
| w.  *teachable*              | teachable                |

I have so far three principles:

1\.  Only nouns and adjectives can be self-referring.
This is because words themselves are objects in the cultural
world; thus they can only be referred to by names or descriptions
of objects, i.e., by nouns or adjectives.

2\.  Self-referring nouns are always grammatical or
linguistic terms applicable to nouns.  This appears to be the
only way for a noun to name itself.

3\.  Self-referring adjectives have a wider range of meaning
than self-referring nouns, because they can express many
aspects of words (than which nothing has more aspects).
The self-referring adjectives listed above bring out, respectively,
that words are:

a.  practical

b-c.  in some language or other (This class of self-referring
adjectives is represented in each language I am
familiar with by one word—namely the adjective which describes
words, including itself, as being in that language.  As
an aside, I wonder if, of the few thousand languages there
are, any is so unselfconscious as not to have a word for itself,
as one language among many?)

d-e.   socio-cultural
f-i.   cognitive
j-k.   stylistic
l-n.   structured
o.   semantic
p-u.   variously expressible
v-w.   pedagogical

My question here is whether, in principle, every noun
and adjective can be unambiguously classed as either self-referring
or nonself-referring.

It is clear that there might be disagreements about the
classification of given words, for reasons such as:

1\.  Different senses of the same word—for example,
*sign* in the sense of 'an indication of meaning' is self-referring;
in the sense of 'an inscribed board used for advertising' it is
not.

2\.  Differences in taste or opinion—some people might
think *interesting* interesting and *euphonious* euphonious;
other people might not.

3\.  Differences in theory—some people might speculate
that words in some sense exist or are things, thus making
*existing* and *thing* self-referring; others' speculations might
reach opposite conclusions.

Such disagreements are not objections *in principle*,
however.  In principle, we can sort out the senses of words,
and settle or at least understand and handle differences of
opinion, taste and theory.  But is there a word which cannot
in principle be assigned to one of our two categories?

It seems to me there is one: the word *nonself-referring*.
If *nonself-referring* is nonself-referring, it obviously describes
itself and thus must be self-referring.  If, on the other hand,
*nonself-referring* is self-referring, then it must describe itself
and be nonself-referring.  So the self-referring word can lead
us to paradox equally as well as the self-referring sentence.

Doubtless, as journal articles say, further research of
this intriguing subject is needed.  And the inviting field of
the self-referring *phrase* lies all untrodden before us.


#### EPISTOLA {Laurence J. Davidson}

I was delighted to read *Hear Finish Before (Pause) You?*,
since one rarely comes across articles on sign language that
deal with Ameslan rather than Signed English.  (In fact, one
all too rarely comes across articles on sign language at all.)
Ms. Brown, rightly stressing the fact that Ameslan has a
grammar of its own, uses some of the most salient differences
between its syntax and English syntax to illustrate this fact:
&ldquo;it lacks articles, and plurals and verb tenses are supplied
either through context or by the addition of the word 'finish'.&rdquo;

Readers might be interested to know that Ameslan
happens to show many remarkable similarities to Chinese in
its syntax: e.g., that identical quotation applies to Chinese!
I have all too often heard the naive claim that neither Ameslan
nor Chinese &ldquo;has a grammar.&rdquo;  In fact, both have quite intricate
grammars; what they don't have is word-endings,
which the Latin-minded often think of as the only kind of
grammar.  I wish, however, that Ms. Brown hadn't devoted
quite so much attention to idiomatic expressions (real or
apparent), since idioms tend to obscure the grammar of a
language rather than to illuminate it.

I have two other minor criticisms of Ms. Brown's article.
First, her folk-etymologies of the signs for male and female
(&ldquo;long ago someone must have decided men have minds
while women have mouths&rdquo;) are not borne out by researchers
in the field.  The standard etymologies are reflected in Lottie
Riekehof's excellent lexicon, *Talk to the Deaf*, and in Harry
Hoemann's thorough and thoughtful text, *The American Sign
Language*: according to Hoemann, &ldquo;the male gender
marker was based on the custom of tipping a hat, and the
region of the forehead serves as the gender marker for male
kinship signs.  The female gender marker was derived from
the bonnet strings tied under the chin.&rdquo;  A different etymology
occurs in William C. Stokoe's pioneering *Dictionary of
American Sign Language*.  Stokoe, the recognized authority
on the linguistics of Ameslan, writes of the sign for &ldquo;female&rdquo;:
&ldquo;Ep&eacute;e himself states that it was selected because of the
hanging curls prominent in the coiffures of the day.  Curiously
enough there is a traditional ASL etymology too which
makes the sign an indication of the ladies' bonnet strings.&rdquo;
[Ep&eacute;e, an eighteenth-century French abb&eacute;, is the father of
the modern American and French sign languages.]

Finally, Ms. Brown leaves the reader with the unfortunately
inaccurate impression that sign-language classes
and textbooks all teach Ameslan.  Would that that were so, but
in fact a great many of them teach Signed English.  The
signs are the same, but the grammar of Signed English is
English grammar, often complete with English suffixes and
prefixes.  There's nothing wrong with Signed English if that
is what you really want to study, but you should know just
what you're getting before you enroll in a class or buy a
textbook.  If you want Ameslan, be sure you're really being
given Ameslan.

My criticisms, however, are definitely outweighed by
the positive aspects of the article.  (In fact, they are even
outweighed by the mere fact that an article appeared on
Ameslan in the first place.)  Perhaps the best thing about Ms.
Brown's article is the simple fact that she makes it clear that
Ameslan is indeed a *language*, not just a lexicon of signs.

I was not so delighted to read your own &ldquo;Obiter Dicta,&rdquo;
in which you display a surprising ignorance (or willful
disregard?) of the meaning of the term &ldquo;affirmative action.&rdquo;
You say that &ldquo;what is probably intended is the sense of *assertive*
action; in other words, 'We don't shilly-shally when asked
for a decision on an application.' &rdquo;  But this is *not* what is
intended at all!  It isn't even close: the term really means
that the employer will *affirmatively* (= &ldquo;assertively,&rdquo; as you
put it) seek out women and members of minority groups.
Not only will he give equal opportunity to those who show
up applying for a job, but he will also assertively try to get
applications from types of people who do not usually apply.
The term &ldquo;affirmative action&rdquo; arose fairly recently in
response to those companies that claimed that the lack of
women, handicapped persons, blacks, etc., in high positions
was due to the fact that very few even applied for those
positions.  &ldquo;Affirmative action&rdquo; companies are now
accepting an obligation to do something about this situation,
to do something *affirmative* rather than the simple *negative*
action of *not* discriminating against qualified minority
applicants.

The quality of VERBATIM is remarkably consistently
high, an occasional *lapsus* like the squib on &ldquo;affirmative
action&rdquo; notwithstanding.  I look forward to each issue.  Keep
them coming, and how about some more articles on sign
language and some articles on animal communication, child
language, and other psycholinguistic topics? [*Laurence J. Davidson, Cambridge, Massachusetts*]


#### EPISTOLA {Margherita S. Smith}

Where have you been?  *Affirmative action* is a phrase
that has been around for some time.  It means, &ldquo;We not only
believe in equal opportunity; we act to affirm that belief by
seeking out and giving preference to people from groups
that have suffered from lack of equal opportunity.&rdquo;

Don't knock it. [*Margherita S. Smith, Annandale, Virginia*].


#### EPISTOLA {Arthur J. Morgan}

&ldquo;Affirmative action&rdquo; is required of companies which
hold Government contracts, or subcontracts.

It is Government English for the requirement that the
company not sit back waiting for members of ethnic minorities,
handicapped persons or women to apply for jobs, but
actively engage in recruiting such prospective employees.

Incidentally, this is sometimes described as &ldquo;seeking
employees from minority groups,&rdquo; or even &ldquo;seeking minorities,&rdquo;
despite the fact that, as any census will show, women
constitute a majority.

To continue with the fairer (though occasionally more
unfair) sex, Mr. Norman R. Shapiro parenthesizes, &ldquo;Hence
the feminine, *brava*, to a deserving diva.&rdquo;

Wrong.

To a deserving diva, for a superlative performance, I
might shout, &ldquo;*Bravo*!&rdquo;  This is an exclamation and is uninflected.
The boys in the balcony, whether amateur fans or professional
claque, who shout &ldquo;Brava!&rdquo;  may be doing the lady an injustice,
since it refers to the diva, not her performance, and
merely makes a statement that she is good, honest, or possibly
even brave.  (To be up on that stage?) [*Arthur J. Morgan, New York, New York*].

***

*As readers may be able to tell, quite a few people have
written to comment on the brief article about affirmative
action.  It is important that the record be set straight;
equally important is the point that the words* affirmative +
action, *in juxtaposition, mean only what readers (and the
government and employers) say they mean by virtue of conventionalized
jargon.  Unfortunately, the convention had
not yet reached VERBATIM.  The other phrase often
appearing in want ads, &ldquo;We are an equal-opportunity
employer,&rdquo; seems to have no stigma and to state a position
more clearly.  Any further comment would be social and not
linguistic*.

—*Editor*

## Mail Lib-Rejoinder
*Claire K. Schultz, Line Lexington, Pennsylvania*

Because of the similarity of names, a friend sent me a
copy of Clair Schulz's &ldquo;Mail Lib&rdquo; [III, 4].

I can relate easily to his feelings because, generally, all
of the same things have happened to me in reverse.  Confusion
on the part of others about one's sex is particularly difficult
during the formative years, when self-identification is
yet to be achieved.  However, the effects of bisexual names
can affect even one's descendants.  I remember my children's
disappointment when I received a letter from President
Truman, which they wanted to show off at school, but no
one would believe that Mr. Clair Schultz was their mother!

My purpose in responding is to focus on another aspect
of mail lib-that taken with one's address.  Fortunately,
these liberties are corrected to some extent if one lives in a
rural situation.

The addresses below, reproduced from envelopes, show
how the simple address in the byline above is misunderstood,
misspelled and adorned, and how the mail gets delivered in
spite of a myriad of variations.  There are many more examples
than can be printed here—I have enclosed only some of
them, to demonstrate the exercise of communication, on a
day-to-day basis.

>Prof. C.K. Schultz        
>Line Lexington            
>PHILADELPHIA             
>USA                      

>Mrs. SCHUTZENBER- &#92;  
>GER C.K.&#92;  
>SCHULTZ&#92;  
>Hilltown Piks

>Mr. and Mrs. Schultz       
>Metropolitan Museum      
>of Art                     
>Line Lexington,           
>Pennsylvania  

>LINE LEXINGTON&#92;  
>(Pennsylvania) U.S.A.&#92;  
>Mrs. C.K. Schultz&#92;  
>Line Pa 18932

>Mrs. SCHULTZ &#92;  
>Milltown Pike&#92;  
>Line Lexington,&#92;  
>Pennsylvania (U.S.A.)

>Mr. Claire K. Schultz&#92;  
>Line St&#92;  
>Lexington, Pa

>Mrs. Clair Schutz&#92;  
>Line Washington,&#92;  
>Pennsylvania, 18932

>Mrs. Claire K. Schultz               
>Little Twon Line                 
>Lexington, Pennsylvania           

>Mr. C. Schultz   
>Lyon Lexington,  
>Pennsylvania

>Miss Claire Schultz&#92;  
>Libre(?)&#92;  
>Lexington, Pennsylvania

>Mr. Claire K. Schultz  &#92;     
>Line Lexington Pa.&#92;  
>Biology&#92;  
>York co. Pennsylvania

>Mr. Schultz               
>Hilltown Pike             
>Lima-Lexington, Pa.       

## &ldquo;Ormonyms&rdquo;
*Ormly Gumfudgin, La Crescenta, California*

Being a columnist of little note nor long remembrance,
I've used my column as a vehicle to play with semantic oddities
and explore the possibilities of various word combinations;
mostly in a semi-humorous vein.  What I'm saying is
that nobody has complained—so far, anyway.

Among the first items I developed was the &ldquo;profundrum,&rdquo;
a word I created to encompass various statements
I've developed (and collected) to make the reader think a
little more than usual.  A few random examples are:

>*Happiness is no laughing matter.*
>
>*Anything worth doing is worth doing.*
>
>*Why not take your mother-in-law out to the next swap&#92;
>meet and see what you can get for her?*
>
>*He who laughs, lasts.*
>
>*The darker the light, the darker the dark.*
>
>*People never go there anymore; it's too crowded*.

In the meantime, I've graduated to what I term &ldquo;ormonyms&rdquo;
because I didn't know what they were.  I sent
some to Mr. Urdang who claims they are &ldquo;junctures&rdquo; but he
hasn't convinced me on this as yet.  However, I have to give
his comments serious consideration because he really knows
more about this semantic business than I do.

The main purpose of this article is to get some more
comments concerning this semantic exercise from our learned
brethren.  My main rule is that they read differently but
sound the same.  It would be most interesting to see if anyone
else is creating/saving such semantic oddities—and what
they may have come up with.

Here are some examples I've created—with a few which
have been contributed by my readers:

>*The stuffy nose can lead to problems.*  
>*The stuff he knows can lead to problems.*
>
>*Where is the spice center?*  
>*Where is the spy center?*
>
>*Are you aware of the words you have just uttered?*  
>*Are you aware of the words you have just stuttered?*
>
>*That's the biggest hurdle I've ever seen!*  
>*That's the biggest turtle I've ever seen!*
>
>*I'm taking a nice cold shower.*  
>*I'm taking an ice cold shower.*
>
>*He would kill Hamlet for that reason.*  
>*He would kill Hamlet for that treason.*
>
>*You'd be surprised to see a mint spy in your bank.*  
>*You'd be surprised to see a mince pie in your bank.*
>
>*Some others I've seen...*  
>*Some mothers I've seen...* 

Here are a couple of examples which do not qualify:

>*Reading in the library is sometimes allowed.*  
>*Reading in the library is sometimes aloud.*
>
>*A politician's fate often hangs in a delegate balance.*  
>*A politician's fate often hangs in a delicate balance.*

My reason they don't qualify is because they are too
easy.  It's using two words that sound the same or similar.

Mr. Urdang sent me an example of junctures which was
the sound of &ldquo;white shoes&rdquo;and &ldquo;why choose.&rdquo;  I tried to put
these into a duplicate sentence to qualify them for an ormonym.
I haven't made a rule about punctuation as yet so I
tried to make a sentence out of them.  A bit awkward, but
here's how it worked out:

>*White shoes; the trademark of Pat Boone.*    
>*Why choose the trademark of Pat Boone.*

Maybe what I'm doing is taking junctures and making a
sentence with them and that's what an ormonym really is.
Anyway, it's fun and maybe it serves to crack a smile here
and there; if so, it's worth it.

I'd appreciate any input; pro, con or whatever is in between.
And maybe we need a word for that—or is there one
already?


#### EPISTOLA {Steve Hicks}

In my article, &ldquo;That Dirty Bird,&rdquo; I have mentioned my
discovery that shitepoke first appeared in print in the 1775
*First Book of the American Chronicles of the Times*, antedating
the *OED*'s single citation of ca. 1850.  In subsequent
research, it turns out that my &ldquo;discovery&rdquo; was itself antedated
by Mitford M. Mathews in his *Dictionary of Americanisms*.
Mathews cites *The First Book of the American Chronicles of
the Times* as the first printed appearance of the term *shitepoke*.
My &ldquo;discovery,&rdquo; then, is due to nothing but incomplete
scholarship!

I'm sure other readers of VERBATIM have already
discovered this error, so let me apologize for my faulty and
misleading reference. [*Steve Hicks, Lawrence, Kansas*].


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

In his article, &ldquo;That Dirty Bird,&rdquo; on the onomastic
migrations of the shitepoke [III, 3], Steven R. Hicks makes
passing reference to the intriguing word *shyster*, an American
colloquialism dating from at least as early as 1846 (see Mitford
Mathews, *Americanisms*, 1966).  Like Mr. Hicks, I have
always taken for granted that it derives from the German
*Scheiss*, 'shit,' (despite other esoteric possibilities put forth
by Mencken).  Not, however, via *Scheisser*, as he assumes
along with Partridge and others, but rather from an oral
form *scheiss*-ster, by analogy with so many nouns in which
the venerable suffix -*ster* originally implied contempt.
(Needless to say, it no longer always does so: witness *youngster*,
*roadster, songster*, and scores of others.)  Partridge supposes
a transmission from German through Yiddish.  This is, I
think, a debatable suggestion, since the usual Yiddish word
for the substance in question is *drek*, not *scheiss* (which, if
used at all, would very likely have undergone a standard
vocalic shift—moved its vowels, so to speak—and been
pronounced &ldquo;shayss,&rdquo; hence an unlikely forebear of *shyster*).

But scatymological considerations aside, readers may
be interested in another proposed derivation, found in
Farmer and Henley's *Slang and Its Analogues* (1890-1904).
This invaluable volume, reprinted by the Arno Press in 1970,
offers the following citation:

>1\. DE VERE, *Americanisms*,... This is the
>SHYSTER ... Ill-reputed men [who] offer their services
to the new-comer, compel him to pay a fee in advance,
and then—do nothing.  On the contrary, they fight
SHY of him, and hence they have obtained their name.

However logical this early etymology, partisans of
*Scheiss* will probably not be budged.

At the other end of the alimentary canal, John G.
Caffrey, in the same issue, calls attention to the phenomenon
of what he terms the &ldquo;dropped d&rdquo; in names of foods and
dishes (*chop sirloin*, et al.).  Many common examples might
be added to his list.  Foremost among them, *ice coffee, ice
tea*, and especially *ice cream*.  The *OED Supplement*
documents this last apocopated form in a passage from 1744,
decades before Dolley Madison introduced the White House
to her dessert.  The original, *iced cream*, is attested as early
as 1688.  Coincidentally, cream also provides a recent
exmaple of what can be dubbed an &ldquo;added d.&rdquo;  Some dairy
food companies have lately taken to calling their product
*soured cream*, apparently in an effort to destigmatize it
somehow by giving the impression that it has been &ldquo;soured&rdquo;
intentionally and that it hasn't just turned &ldquo;sour&rdquo; through
age or neglect.[*Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut*]


#### EPISTOLA {Thomas Daniel}

Mr. Pete Chappars was apparently misinformed about
the special meaning of *to signify* amongst blacks [III, 3] by
what must have been inarticulate informants.

This peculair meaning of *to signify* (not confined solely
to any one part of the country, I might add) is to make an
oblique hint or remark, an indirect intimation or an insinuation.
In short, innuendo.

From time to time popular music of all sorts filters
down to some of us lovers of the classics.  One such occurrence
was the 1965 recording of Wilson Pickett's &ldquo;Mustang
Sally.&rdquo;  If memory serves me right, here is a part of the lyric
for Mr. Chappars' edification:

>I bought you a brand new Mustang, a 1965.  
>Now you come around signifying, woman.  
>You don't want to let me ride.

[*Thomas Daniel, Warren, Ohio*]


#### EPISTOLA {Vera C. V. Karger}

Years ago a black man I knew well finally objected,
one day, to my &ldquo;signifying.&rdquo; I asked what that meant.  I was
told that this word described the subtle, yet pointed way in
which I verbally probed to uncover whether he had done a
particular thing or had been in a particular place.  In plain
English, had he been with another woman.  It also described
the case in which I let it be known very indirectly, by what
I said, that there was a piece of information I had that he
might have preferred I hadn't.

My probing had not been direct, as was the discussion
you described going on in the parking lot.  I understood that
directness was definitely not a quality of signifying!  Rather,
it is that idle, spoken-yet-unspoken, semi-hidden *signaling*
that is thought to be especially well cultivated by women.  It
avoids direct confrontation.

Incidentally, it is not unusual for blacks to protect
important parts of their language from knowledge by the
whites, so you may have been deliberately misled.  Too bad,
because black language has a rich history.  But after all, it is
a way to remain on guard and retain privacy in a still
hostile environment. [*Vera C. V. Karger, Stamford, Connecticut*]


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v4n1_1977-05)