---
title: "Vol IV, No 2 [September 1977]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## We Shall Know Them By Their Roots
*Clair Schulz, Clinton, Wisconsin*

Of all the aspects related to the institution known as
rock music, one of the most intriguing is the names
groups choose for themselves.  Whether the names are ordinary
or outlandish, they sometimes become so much a part of
our culture that, for instance, a casual reference to the *Four
Seasons* or *Dawn* is just as likely to remind people of tunes
as of time.  True, most groups vanish after a short period of
popularity, but many of their names remain suspended in
the same web of nostalgia that holds glutinously to memories
of first dates and aborted dreams.  The parade of names that
follows is for those who want to hear their favorites one
more time.

Some groups began merely by counting heads.  There
were *Four Tunes, Aces, Preps, Freshmen, Tops, Fellows*, and
*Lads*.  One-upmanship has been practiced by the *Fifth Dimension,
Five Americans, Dave Clark Five*, and *We Five*,
although they too were outscored by the *New Colony Six*
and *Six Hits and a Miss*.  Still others (the *Association, Group
Image, Gallery*) banded together under corporate entries.

Music itself has been the inspiration for a number of
groups.  The *Band, New Vaudeville Band, Chords, Chordettes,
Crescendos, Accents, Monotones, Cleftones, Sparkeltones
Delfonics, Gerry and the Pacemakers, Merseybeats, Easy
Beats, New Beats, Delta Rhythm Boys, Rhythm Heritage,
Amazing Rhythm Aces*, and *Blue Notes* identified with
musical terminology.  The *Bells, Roxy Music*, and *Earth Opera*
struck melodic notes, whereas the *Ding Dongs, Platters*, and
*Music Explosion* selected less pretentious titles.

Ever since *Bill Haley and the Comets* blazed across the
rock and roll heavens many troupes have considered themselves
children of light.  The *Chi-lites, Limelites, Lovelites,
Fireballs, Firefall, Flares, Flames, Flaming Ember, Lamp of
Childhood, Silhouettes, Reflections, Shadows of Night, Rays,
Link Ray and his Ray Men, Clear Light*, and *Flash* represent
direct and oblique references to light, countered by the extraterrestrial
illumination provided by the *Moonglows, Sounds
of Sunshine, K.C. and the Sunshine Band, Ars Nova,
Morning Star, Starbuck*, and *Joey Dee and the Starliters*.
Artificial energy emerges from the *Magic Lanterns, Edison
Lighthouse, Electric Light Orchestra, Electric Flag, Electric
Prunes, and Pacific Gas and Electric.*

Brilliance is also apparent in the colors rock artists select
to represent them.  The favorite hue appears often: *Blue Suede,
Blues Image, Blue Oyster Cult, Blue Bells, Blue Cheer, Blues
Project, Blues Magoos, Moody Blues*, and *Schocking Blue*.
Other colorful performers include *Redeye, Redbone, Pink
Floyd, Frijid Pink, Rose-colored Glass, Savoy Brown, Soft
White Underbelly, Average White Band, Deep Purple, New
Riders of the Purple Sage, Silver Convention, Quicksilver
Messenger Service, Argent*, the *Inkspots*, and *Yellow Pages*.

Love and domestic life are not only the themes of most
popular songs; they have also served as afflatus for singers
seeking an image.  Affection has been expressed by *Love,
Love Affair, Love Unlimited, Ruby and the Romantics,
Heart*, and *Kiss*.  There have been a number of siblings such
as the *Osmonds* and *Jacksons* who have recorded under surnames,
but groups that lack common bloodlines have also
invoked familial ties.  Relatively speaking and singing were
the *Brotherhood, Flying Burrito Brothers, Righteous
Brothers, Big Brother and the Holding Company, Mamas
and the Papas, Every Mother's Son, Mothers of Invention,
Family*, and *M(other) F(ather) S(ister) B(rother)*.

Young people have been unjustly accused of having no
sense of time or place.  The calendar and clock have been
duly noted by the *Tymes, T.I.M.E., Moments, Midnighters,
Dusk, 8th Day, Wednesday, Ten Years After*, and *Ides of
March*.  The *Belmonts* that backed Dion DiMuci in the fifties
derived their name from a street in the Bronx, and since that
time the nation's largest city has spawned *New York City,
Brooklyn Bridge*, the *Lower East Side, Manhattan Transfer*,
and the *Manhattans*.  The tradition of paying homage to
home territory has been carried on by *Chicago, Boston,
White Plains, Orleans, Bay City Rollers, Nazareth, Detroit
Emeralds, Black Oak Arkansas, Kansas, Ohio Players, Herb
Alpert and the Tijuana Brass*, and *Sergio Mendes and Brazil*
'66.  (The last group truly changed with the times; they are
now known as *Sergio Mendes and Brazil '77*).  Additional
lessons in geography are provided by *Jay and the Americans,
America, American Breed, Ronnie and the Daytonas, B.J.
Kramer and the Dakotas, Cimarron, Left Banke, Ozark
Mountain Daredevils, Linn County*, and *Stone Country*.

Transportation to these places may be achieved in a
variety of ways.  Among the groups that used automobiles
for extensive mileage are the *Rivieras, Fiestas, Edsels, Impalas,
El Dorados, Falcons, Fleetwoods, Fleetwood Mac, Thin
Lizzy, Cadillacs, L.T.D., Booker T. and the M.G.'s, Flash
Cadillac and the Continental Kids*, and *Mitch Ryder and
the Detroit Wheels*.  Other methods of travel have been
obtained via *R.E.O.  Speedwagon, Orient Express, Ohio
Express, B.T. Express, Caboose, Sea Train, Grand Funk
Railroad, Dixie Flyers, Led Zeppelin*, and *Jefferson Airplane*
(later *Jefferson Starship*).

People mystified by the feral gyrations of modern
dances will not be surprised to discover that many groups
captured their names from wildlife.  The *Animals, Tarriers,
Chipmunks, Teddy Bears, Monkees, Critters, Herd, Turtles,
Murmaids, Crickets*, and *Beatles*, as well as *Crazy Horse,
Stone Pony, Howlin' Wolf, Sopwith Camel, T. Rex, Buffalo
Springfield, Elephant's Memory, Kangaroo, Rhinoceros,
Three Dog Night*, and *Country Joe and the Fish* borrowed
from the animal kingdom.  Flying above the earthbound
beings are the *Byrds, Yardbirds, Larks, Jayhawks, Ravens,
Flamingos, Pelicans, Orioles, Sandpipers, Eagles, Robins,
Swallows, Wings*, and *Crow*.  (The *Penguins* and *Iron Butterfly*
performed well, but could not get off the ground.) The call
of nature has also been answered by the *Gladiolas, Clovers,
Rose Garden, Earth Wind and Fire, Rare Earth, Mother
Earth, Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, Seeds, Gladys Knight and
the Pips, Grass Roots, Fever Tree, Hollies, Beach Boys,
Ocean, Surfaris, Mad River, Credence Clearwater Revival,
Zephyr, Hilltoppers*, and *Mountain*.

Parents frequently complain about the cost of feeding
and clothing teenagers, and even when not lamenting their
fate are reminded of it by the artists who record the albums
they themselves often purchase for their sons and daughters.
Fruits and vegetables are represented by the *Silver Apples,
Crabby Appleton, Lemon Pipers, Moby Grape, Wild Cherry,
Grapefruit, Raspberries, Strawberry Alarm Clock*, and
*Ultimate Spinach*.  The simple fare offered by *Hot Butter,
Bread, Goldie and the Gingerbreads, Sugarloaf, Honeycombs,
Peanut Butter Conspiracy*, and *Marmalade* whet appetites
for the *T-Bones, Joy of Cooking, Main Ingredient, Hot
Tuna*, and *Captain Beefheart and his Magic Band*.  Liquid
refreshment and sweets are readily available from the *Lovin'
Spoonful, Tea Set, Creem, Hot Chocolate, Humble Pie,
Vanilla Fudge*, the *Candymen*, and *1910 Fruitgum
Company*.  After such a rich diet, people might feel compelled
to settle down in easy chairs and wrap themselves in the
rhythms of the *Satins, Turbans, Weavers, Hollywood Argyles,
Orlons, Velvet Underground*, and *Chiffons*.

Another parental concern, that listening to rock music
brings impressionable minds under Satanic or necromantic
influences, is only partially correct.  Certainly names such as
the *Zombies, Enchanters, Undertakers, Mindbenders,
Temptations, Temptress, Grateful Dead, Styx, Spooky
Tooth, Pickettywitch, Coven*, and *Black Sabbath* are not
apt to instill *joie de vivre* in human breasts.  But counteractive
forces are presented by the *Shangri-Las, Soul Stirrers, Soul
Survivers, Sweet Inspirations, New Hope, Seekers, Searchers,
Meditations, Devotions, Nice, Miracles*, and *Angels*.

It should be freely admitted that there are negative
elements of a mundane nature present as well.  Ensembles
like the *Who, Guess Who*, and *Question Mark and the
Mysterians* arouse suspicion.  The *Mugwumps, Charlatans,
Casinos, Trashmen*, and *Young Rascals* are merely mischief
makers compared with the *Churls, Corsairs, Intruders,
Highwaymen, James Gang, Mob, Village Stompers,
Stampeders, War, Bloodrock, Lost Generation, Stealers
Wheel, Bad Company, Badfinger*, and *Scaffold*.  Transients
who formerly adhered to the *Drifters, Paupers, Coasters,
Vagrants*, and *Rolling Stones* have more recently found a
voice in the *Runaways*, an all-female band that exudes
sensuality in a manner that might only be surpassed by the
*Demimondes* or the *Trulls*.  There also exists a multitude of
groups whose names seem to belong on the tattooed arms of
street gangs, foremost among them being the *Rockin' Rebels,
Tornadoes, Hurricanes, Raiders, Kinks, Dominoes, Outsiders,
Hombres, Ramrods, Ventures, Del Vikings, Gaylords,
Olympics, Marcels, Spinners, Contours, Youngbloods,
Doors*, and *Los Bravos*.

Those who foresee a slide into decadence need not
despair, for each pejorative can be balanced with names
reflecting breeding, royalty, and even snobbishness.  Despite
the egalitarian lyrics of many popular songs, groups like
*King Curtis and the Kingpins, the Kingsmen, King Crimson,
Queen, Royal Teens, Royal Guardsmen, Teen Queens,
Amboy Dukes, Essex, Barons, Regents, Viscounts, Buckinghams,
Imperials, Crests, Coronets*, and *Sam the Sham and the
Pharaohs* exemplify the monarchy rather than the great
unwashed.  Less regal but still displaying elitist sentiments
are the *Commodores, Cavaliers, Elegants, Beau Brummells,
Champs, Supremes, Gentrys, Chairmen of the Board, Friends
of Distinction, Presidents, Rocky Fellers, Magnificent Men,
Great Society, Uniques, Originals, Stylistics, Fortunes,
Classics IV, Influence, Eden's Children, Sapphires, Diamonds*,
and *Pearls Before Swine*.  To indicate gentility, groups have
taken residence in the glamorous surroundings of *Procol
Harum, Crystal Mansion, Wadsworth Mansion, Glass
House*, and *Taj Mahal*.  There is even status in the names
adapted from magazines: the *Vogues, Playboys, Vanity
Fare*, and *Harper's Bizarre*.

Perhaps one day an artist will translate the incongruity
of the noble coexisting with the villainous into rock music's
escutcheon: a white sport coat opposite a black leather jacket.

This is quite obviously not an inclusive list.  There are
scores of groups who, by selecting a unique identity, defy
categorization.  Where, for instance, would one place *Soft
Machine, Bagatelle*, and *Status Quo?  Status Quo* is not only
a distinctive but also a highly ironical choice for singers and
musicians who perform in the most transitory field of entertainment.
But even in this rhythmic world of perpetual
change there is one constant: all groups, regardless of size,
sex, or temperament, can trace their origin to the greatest of
recording artists, *Noah Webster and the Lexicographers*.

## Scoring Jargon
*David C. Ferris, Exeter University*

Compare this:

>To everything there is a season, and a time to every
purpose under the sun.  A time to be born and a time to
die, a time to plant and a time to pluck up that which
is planted

With this:

>Over the past ten years the school has evolved a child-centred
individual-learning situation with a degree of
integrated day organisation and close co-operation
between each year's mixed-ability classes.  Basic-work
morning programmes are carefully structured but allow
for integration...

Both passages are true enough exemplars of their times,
the former from the Authorised Version, the latter from a
recent advertisement for a Junior School teacher.  Contrasting
the two suggests that the language has gained in the past 350
years something that it could well do without.  Loosely, we
can call it &ldquo;jargon,&rdquo; but it would be unfair to leap on our
high horses every time we read a passage that contains unpleasantly
long words and which does not make much sense
to us; if we hear that

>Reaction kinetics and gas absorption, as well as catalysis
and granulation, are technical fields in which the
Division is particularly interested

we can do little but admit that nowadays there is more to
fertiliser than following a horse with a shovel.

So this attack is addressed only to the inflated verbal
pomposity that we might call bullfrog jargon.  The school
advertisement quoted above is by no means the most repellent
abuse of English available, but I used it because it does
at least seem to have been intended seriously, unlike perhaps,

>The structured structure by reason of its symbolic
efficacy ongoingly structures the structure.

Although you never meet anyone who writes it himself,
jargon somehow continues to rampage over English like the
tendrils of a creeping jungle.  It would be easier to resist if
we could pin down a little more precisely what it is, and
maybe the enterprise has a certain grisly interest of its own;
earlier resistance fighters have of course made their forays,
but tended to add a salvo of personal preferences as to style,
and besides did not have the dubious advantages of the New
Linguistics.

One thing they agreed was that we must all stamp hard
on polysyllabic verbalisations.  Actually, however, it is too
naive to assume simply that 'jargon' equals &ldquo;long words&rdquo;
even though we can see why we feel the temptation, when
the enemy called taxmen *inland revenue officials* or when
mockery devises *artificial bipartite abdominal integument* as
a replacement for *trousers*.  Admittedly there is a link; *experimentation*
instead of *experiment* is a well-known type of
irritant, while *experiment* itself could often give way to *test*.
This is not at all to say that the words in each pair always
mean the same thing, only that they sometimes do and that
in such cases life would be more comfortable if writers would
use the shorter one.  Yet even if we could cajole, bribe, or
threaten out of use all words of more than two syllables,
things would not be that much better.  Some people shrink
from using one word where ten will do and entangle themselves
in Byzantine wiles to avoid our everyday monosyllables;
*so now* disappears underneath *at this present moment in time*.
Switching our scrutiny to the number of syllables in a sentence
does not help much either; we can shorten the unexciting
but straightforward

>to judge from what is happening now, things will go
on getting worse

to

>current trends indicate a continued decline

which, however, now reeks of jargon.  Length simply is not
blameworthy in itself; other factors are lurking in the undergrowth.

One noticeable thing about jargon is its cargo of vogue
words.  For no very clear reason certain weeds or animals
sometimes undergo a huge and rapid leap in numbers and
threaten to upset the natural system where they live; in much
the same way certain words start breeding like rabbits and
make an increasing (or &ldquo;ongoing&rdquo;?) nuisance of themselves.
Today we are plagued by &ldquo;open-ended&rdquo; &ldquo;meaningful&rdquo; &ldquo;commitments&rdquo;
&ldquo;escalating&rdquo; in all too many &ldquo;situations.&rdquo;  Sometimes
vogue words succeed in keeping the territory they have
seized, for it is not frequency as such, but sudden increase
in frequency that makes them objectionable.  More often they
have their heyday and then pass on out of the limelight;
*orchestrate* and *organic* are examples that seem to be fading
into the darkness already.

However, although we may look askance at vogue
words they do not really seem to be longer than the common
run, nor does their presence of itself turn a text into jargon.
Another hare that invites pursuit is the idea that unusual
recherch&eacute; words are the linguistic villians.  After all, *marmalade*
and *mother* are not jargon but are common, while *mode*
and *median* are jargon but are not common.  On this view
vogue words annoy us precisely because they forsake their
proper rarity and make an indecent exhibition of themselves.
Unfortunately, the hare turns out to be a wild goose; there
are plenty of words that tend the other way.  For most readers
the average &ldquo;rarity&rdquo; of

>the piebald mare trampled the yarrow underfoot
>
>must be much higher than of
>
>the identical theory offers a basis for development
>
>but the latter is jargon, the former plain.

So consider *flibbertigibbet* and *tatterdemalion*.  At a
guess these words get used fairly sparingly and they are certainly
not short.  Yet there is something reassuring and solid
about them that seems to make them proof against corruption;
we could sum it up by saying that they are homely rather
than official; they are the sort of words we may have met
among friends or family, and not in textbooks nor in some
official report.  There are large overlaps between homely
words and those of native English (those not known to have
been borrowed from another language) and between official
words and those derived from the classical languages, though
the agreements are not complete.

Homeliness brings with it two traits, both of which a
word must have to earn our highest esteem.  One is simplicity.
The classical origin of most official words explains why so
many start with prefixes like *contra*- and *anti*- or end with
suffixes such as -*istic* and -*ational*.  It is a good rule of thumb
that where you find many affixes you have a jargon-ridden
writer, but the etymology does not matter in itself.  What
does matter is the amount of brainwork demanded of readers.
Vague as it may be, a proper slice of meaning is linked to
such affixes in many of their occurrences (contrast *archaic*
and *archaistic*); and there is evidence that an effort is needed,
even if a very slight and subconscious one, to glue together
the meanings of affix and root so as to decide roughly what
the whole should mean, an effort not required for words
that are, in English, simple, like *strong* or *chrysanthemum*.
These tiny hurdles keep tripping our brain as it follows its
semantic path and this is where length comes in.  Naturally
the more affixes are added to a root the longer the word becomes;
but the trouble is caused not by length *sensu stricto*
but by complexity.

The second point about homeliness is illuminated
by words like *ocelot* which we might well first come across
in a textbook; certainly, ocelots were not plentiful around
my mother's knee.  Yet it would seem odd to describe the
name of an animal as jargon.  Trying to explain this forces
us to admit a cleavage in English between words that are in
some way tangible or &ldquo;real,&rdquo; and those that are abstract.  We
might agree in practice about the allocation of many items,
but it is impossible to give an exact rule about where to draw
the line, and what is more it will by no means coincide with
what science would tell us; for instance, unicorns must be
real whereas semanticists, regrettably, might be abstract.

We are now nearly able to devise an index to assay the
linguistic virtue of English words, but fair play imposes one
caveat.  A word like *international* is abstract, borrowed from
Latin with both prefix and suffix, and very often met &ldquo;officially&rdquo;;
its appearances in advertisements even smack of the
vogue word.  However, we cannot throw many stones at it,
simply because there is often no easy brief alternative (think
of *international opera-singer*).  Many words look suspiciously
like jargon but escape with unsullied character because there
is just nothing else that will do so well in the same place.
That said, here is the index, built on the above remarks; naturally,
we assume some give and take in the workings.

>(1.)  If the root of the word is &ldquo;native&rdquo; English; or
(should it be borrowed) if the whole word cannot
easily be replaced by another that does have a native
root,
>
>SCORE 1.
>
>For other roots,
>
>SCORE 2.
>
>(2.)  For every affix except -*ing, -ed, -en* and -*s*,
>
>ADD 1.
>
>(3.)  If the root is a bound morpheme (that is, if it
cannot stand as a word in its own right, like -*ceive*),
>
>ADD 1.
>
>(4.)  If the word as a whole has an &ldquo;abstract&rdquo; meaning,
>
>ADD 1.
>
>(5.)  If the word is a vogue word,
>
>ADD 2.

Actually, it is far too optimistic to believe that this index
could help in rooting out jargon; I merely offer it to readers
so that they may amuse themselves in a melancholy way,
gauging the monstrous growth of the weeds closing around
the language.

The natural next move is to work out an index for texts.
This means sniping at the Hydra of structural jargon; for
even if they use only low-scoring words, writers can still
make things awkward to understand or at least less attractive
by using them in complex structures with plenty of subordinate
clauses and dependent phrases.  It is here that the legendary
compilers of government regulations show their true
mettle.  Sadly, it is out of the question to work out a thoroughgoing
system, if only because far too little is yet understood
about the freedom with which our language lets us play
around with the shape of sentences.  But we can cook together
a few ideas of our own and other writers, to give something
like this:

>(1.)  Add together the jargon scores for all the verbs,
adverbs, adjectives, and nouns other than names.
>
>(2.) For every passive verb,
>
>ADD 1.
>
>(3.)  For every double negative (as famously guyed in
Orwell's *a not unblack dog was chasing a not unsmall
rabbit across a not ungreen field*),
>
>ADD 2.
>
>(4.)  For every subordinating conjunction,
>
>ADD 2.
>
>(5.)  Divide the result by the total number of words in
the text.

One important ingredient is missing, namely some means
of measuring how complex the ideas are that the writer is
trying to convey; any hack could score well describing the
adventures of Tom and Jerry, but a laureate could, and indeed
should, score rather high in expounding Kant's philosophy.
This may be why editorials in the more picturesque
newspapers score lower than *The London Times*.  For that
matter, something similar applies to the word index; ideally,
we should mark different degrees of vacuity on a scale leading
towards total meaninglessness, and adjust our sense of outrage
accordingly.  Yet, it is extremely difficult to pry into the
inner anatomy of words to see how far the essence of meaning
is diluted, nor is there much hope of getting wide agreement
between, for instance, political theorists and theologians.
At present, the best available remedy seems to be marking
words as abstract or tangible.

One last observation is that here as often elsewhere both
extremes are suspect.  A very low score betrays a failing in
that such writing would be more like babytalk than good
English.  On the other hand, the indices presuppose that high
scores are a greater threat—signs of floundering intellect, or
even mental bankruptcy; that is why I am interested, and
sorry, to find after marking a range of texts that the highest
scores of all were fairly consistently those of works on theoretical
Linguistics.


#### EPISTOLA {Barbara Marsh}

Nine words with *oto*?  What a hornet's nest that will
stir up!  The photographers will be annoyed, and all the
otologists.  (There are at least a dozen earthickling relatives of
that one.)  The gardeners will throw to croton or a
cotoneaster or a sotol; you'll be told to jump in the Potomac
without a rotor.  No one will kotow to you, or serenade you
on a koto; rather, you'll be threatened with celotomy or
colotomy, equally uncomfortable, or with banishment to
Cotonou or Cotopani.  (There's one of those in Colorado as
well as in Ecuador.)  Notoungulates and lotophage will vie
with potoos and potoroos to bring you notoriety—and that's
not one patch of what you'll hear from readers who have
access to a big Webster or Oxford!

John Sinor in the San Diego Evening Tribune had his
readers on their *otos*, trying to find the four English words
that end in *gry*.

Try *that*, Richard Manchester.

But I am going to buy your book because—lucky
me—I have three grandsons who love words. [*Barbara Marsh, San Diego, California*].

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *[LOUISIANA PLACES: A Collection of Columns from the Baton Rouge Sunday Advocate 1960 - 1974](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=30617805481&searchurl=ds%3D20%26kn%3DLOUISIANA%2BPLACES%253A%2BA%2BCollection%2Bof%2BColumns%2Bfrom%2Bthe%2BBaton%2BRouge%2BSunday%2BAdvocate%2B1960%2B-%2B1974%26sortby%3D17&cm_sp=snippet-_-srp1-_-title1)*
Clare D'Artois Leeper, (Legacy Publishing Company, 1976), 264 pp.

On February 7, 1960, under the heading of &ldquo;Louisiana
Places: Those Strange Sounding Names,&rdquo; the Baton Rouge
*Sunday Advocate* published a brief account of *Natchitoches*,
the name of &ldquo;the oldest town in Louisiana,&rdquo; deriving it from
&ldquo;paw-paw eaters,&rdquo; the name of a Caddoan tribe.  This short
discussion turned out to be the starting point and set the
tone for a regular column on Louisiana place names (mostly
names of towns and post offices) which Mrs. Leeper has
conducted ever since.  The fruits of the first fourteen years of
her labors, about 770 items in all, have now been gathered
and published in book form.  The collection, while
preserving the original wording of the first printing in all
instances, presents the names discussed in alphabetical
order.  Although making them more easily accessible, this
arrangement also exposes some of the major weaknesses
inherent in the &ldquo;permanent&rdquo; reprinting of what once were
intended to be &ldquo;occasional&rdquo; pieces, i.e., the conversion of a
weekly newspaper column into a book without the required
thorough revision.

The most noticeable of these shortcomings is
undoubtedly the presence of a number of verbatim
duplications (as under *Arizona, Bordelonville, Bunkie,
Converse, Dry Creek*, and several others), which makes
sense in a series of articles written over many years—at least
partly in response to readers' enquiries—but tends to annoy
the reader.  As the author of a similar column in a monthly
magazine, this reviewer is very much aware of the strong
temptation to convert such contributions into a book,
especially when encouraged by appreciative readers, but
only under exceptional circumstances can such a conversion
be carried out successfully and should therefore usually be
avoided; it should never be attempted without the provision
of an overview through a summarizing Introduction or
Conclusion.

Having expressed an understandable dissatisfaction
with the inappropriate process which created this volume,
one is pleased to discover that the original subtitle, dropped
in May 1965, does not imply the kind of exclusive hunt for
the quaint and the curious which is so often the pursuit of
the local onomastician.  Naturally, several place names
whose major attraction lies either in their intriguing surface
meaning (*Aimwell, Bayou Bonne Idee, Converse, Forlorn
Hope, Fort Necessity, Gin Lake, Lick the Skillet, Luna,
Spoon Full, Sunset*, for example) or in their exotic
sound/spelling (*Anacoco, Atchafalaya, Choupitcatcha,
Maringouin, Natchez*, for instance) are discussed, but their
inclusion does not seem to stem from the notion that such
names are more worthy of enquiry than those which
apparently contain no such mystery (*Bailey's Dam,
Baldwin's Store, Big Bend, Branch, Buchanan's Ferry, Center
Point, Cotton Valley, Oak Ridge*, etc.).  For the name
scholar there is no such creature as a &ldquo;pedestrian&rdquo; or
&ldquo;uninteresting&rdquo; name, and Mrs. Leeper is clearly well
aware of the full scope and potentialities of onomastic
research.

Naturally, the geographical location and documented
history of Louisiana predict a sizable native American and
French admixture to the state's place-nomenclature, but
while there does not appear to be any particular toponymic
marker with regard to the former, a generic like *bayou*
serves its purposes well as an indicator of the settlement area
of the Louisiana French, as was demonstrated by Robert C.
West over twenty year ago.  The volume under review lists
twenty-eight names in which this term, borrowed by the
French incomers from the Choctaw *bayuk*, occurs as the
first element; close scrutiny of the specifics of these names
(*Chene Fleur, Adois, Alabama, Barbue, Beaucoup, Bonne
Idee, Bushley, Castine, Chene, Chicot*, etc.) would be in
itself a rewarding undertaking, opening up a fascinating
range of cultural influences and naming practices, from the
straight-forward to the bizarre.

As is to be expected, however, a study of Louisiana
place names is not so much an exercise in linguistics as an
investigation of local and regional history, and the better
one knows the people behind the settlements, the first
settlers, the first postmasters, the landowners, their wives
and daughters, the easier is the task of unraveling the
strands woven into some of the name stories; for if there is
one chief factor which dominated the naming of Louisiana
places, it is the recognizable American phenomenon of the
shift from a personal name to a place name, as a gesture of
grateful commemoration (*Addis*: after J.W. Addis, an
official of the Texas & Pacific Railroad; *Akers*: after William
W. Akers, the first postmaster; *Allen Parish*, after Henry W.
Allen, Confederate governor of Louisiana; *Allen Settlement*:
after Mr. Allen, the first Justice of the Peace; *Amelia*, after Miss
Amelia Dupuis, the deceased bride of the first postmaster;
and several dozen more).  It is in the exploration of this
toponymic category, which forms such an astonishingly
high proportion of the names on the Louisiana map, that
Mrs. Leeper is at her best seeking out relevant information
wherever it may be hidden.  Thus the examination of a
naming process frequently becomes the detective story of an
eminently human event, and *story and history* merge again,
regaining their former etymological unity.

Under these circumstances, who wants to attribute
blame if the narrative impulse sometimes wins out over
scholarly sobriety?  Nevertheless, it would have been useful
to have indicated in some way when a (migratory) place-name
legend is recounted rather than a historical fact;
otherwise, &ldquo;West we go&rdquo; as an answer to the question
&ldquo;Where do we go from here?&rdquo;  will become accepted more
than locally as the true story behind the name *westwego*,
and *Sunset* will continue to be thought of as having been
named either by workers building the Southern Pacific
Railroad, at the end of a heavy working day, or,
alternatively, by inhabitants of Grand Coteau over whose
community &ldquo;the sun would have set,&rdquo; if the new railroad
had not gone through it.  Such folk-etymological reinterpretations
hardly ever manage to retrace the original naming
process, although their value to the student of folk narrative
is, of course, undeniable.

Perhaps the special fascination, even virtue, of
*Louisiana Places* lies in this very mixture of the sober and
the sentimental, the rigorous and the romantic, the
felicitous and the folksy.  Just as they have done for the
people of Baton Rouge since 1960, Mrs. Leeper's 770 place-names
will now serve for those beyond the circulation area
of the *Sunday Advocate*, as keys capable of unlocking some
of the otherwise closed doors of Louisiana settlement history.
On the whole, those who trust those keys will not be
disappointed.  They may, however, well join this reviewer
in wishing that the author would soon provide us with a
second book (beyond the supplements already promised),
which, by abandoning the alphabetical arrangement, will
give us that overall summary that the present volume lacks
and which will treat the place names of Louisiana in the
context of linguistic, social, cultural, and economic history.
In the meantime, those of us involved in the Place Name
Survey of the United States are grateful for another
important stone in this country's toponymic mosaic.

*W.F.H. Nicolaisen, State University of New York at Binghamton*

***

... *As we were going to press, we received word that the
two supplements to* Louisiana Places, *one for* 1975 *and one
for 1976, are now available*.  $2.50 *each, paperback*.

—*Editor*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *[Indiana Place Names](https://www.amazon.com/Indiana-Place-Names-Ronald-Baker/dp/0253141672)*
Ronald L. Baker and Marvin Carmony, (Indiana University Press, 1975), xxii + 196 pp.

In the 1960s, the American Name Society established a
commission to undertake a Place-Name Survey of the United
States.  The massive project is now well under way and is estimated
to take 25 years to complete.  It will result in a
multi-volumed dictionary roughly comparable to the 50 or
so volumes of the English Place-Name Society's *Survey of
English Place Names*, published over the last half-century
by Cambridge University Press.  The dictionary will include
definitive information on the historical, linguistic, geographic,
and folkloristic aspects of the names and of the
naming process of such artificial and natural features as
cities, counties, streams, and the like.  Meanwhile, approximately
half of the states have place-name dictionaries of
some sort and of varying degrees of completeness and accuracy.
*Indiana Place Names* grew out of materials gathered
for the national Survey and could well serve as the model
for other studies which will doubtless appear over the next
several years while we await the publication of the projected
national study.

*Indiana Place Names* consists mainly of a 16-page Introduction
and a 186-page glossary.  The book offers information
for the general reader about 2,271 villages, towns,
cities, counties, streams, and lakes in the state, with emphasis
on settlement names.  It is quite selective in its coverage
and is by no means a gazetteer, as the editors point out.
Individual entries vary in length from a couple of lines to
nearly a page and include information on spelling, pronunciation
(including stress pattern), alternate names, type of
name (e.g., village, county), location, origin, and legends.
The average entry has perhaps 6-8 lines.

In the Introduction, Professors Baker and Carmony
classify the place-names into the following categories: names
of persons, names from other place-names, locational names
(*East Fork Tanners Creek, Half Way Creek*), descriptive
names (*LaPorte, Plum Tree, Badger Grove*), inspirational
names (*Harmony, Waverly, Troy*), humorous names (*Santa
Claus*), Indian and Pseudo-Indian names, names from other
languages, incident names (*Cyclone, Treaty Creek*), names
from folk etymology, coined names, mistake names, and
names from legends and anecdotes.  The editors are thus
able to account for an impressive variety of memorable names,
including *Antiville, Beanblossom, Correct, Daylight, Jacks
Defeat Creek, Needmore, Popcorn*, and *Pumpkin Center*.

Among the most interesting names are those derived
from folk etymology and those that are mistake names.
How much more American-sounding can a name be than
*Gnaw Bone*, especially when we learn that it is a corruption
of the French name *Narbonne*?  Similarly, *Mary Delarme
Creek* is a version of *Marais de l'Orme*, 'Elm Swamp.'  *Correct,
Siberia*, and *Taswell* should have been, respectively,
*Comet, Sabaria*, and *Laswell*.

Some 31 of the names covered are derived from legends,
and for many other names legends have been included.  As
the authors point out in the Introduction, the legends often
suggest the prejudices and humor of the people telling them,
and whether the legends accurately account for the names
or not, they indicate what the names mean to the people
who use them.  It is fun to know that local legend attributes
the name Eugene to a drunk who, having lost his wife, tried
to call her (&ldquo;Oh, Janel&rdquo;), but could only manage to say
&ldquo;Eu, Jene.&rdquo;

The authors not only analyze and classify the names
treated in the book, but also discuss the pronunciations of
these names, pointing out characteristics of Indiana speech
as they occur in the names treated and noting other phonological
reasons for the pronunciations recorded.  Thus, the
pronunciation of *Morristown* as if it were spelled &ldquo;Morsetown,&rdquo;
the loss of the final -*t* in *East Liberty*, the pronunciation
of *Bainbridge* as &ldquo;Brainbridge,&rdquo; and of *Putnamville* as
&ldquo;Putmanville&rdquo; are explained in light of the authors' sound
knowledge of the phonological development of language in
general and of American English in particular.  The discussion
can generally be understood quite readily by the non-linguist,
and such terms as metathesis, substitution, and
assimilation are worked unobtrusively into the explanations.

The book has flaws, but they are relatively minor.  For
instance, the definition of a place-name given in the first
sentence of the book needs explanation.  The authors mention
no other studies of Indiana place-names in their Introduction,
they do not allude anywhere to the fact that an
important national journal is published in the field (*Names:
Journal of the American Name Society*), nor do they
mention what is perhaps the most popular book on names,
George Stewart's *Names on the Land*.  And they offer no explanation
of the purpose or scope of the national Place-Name
Survey.  The general reader, to whom this book is addressed,
needs to know about these things.

It would help the general reader, too, if the relationship
between the pronunciation of Indiana place-names and
the dialects of Indiana were made clearer.  To this end,
more of the distinctive features of Indiana dialects need to
be emphasized.  More information on the method used to
select the names studied and on the method used to select
the works included in the Bibliography would be useful.  Are
the works in the Bibliography works consulted, works of
general interest, or what?  In any case, the publisher should
be mentioned for each work listed.  More explanation of
why and how the particular pronunciation informants were
chosen is also needed.

As excellent as the pronunciation section is, some
matters are handled superficially.  It is not enough, for example,
to account for *Floyds Knobs* becoming *Floyd Knobs*
by saying that this sound change occurs &ldquo;because the combination
is hard to pronounce.&rdquo;  Why not say that since the -*s*
in *Knobs* is anticipated, the speaker drops the *s* in *Floyds*?
In addition, the pronunciation key is inadequate, and the
printer, apparently, has introduced into it several errors.
Finally, although the book has a beautiful map in an envelope
inside the back cover, the reader is completely frustrated
when he discovers that the coordinates of the map in
the glossary do not refer to this map at all, but to a highway
map which is not included in the book!

A measure of the book's success is that it whets the
appetite for more than its format can accommodate.  For
example, it would be interesting to know much more about
the origins of the names treated and about the nature and
role of topographical terms in the naming process.  The discussion
of dialects would be even more valuable if some
note were taken of social dialect differences.  Someone needs
to compare the pronunciations documented here with pronunciations
found in dictionaries, and an analysis of syllable
divisions might tell us more about the nature of English
words and their formation.  Meanwhile, onomasticians everywhere
may well be grateful to Professors Baker and Carmony
for a careful and useful study which will help the general
reader understand the value and fun of a discipline which is
perhaps just now coming into its own in the United States
after a quarter-century of serious study by hundreds of
scholars and laymen alike.

*[W. Bruce Finnie, University of Delaware]*


#### EPISTOLA {M. Panzer}

Since most of your readers appear to be supersleuths, I
await the charge that there is no chapter on Howard Cosell
in *A Civil Tongue*.  I had written &ldquo;Criticism in the chapter
of Howard Cosell, etc.&rdquo; and it came out &ldquo;Criticism in the
chapter on Howard Cosell, etc.&rdquo;

One or two of the items in III, 3 brought back to mind
a book manuscript I once failed to sell.  It was titled &ldquo;Psychiatric
Cook Book.&rdquo;  I list a few of the recipes:

>*Plum Loco Pudding*      
*Freud Oysters*  
*Stuffed U.N. Conches*  
*Inferiority Cornflakes*  
*Inn Bread*            
*Accident Prune Pie*  
*Kooky San Jacque*     
*Schizo Farina*  
*Lemon Derange Pie*    
*Filet of Timid Sole*  
*Apple Jitters*          
*Depressed Duck*  
*Fruit Conflict*         
*Moronated Herring*  
*World's Fear Special*   
*Group Therapea Soup*  
*Poultry, Geist*         
*Egg Foo Jung*  
*Milk of Amnesia*        
*Oddballed Eggs*  
*Traumatic Ketchup*      
*Menthol Blocks*  
*Powdread Milk*          
*Confused Manna*  
*Addle, Pate*            
*Lobster Claws, Trophobia*  
*Raw Shacktoast*         
*Withdrawn Butter Cookies*  
*Sib Ling Chow Mein*     
*I Qcumber Salad*  
*Dream of Celery Soup*   
*Padded Celery Soup*  
*Shocked Liver*          
*Senilla Tea*  
*Shuddered Wheat*        
*Mixed Nut Cake*  
*Oafmeal Cookies*        
*Oedipus Compote*

[*M. Panzer, New York, New York*].

## Twenty-six Sticks
*Alden Stahr, Columbia, New Jersey*

Oscar Ogg, in his *The 26 Letters* (Thomas Y. Crowell
1961), maintained that the Phoenicians invented our alphabet.
But I hold that they didn't need to &ldquo;invent&rdquo; it—all
they had to do was go out among the Cedars of Lebanon
and pick up an alphabet very handily with the aid of a
bronze dagger.

I made this startling etymological discovery when my
young son Stanley was having difficulty learning the alphabet.
I took him out in the woods, and with the aid of a penknife
and a high degree of pertinacity we played a game of
finding the building twigs of communication.

It's possible, of course, to start with A and find the
letters in alphabetical order (what else?).  But the rewards
come sooner if we take any letters that come along and
gather them helter-skelter until we have the whole twenty-six.
Trees and bushes out in the open are too regular in their
growth to have any but *I-V-Y* letters.  If you want the odd,
difficult letter, go where the undergrowth is thick and
branches must twist and sometimes bend backwards as their
leaves reach for sunlight.  Certain trees have growing patterns
that make them good sources of special letters.  For example,
the branches of wild cherry and gum often grow at
right angles to each other to yield such letters as *L, T, E,*
and *F*.  Grapevines, wisteria, poison ivy (!) or other climbers
are good sources of curvy letters such as *C, G, J, O, P,*
and *Q*.  Here is where Stan and I found the individual
letters:

>A - prickly pear        
B - wisteria              
C - wisteria              
D - apple tree             
E - wild cherry           
F - wild cherry           
G - prickly pear         
H - spice bush            
I - any bush (even ivy!)   
J - wisteria              
K - gooseberry bush      
L - oak tree               
M - hemlock tree           
N - mulberry  
O - Virginia creeper  
P - wisteria  
Q - wisteria  
R - apple tree  
S - wisteria  
T - gum  
U - wisteria  
V - maple  
W - mulberry  
X - black birch  
Y - spice bush (or any tree)  
Z - prickly pear

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Sexism and Language*](https://www.amazon.com/Sexism-Language-Alleen-Pace-Nilsen/dp/0814143733) and [*Responses to Sexism*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=30962353480&searchurl=ds%3D20%26kn%3Dresponses%2Bto%2Bsexism%2BOuida%2BClapp%26sortby%3D17&cm_sp=snippet-_-srp1-_-title1)
Alleen Pace Nilson, Haig Bosmajian, H. Lee Greshuny, and Julia P. Stanley, (National
Council of Teachers of English, 1977), 203 pp. and Ouida Clapp, ed., (National Council of Teachers of English, 1977), 150 pp.

In the course of developing *Sexism and Language*, the
authors sent a questionnaire designed to &ldquo;survey people's attitudes
on the issue of sexism and American English&rdquo; to 200
randomly selected editors and members of academic organizations
concerned with English.  Within this elite group an
obvious struggle is going on between those sensitive to the
broad currents of linguistic change already at work and those
blindly committed to the status quo.  Representative of the
latter was the following response: &ldquo;Our editorial policy ...
is more concerned with clarity and a certain purity ... than
it is with the rather laughable and probably hopeless attempts
(and meaningless ones, at that) to rid English of all sex-determined
language.&rdquo;

The two books dealing with sexist language recently
published by the country's largest professional organization
of English teachers will probably not enlighten so confused
and self-righteous a &ldquo;thinker,&rdquo; but for those more alert and
open-minded, they provide solid, well-documented evidence
of the damaging influence on both sexes of some of our most
cherished linguistic habits.

*Responses to Sexism*, the current manual in the NCTE's
Classroom Practices series, contains 26 teaching units designed
to help students recognize sexism in its many subtle forms
and to develop flexible attitudes toward human individuality.
Five of the units focus specifically on language and form a
useful supplement to the longer volume.

*Sexism and Language* is an ambitious effort to analyze
obstacles to sexual equality both in the vocabulary and grammar
of standard English and in its use in several disparate
subject area—law, literature, marriage, dictionaries, and
children's books and teaching materials.  Inevitably the result
is uneven.  Like many publications put together from papers
related to each other only by their authors' common concern,
the book lacks a sense of progression.  Further, the distinction
between language itself and how it is used is often blurred:
much of the analysis deals with the stereotypical images of
females and males perpetuated through written materials
rather than with words themselves or the exclusionary grammatical
&ldquo;rules&rdquo; imposed on children by generations of well-meaning
teachers.

Despite these weaknesses, each of the eight essays in the
book contains valuable insights.  Stanley's &ldquo;Gender Marking
in American English: Usage and Reference&rdquo; demolishes any
lingering belief that masculine-gender &ldquo;generic&rdquo; forms are
sexually inclusive.  Arguing that the &ldquo;generic&rdquo; encourages
writers and speakers of English to perceive the male sex as
the social standard (p. 62), Stanley uses extensive quotes from
contemporary writers, both male and female, to demonstrate
her case.

Nilsen's description of her work with young children, in
which she tested their responses to William Labov's Type I
(naturally developed) and Type II (formally taught) rules of
grammar, supports Stanley's conclusions (p. 178).  In other
essays Nilsen discusses the definition of sex-roles conveyed
through both slang and standard English.  Her introductory
article, which traces the media's handling (from 1970 to 1976)
of linguistic sexism as a social issue, will serve as a useful
chronology for future students of the subject.

Bosmajian's &ldquo;Sexism in the Language of Legislatures
and Courts&rdquo; provides historical perspective on the way
&ldquo;women have been defined, labeled, and stereotyped as (1)
mother and wife, (2) infantile and incompetent, (3) seductive
and immoral, and (4) nonpersons and nonentities&rdquo; (p. 77).

Gershuny explores the pervasive consequences of prejudiced
Biblical translations: for example, the failure to render
the Hebrew '*adham* (translated Adam) as the equivalent of
&ldquo;human being&rdquo; in Genesis 2.  Her discussion of subliminal
sexism in dictionary definitions includes the best analysis in
the volume of the harm done males (as well as females) by
linguistic stereotyping (pp. 147ff).

The Valuable &ldquo;Guidelines for Nonsexist Use of Language
in NCTE Publications,&rdquo; which the Council published
in 1976 is included as an appendix.

As long as teachers, writers, and editors ignore the androcentric
bias of standard English, its maiming—and obscurantist—effects
will continue.  As these books demonstrate,
however, pressures for change are widespread and sometimes
come from unexpected sources.  One reply to the questionnaire
the authors of *Sexism and Language* sent out came
from an editor who wished to remain anonymous: &ldquo;We have
made few, if any, changes,&rdquo; he wrote, &ldquo;and do not plan to
do so.&rdquo;  Tucked in the same envelope was a second, unofficial
response: &ldquo;This is a note from ________'s secretary,&rdquo; it said.
&ldquo;His answer and the deletion of his name speak for themselves.
I'm working on him.&rdquo;

*[Casey Miller and Kate Swift, East Haddam, Connecticut]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Westcountry Words and Ways*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Westcountry%20Words%20and%20Ways%2A%20%2AK.C.%20Phillipps&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20)
K.C. Phillipps, David &amp; Charles, (North Pomfret, Vermont, 1976), 144 pp.

As long ago as 1905 the great British dialectologist
Joseph Wright observed: &ldquo;There can be no doubt that pure
dialect speech is rapidly disappearing even in country districts,
owing to the spread of education, and to modern
facilities for intercommunication.&rdquo;  The gloomy foreboding
implicit in this remark has been largely borne out by subsequent
events: the spread of literacy and education, and the
snobbery that too often accompanies them; the improvements
in transportation and travel, which have brought a
shakeup of a hitherto stable population; the calamitous influence
of two world wars; the coming of radio and television—all
have had a hand in the standardization of speech
and the decline of colorful localized variations in it.

Having said all that, it comes as a surprise perhaps to
think that English dialects are still &ldquo;alive and well&rdquo; in many
parts of the U.K.  The nation-wide Survey of English Dialects
(SED), organized by Leeds University, was not
launched until 1947, yet it found a wealth of material to
record during the 1950s and 1960s.

Dialect is one of the most enduringly popular and approachable
areas of linguistics.  It often evokes nostalgic
reflections on the past, and the humor and practical &ldquo;horse
sense&rdquo; it often embodies seem to epitomize solid stable
values in an all-too-changing world.  Although for modern
linguists, dialectology is still somewhat rooted in the era of
comparative philology, many people with an interest in
local words and their origins do their share to preserve both
the study and practice of dialect speech.  Local dialect societies
flourish throughout the British Isles.

The wish to preserve, to &ldquo;gather up the fragments that
remain, that nothing be lost&rdquo; is a vital element in K. C.
Phillipps's *Westcountry Words and Ways*.  It is a thoroughly
enjoyable book, aimed both at the enthusiastic &ldquo;word-buff&rdquo;
and at the person who is interested in a bygone way of life.
Dealing specifically with the dialect and customs of
Cornwall and West Devon, the book presents us with an
abundance of absorbing data all put together in a highly
readable, often humorous way.  In a 19-page discursive introduction,
Mr. Phillipps, lecturer in English at Leicester
University, briefly chronicles the history of dialect research
and points up some interesting aspects of Westcountry
speech: how it makes use of humorous similes like &ldquo;You'm
like a cow handling a musket,&rdquo; or turns coarseness into a
virtue, as in &ldquo;The devil shits luck for some, but when he
comes to we, he's hardbound [constipated].&rdquo;  Mr. Phillipps
mentions how scientific modern dialectology is; he deplores
the lack of interest in the International Phonetic Alphabet
exhibited by dialect enthusiasts and general readers alike—
but he shrewdly avoids using phonetics himself in this book.

The main part of the work, also discursive, although arranged
alphabetically under keywords, is really a detailed
expansion of some elements of the introduction.  The keywords
act merely as points of departure for entertaining,
often anecdotal articles on Westcountry life and language.
The arrangement suits the browser rather than the reader
looking for something specific, and despite the presence of
an index the linguist wishing to know about the Celtic element
in Cornish English, for example, will have to realize
in advance that much of what Mr. Phillipps has to say on
the subject is contained under the keyword PADGY-POW.

This unsatisfactory arrangement is regrettably not the
only drawback of the book; there is also one that arises from
Mr. Phillipps's desire to prevent interruptions in his text.
Thus the rather unusual method is employed of referring to
an endnote by using a key phrase rather than a number.  It
was rather disconcerting to find that without realizing it I
had read a passage on which there was a note, even though
the author explains his system in the preface.

Yet these points are rather pedantic quibbles.  This is
not a reference work and my judgment of it is based on
its entertainment value, which is very high.  *Westcountry
Words and Ways* is a thoroughly well-researched book.  The
author has gone to local magazines, learned journals, works
of literature, and old dialect glossaries and dictionaries, and
has also drawn on his own experience as a Westcountry dialect
speaker.

True, the book is very often parochial in character, and
we have the inevitable lamentation for the loss of things
past and detestation of things present (especially motorways
and city-dwellers).  But in case you think that Westcountry
dialect is like a wine that doesn't travel, just dip into this
book and see if you can resist the humor of remarks like &ldquo;If
that hedge wudn' there he'd a gone right through 'un,&rdquo; or a
sign on a beach saying &ldquo;Do not sit in deck-chairs with wet
bathers.&rdquo;

*[William Gould, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Classification and Index of the World's Languages*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Classification%20and%20Index%20of%20the%20World%27s%20Languages%2A%20%2AC.F.%20and%20F.M.%20Voegelin&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20)
*C.F. and F.M. Voegelin, Elsevier, New York, Oxford, Amsterdam, 1977, ix + 658pp.*

This is a nonobjective review.  It has to be.  Faced with
an index of thousands of names of languages and dialects,
only a minute fraction of which are familiar to him, the
poor reviewer pursues his feeble ken to an *O altitudo!* and
marvels at the courage that undertakes such an impossible
task.  That the task, though mainly shouldered by the Atlantic
(= 'Atlaslike') team of the Voegelins, was shared to a
certain extent is inevitable.  Over forty distinguished consultants
assisted, plus a number of graduate students.  Was there
enough help?  Perhaps not.  Perhaps there never can be.

The book is based in part on previous work.  In twenty
separate numbers of *Anthropological Linguistics* (1964-66),
the authors gave us *Languages of the World*.  Now, with an
NDEA contract and the help of the consultants referred to,
they have provided a complete revision according to a
model provided by Charles F. Hockett ([ix]).

Let me say that the book is superior to others of the
sort known to me—which does not imply lavish praise.  The
nit-picking that follows will be directed at nits that should
not have been found in such a volume.  The introduction
makes a debatable remark in the first sentence: &ldquo;one century
[has elapsed] since the recognition that all the languages of
the world could yield proto languages.&rdquo;  This certainly needs
qualifying (with &ldquo;theoretically&rdquo; or the like?), for what are
we to do with Burushaski and all the other languages with
no known relatives?

In approaching such a dazzling work, a reader soon
turns to his own pet fields of interest or fortuitous areas of
useless knowledge.  Thus I turned first of all to Celtic, hardly
an out-of-the-way realm compared to Chorotega or
Upper Cowlitz, granted, but possibly less familiar than
French or German to some readers of *Verbatim*.  Here I was
self-righteously appalled.  I found the traditional divisions of
*p*-Celtic and *q*-Celtic, but with no explanation of the terms
and with no reference to embarrassing contradictions in
Gaulish or to recent illumination emanating from discoveries
in Spain.  I realize that limitations of space are crucial.
But space could have been saved in giving the number of
monoglot speakers of Welsh in four digits, instead of a fictional
six.  And the name of the Breton town Vannes takes
slightly less ink than the incorrect *Vannetais* (= the dialect,
not the town).  To say that Breton is &ldquo;probably an off-shoot&rdquo;
of Cornish saves space, to be sure, by avoiding many
problems.  The statement on Patagonian Welsh is most ambiguous:
&ldquo;spoken in Chubut Territory, Patagonia in South
America in 1891&rdquo; (p. 103); it is still spoken there!  In listing
the counties in which Welsh dialects (North and South—an
intolerable oversimplification for anyone even slightly acquainted
with Welsh dialectology) are spoken, the book
provides an unpardonably incomplete statement.  Manx,
called &ldquo;extinct in this century&rdquo;—possibly a true statement—
was presumably still alive and doing poorly when the book
was written, for the last native speaker (born in the 1870s)
lived on with Celtic stubbornness until 1974.  There are still
speakers, however, who learned it as a second language.

Let us look at Germanic, the group to which English
belongs.  A rather old-fashioned division is chosen (East,
North, and West Germanic), although we are made aware
of alternative theories (p. 139).  But what evil genius led the
authors to divide Scandinavian into Continental and Insular
Scandinavian?  A great many speakers of what are called
&ldquo;Continental&rdquo; Scandinavian languages live on islands.  We
might well ask why English is not called &ldquo;Insular West Germanic&rdquo;
!  There is, however, greater fault in historical distortion.
The Faroese would be justifiably incensed to learn (p. 141)
that their islands are &ldquo;Dutch-administered&rdquo;!  They never
have been, and even the Danish control is slackening more
and more in a surge of Faroese nationalism.  The figures on
speakers of Faroese (and Icelandic, too) are too low, as contrasted
with those of Celtic speakers, which are, for the
most part, too high.  Perhaps the relative exuberance or
mendacity of trusted consultants is to blame.

Including English-based Creoles as members of West
Germanic, while no doubt intriguing to anthropologists,
lends considerable distortion to the classification, especially
when the numbering system implies that English (No. 5 in
the Germanic group) is more or less equivalent to Gulla
(No. 7), or that German and Dutch together (&ldquo;Netherlandic-German&rdquo;)
have somehow the same statistical weight as, e.g.,
Beach-la-mar (No. 16, p. 144), with its 50,000 speakers!

Another hobby of the reveiwer's is Armenian.  In this
book we find a traditional classification which, while not
damnably wrong, was nevertheless shown by the outstanding
Armenian linguist Hrachia Acharian/Ajarian as early as
1909 to have certain shortcomings.  In his dissertation at the
University of Paris, one of the few works by him not written
in Armenian, but in French—and therefore accessible to the
West, including Indiana—he gave syntactical and morphological
proof of a much better tripartite division.  Meillet's
notion that Armenian was most closely related to Greek is
based on eclectic features and, despite endorsement by Eric
Hamp, for whose linguistic acumen this reviewer has boundless
respect, is probably not well-founded; it is, nevertheless,
accepted in this volume.

Living in Yonkers, N.Y., I am interested in a group of
neighbors who call themselves &ldquo;Assyrians.&rdquo;  In fact, the two
centers of Assyrian activity in the United States are Yonkers,
N.Y., and Flint, Michigan (the latter also has Druses, to
make the picture more intriguing).  At the Assyrian National
Headquarters in Yonkers one hears, from the lips of people
so gentle that they can hardly ever have come down like a
wolf on the fold, that they speak the &ldquo;language of Jesus
Christ&rdquo; (unaltered).  How does a book like the present one
give an average citizen information on such matters?  Not at
all.  Assyrian is discussed only in its usual connotation, as a
&ldquo;dialect&rdquo; of ancient Assyro-Babylonian.  Even if one looks up
Aramaic, bearing in mind the spoken language of Palestine
at the time of Christ, there is still not much help.  Somewhere
under &ldquo;Modern Aramaic&rdquo; this so-called Assyrian language
should be included, but it is far from clear, in the
present classification, where it belongs.  (Incidentally, here,
as well as in other places in the book, the use of such a paltry
device as the semi-colon baffles the poor reader.  Such an
admission of one's own inadequacy ought to be eschewed,
but it is difficult for me to tell whether a given semi-colon is
a wall excluding extraneous elements, or a gate granting
access, or a permeable membrane allowing osmosis.  A look
at p. 303 makes me vote for East Aramaic; but I could be
wrong, and my neighbors, if dependent on works like this,
will continue to confuse themselves with Christ and possibly
Nebuchadnezzar as well.)

If these areas about which I know a thing or two (hardly
three) evince so many defects, how can I have any great
confidence in the accuracy of those sections (most of them!)
where I know nothing?  Logicians tell me that this is faulty
reasoning.  I do not believe them.

There is a bibliography, called &ldquo;References&rdquo; (359-383).
Now, despite the worldwide scope of the material covered,
well over two-thirds of the books listed (articles, too) are in
English.  Moreover, in those titles in foreign languages, there
are incredibly glaring errors—in German, French, Russian,
etc.  Can you believe that there was an *Akademie der
Widdenschaften* in Vienna?  There are many signs of haste
in this portion of the book.  Perhaps the printer should not
be paid.

I wonder how many people can afford the price of the
volume?  I cannot.  I am also not convinced that such a work
is really possible.  We may need an encyclopedia instead.  We
also need maps.  The ancient Meillet-Cohen had them, and I
still consult them with some profit, although not for all parts
of the globe.  We probably also need tapes and films and
many other things.

Come to think of it, there probably hasn't been a
completely satisfactory and satisfying work on language since
Panini, and even that great grammarian is said to have had
his faults.  There is, however, one great merit (in addition to
many others, despite my strictures) and that is: its overwhelming
list of languages should give pause to those friends
(now, perhaps, ex-friends) of mine who mouth sweeping
utterances about &ldquo;all languages.&rdquo;

*[Robert A. Fowkes, New York University]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Eponyms Dictionary Index: A Reference Guide to Persons, Both Real and Imaginary, and the Terms Derived from Their Names*](https://www.amazon.com/Eponyms-dictionaries-index-editor-Ruffner/dp/0810306883)
James A. Ruffner, ed., (Gale Research Co., 1977), xxviii + 730 pp.

For those readers not in the mood to reach for the
dictionary, an *eponym* is defined by the *Random House
Dictionary* (*Unabr*.) as 'a person, real or imaginary, from
whom something, as a tribe, nation, or place, takes or is said
to take its name: *Brut, the supposed grandson of Aeneas, is
the eponym of the Britons*.'

Among all of the medical, anatomical, biological, and
other names (e.g., *Shick test; Voight's lines; Swainson's
hawk, thrush, cliff swallow, warbler*, and *warbling vireo;
Swammerdam's vesicle; Unwin's extensometer*, etc.) are
nestled *Peter Principle, Munchausen's syndrome*, and *Murphy's
law* (attributed to 'Murphy Edsel?').  Browsing around, one
finds such gems as *Queen Elizabeth's pocket-pistol, Knipperdollings*,
and *Yongjong era*.  Moving in the other direction (to
the eponyms themselves), we can be dismayed that *Brillat-Savarin*,
besides meaning 'gastronome,' has provided the
name only for *Savarin*, which is a kind of egg bread (and of
course, a brand name for a coffee), while *Pierre Paul Broca*
gave his name to about ten anatomical spaces, angles, and
other details.  *William Carey Brinkerhoff*, although only *B.'s
speculum* appears to have been named after him, ought at
least to have a longevity potion named in his honor: he
appears to be alive though born in 1861.  [For the less fleet
of fingers, that's 116 years.]

Extremely useful as reference, especially for etymologists,
this book lists 20,000 terms and their 13,000 eponyms.  Moreover,
each is documented by reference to one or more of
the 500 biographical sources neatly listed in a bibliography
at the front.  *Silhouette, Ferris wheel, poinsettia, boycott,
nicotine*—they are all there.

Inevitably, as the editor suggests in his Preface, some
items have been missed, but the only omission we noted was
of *Urdang's Law*, &ldquo;If you want a book badly enough you
will buy it regardless of the cost.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {George O. Morrison}

Below is the answer to a query regarding a word in
*Mariah Magazine* (Fall) found on page 58.

>Thanks for your inquiry.  A *hornsmith* is a person
who crafts or carves items out of horns or bones (or
synthetic substitutes such as plastic nowadays).  Items
might range from a belt buckle to a knife butt.
*Hornsmith* may be part of western Rocky Mountain
vernacular.

[*George O. Morrison, Monrovia, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {John P. Kidner}

Cheers & *Jeers*

The menu of the Sunningdale Country Club, Scarsdale,
N.Y., offers: *crisp Long Island duckling, &ldquo;Montmerancy,&rdquo;;
soft shell crabs, sauteed almondine; tournadoes of
beef, &ldquo;Forestiere&rdquo;* [*guaranteed to give you wind?*]; *and mocca
layer cake*, and *All entries* [are] *served with soup, salad, fresh
vegetable, potato &amp; coffee*.  What we want to know is whether
serving potato with the coffee is a rebellious reflex against
the (California-inspired) practice of serving a salad with the
appetizer?  [Richard M. Lederer]

Sign on a restaurant in Richmond, Virginia: *veal parma
john*.  [Mrs. Howard Williamson]

Comments about self-referring words in VERBATIM
[IV, 1] have evoked some interesting correspondence
from several readers.  Now a letter from Geertrui H. Garbolevsky
on quite another subject sparks the invention of the
self-canceling phrase.  She provides the following, from &ldquo;one
of the better known universities in the Tidewater, Virginia,
area&rdquo;: *This card entitles this student to attend your class.
Students who report without this permit should be sent to
the Registration Center to determine their registration status*.
[How does the instructor know what to do about students
who have no card?]  Another gem, from the railroad station
in Amsterdam: *We give no information*.  And a long-time
favorite of ours, to be found on every Band-Aid and other
sterile gauze pad package made by Johnson & Johnson: *Sterility
not guaranteed if package is opened*.

Two candidates for the *Word Most Often Misspelt: minuscule*
(usually &ldquo;miniscule&rdquo;); *millennium, millennia*
(usually &ldquo;millenium, millenia&rdquo;).  On the basis of actual count,
the latter misspelling is actually preferred by *The New York
Times*, which, significantly enough, considers itself &ldquo;the
Keeper of the Anals&rdquo; (or is that Annals?).

This season's candidate for the word most often misused:
*bemused*.  It means 'confused, befuddled; lost in thought,
preoccupied'; it is more often misused to mean 'amused,'
usually by journalists.

*Words of Size and Shape*

I am fond of words.  I like the pulsing, throbbing ones
that send a sentence bounding: *plummet, succubus, plunge*,
or the angular ones that tear their way through—*shock,
stark, acrylic, act*.  Although not enthusiastic about the thin
words that set the teeth on edge—*needle, skewer, shrew*—
nor the chameleons that change their color to hide their
meaning: *appears, figuratively, alleged*, I truly admire the
big, full-blooded ones that stand like a bulwark, making the
verbs work like hell to overcome them: *dungeon, mawk,
holocaust, turgid, gothic*.  There are light words that float
their message—*pastoral, serene, languid*, and there are the
cossacks that thunder through the mind: *savage, murder,
cauldron*.  I like the crisp words, too, those that make thoughts
dance: *crystal, dazzle, crackle*.  Still, I am aware of the tyranny
of pure definition as it strips some words of their inherent,
almost restful euphony—*gangrene, influenza*.  Some there
are that have a way of grouping themselves into an invitation
to join them in a journey—*down across the ways*, or summon
me to view an exciting panorama of space and time: *dawning
of an age, a field of stars*, or that give me a trip along landscapes
of nostalgia: *twilight of an era, corridors of time*.  Yes,
sir.  I like words.  Each is a nucleus upon which misty thoughts—
concepts—can condense to become vivid with life and color.
And I am most fortunate for I have thirty-five thousand of
them immediately at hand, and quick access to a quarter
million more.  Yes, indeed.  I like words. [*John P. Kidner, Alexandria, Virginia*].


#### EPISTOLA {George R. Downs}

As you probably already know, the commonly used
&ldquo;four letter words&rdquo; of 1977 were rarely, if ever, printed in
the early days of our country.  As a matter of fact, when
spoken, it was only in private conversation—and then in a
lowered voice.

This is leading up to the article, &ldquo;That Dirty Bird,&rdquo;
which appeared on the front page of Volume III No. 3 of
your publication.

My boyhood home was in Minnesota (where herons
and their habitats are numerous).  My uncle who was born
in Iowa well before 1850 told me (who was born in 1903)
that the popular name of &ldquo;That Dirty Bird&rdquo; was derived
from its habit of evacuation when disturbed and taking
flight.  According to my informant, the bird was called *shitpuke*,
an easily acceptable explanation considering both the
fact that the birds were numerous and immediately flew
away from the disturber so that it was difficult to tell
whether the bird was regurgitating or was evacuating its
bowels.  Hence the double &ldquo;shite-poke&rdquo; name.

There is little or no need to consult erudite dictionaries.
&ldquo;Ask the man who has seen scores of the Dirty Birds.&rdquo;
Incidentally, the effluviae are white or brownish white and
in many places stain the bulrushes where the heron makes
its home. [*George R. Downs, Denver, Colorado*].


#### EPISTOLA {John P. Jehu}

I would add the German word *Kafer* to the list in Mr.
E. E. Rehmus' penultimate paragraph of &ldquo;La Cucuracha&rdquo;
[III, 3]. [*John P. Jehu, Albany, New York*].


#### EPISTOLA {L. E. Braun}

A woman in our town is well-read and well-traveled
and holds at least two academic degrees.  Yet she speaks of
the Hillamanian Mountains in Tibet, Simonese cats in Thailand,
and Flamingo dancers in Spain.

&ldquo;You mean Flamenco,&rdquo; someone murmurs, and she
replies, &ldquo;Yes, that's what I said: Flamingo!&rdquo;  After a week in
Taxco, where the Mexicans corrected her daily, she still
called the town Tacos.

What causes this aberration?  Where is the malfunction?

Needless to say, her friends are enchanted.  She serves
steak with Bordello sauce.  Her young nephew watches a TV
show called Sesame Seed.  Her dining room set was designed
by Drunken Phyfe. [*L. E. Braun, Detroit, Michigan*].


#### EPISTOLA {Harry L. Arnold, Jr., M.D.}

&ldquo;I&rdquo; before &ldquo;e&rdquo;
Except after &ldquo;c,&rdquo;
Or when sounded as &ldquo;ay&rdquo;
As in &ldquo;neighbor&rdquo; or &ldquo;weigh,&rdquo; EXCEPT IN

Neither could either weird, surfeited, counterfeit sheik
raise a stein, seize the height by stealth or sleight, or
summon the leisure to make an obeisance by the seismograph
on the weir.

*Sheik* and *obeisance* were of course once exceptions like
*neighbor* and *weigh*, but no longer, at least in the U.S. [*Harry L. Arnold, Jr., M.D., Honolulu, Hawaii*]


#### EPISTOLA {E.J. Moncada}

H. N. Meng [III, 1] asks if *spit*, as in *spit and image*,
might not be a truncated form of *spirit*.  N. Shapiro suggests
[III, 3] that we are dealing with &ldquo;honest-to-goodness spit&rdquo;
(with which opinion I fully concur) and quotes a 15th
century French phrase to substantiate his opinion: *son p&eacute;re
tout crach&eacute;*.  Proverbial expressions have a way of bouncing
back and forth across territorial boundaries and surely one
of the most exciting, though frustrating, studies must be the
search for the original version of any given proverb.  Later
reflections of this French phrase may be seen in Mateo
Aleman's *Guzman de Alfarache* (Pt. I, 1599) where we find
the phrase &ldquo;*le decia que era un estornudo suyo y que tanta
similitud no se hallaba en dos huevos*,&rdquo; (Clasicos Castellanos,
I, 93).  James Mabbe, the English cleric who translated
*Guzman* into English as *The Rogue* (1622), renders this line
in his usual verbose fashion as &ldquo;my mother would tell him,
that I was like him, as if I had been spit out of his mouth;
and that two Egges were not liker one another, than I was
like him&rdquo; (Tudor edition, I, 84), where the Spanish *estornudo*
(sneeze) is rendered by *spit* (both, after all, being forms of
forceful ejection).  In Italian we also have the phrase, *e suo
padre nato sputato*.  M. P. Tilley, in his grand *A Dictionary
of the Proverbs in England in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries* (1950) lists: *As like him as if he had been spit out
of his Mouth* (M 1246) and dates the first example of its use
as 1598.

It seems to me that the documented use of *spit* in such
a context makes the expression *spit and image* a &ldquo;corrected&rdquo;
form of an earlier participial use of *spit*, as in *spitten image*.
Given this construction, the derivative *spit 'n image* (which
puzzled Meng) becomes understandable and perfectly suits
the meaning of the phrase as in: *he's the spit 'n image of his
father*.

Ruth Brown, in her article on sign language, VERBATIM,
III, 3, *Hear Finish Before (Pause) You?*, points out that
nouns indicating the human male are signed above the nose
while those belonging to the female are signed below the
nose.  She then, jocosely I hope, states that &ldquo;long ago someone
must have decided men have minds while women have
mouths.&rdquo;  The more charitable and traditional explanation
associates the gender with the head piece.  The sign for man
is much like the gesture of catching hold of the brim of a
hat (remember those curious items of dress?).  The sign for
woman, the thumb tracing a line roughly from the inferior
tip of the auricle down to the chin, represents the string or
ribbon from the woman's bonnet which was fastened
beneath the wearer's chin. [*E.J. Moncada, Gallaudet College Washington, D.C.*].


#### EPISTOLA {M. DeChant}

It is well known that Milwaukee's largest ancestral
group is German.  Imagine the plight of a doctor's secretary
who has to spell and pronounce names like these all day,
every day:

>*Greiveldinger*  
*Griepentrog*  
*Habersetzer*  
*Klotzbuecher*  
*Krautkramer*  
*Kronschnabel*  
*Pflughoeft*  
*Promenschenkel*  
*Reifschlager*  
*Schwabenlender*  
*Seidenstricker*  
*Wesselschmidt*  
*Schachtschneider*

[*M. DeChant, Thiensville, Wisconsin*].


#### EPISTOLA {Donald Weeks}

In a recent issue of *VERBATIM [III, 2],* &ldquo;an
(unspecified) number of years ago&rdquo; was used.  In my own
writing I solve such a problem quite simply to my
satisfaction by putting it: &ldquo;A (n unspecified) number of
years ago.&rdquo;

One further thought: Why is it that during Lent some
bakeries produce &ldquo;hot &times; buns&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;hot + buns&rdquo;? [*Donald Weeks, London, England*].


#### EPISTOLA {M. R. Paskow}

The Japanese word for insect is properly *konchu*, a more
common word for insect or bug is *muchi*; the proper name
for cockroach in Japanese is *aburamuchi*, literally 'oil-bug.'
In III, 2 my letter concerning &ldquo;The Enigmatic Eggplant&rdquo;
has the following error which is probably due to a
misreading of my script: &ldquo;Italian farmers who just cultivated&rdquo;
should read &ldquo;Italian farmers who first cultivated.&rdquo; [*M. R. Paskow, Sonoma, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Donald E. Schmiedel}

In VERBATIM [III, 4], proofreader Barbara Marsh
wondered why *chili* was so often spelled *chile*.  It would
probably be more in order to wonder why the Spanish word
*chile* appears so often as *chili*.  I don't know but I would
guess that it is a result of an Anglo mispronunciation of the
last syllable of *chile*.  Yes, the name of the pepper is identical
to the name of the country, and the vowels rhyme with *we-they*. [*Donald E. Schmiedel, Las Vegas, Nevada*].

#### EPISTOLA {Carol Coon}

The managing editor of the *Old Farmer's Almanac*
suggested writing to you for help on a reference question I
sent to them.  We are trying to find the origin of the phrase,
*old man winter*.  It is such a common saying but I can't seem
to get a handle on how it started.

Any suggestions you have will be greatly appreciated. [*Carol Coon, San Franscisco, California*].

***

...*Readers may send their speculations, suggestions, etc.,
directly to Ms. Coon/Reference Librarian/Bay Area Reference
Center/San Francisco Public Library/Civic Center/San
Francisco, CA 94102*.

*Editor*


#### EPISTOLA {Charles Bremer}

Our &ldquo;American-English&rdquo; is fast becoming the international
language that will eventually become the means
for all the peoples of the world with which to exchange knowledge
and ideas and to strive toward mutual understanding.

Unfortunately, our language in its present state is far
from an ideal system of symbols, growing as it has from an
array of northern European and Romance languages with a
sprinkling of American Indian, Yiddish, and a few dozen
other languages.

While this mixture has tended to develop an extensive
lexicon, it has complicated it to a degree that endangers its
usefulness.  Therefore, steps must be taken now to purify
and distill our language so that it can be used accurately
and be taught to our children and to people of other
countries quickly and easily.

Efforts such as yours are at work toward making our
language a more accurate and useful tool for communication
and should earn widespread interest and support. [*Charles Bremer, Lincoln City, Oregon*].


#### EPISTOLA {Joanna B. Paxson}

The February 1977 issue was a delight.  Walter C.
Kidney, in &ldquo;The Seating of Zotz&rdquo; [III, 4], pointed out that
reading widely leads to an extensive but not always *useful*
vocabulary.  (Emphasis added.)  Au contraire.

Ten years ago I had a lunch interview with a writer/
prospective employer.  He said he'd always liked the word
*borborygmus* and looked at me expectantly.  &ldquo;Oh yes,&rdquo; I
replied brightly, &ldquo;Greek for 'tummy-rumblings.' &rdquo;  The job
was mine.

I had only learned the word two weeks previously from
an amusing column in *The Saturday Review of Literature*.

Looking back, I bet the writer had learned the word
from the same source.  If you read this, Mark, I'll hear your
chuckle. [*Joanna B. Paxson, Washington, D.C.*].


#### EPISTOLA {Willard Espy}

A cartoon in VERBATIM [III, 4] revolves around the
expression *to bend over backwards*.  I am led to share with
you an excerpt from a letter I received recently from Robert
I. Colin, of Gloucester, Massachusetts.

>When, before retirement, I worked at ITT in
Nutley, N.J., I often had two-way correspondence with a
gentleman working at an ITT subsidiary in Stuttgart,
Germany.  Our letters (and conversations at personal
meetings) were often polyglot, since we both were
handy in each other's languages.
>
>In one of my letters to Stuttgart, I used the
phrase *bend* (or *lean*) *over backwards*.  In reply, my
colleague wrote that he followed well all of my
letter, but &ldquo;what is this thing about bending over
backwards?&rdquo;
>
>To explain it, I composed several instances where
that phrase would apply.  Also I cited the (cumbersome)
German word, *&uuml;berkompensieren* 'to over-compensate'
>
>Stuttgart was still puzzled.  Some months later he
came to Nutley on a personal visit.  In my office was
another ITT employee, a Frenchman.  I knew that
Stuttgart, like many educated Germans, was proficient in
French, so I asked Etienne if he could explain what *bend
over backwards* would be in French.
>
>Etienne paused a minute, and replied, &ldquo;No.  A
Frenchman would never bend over backwards.&rdquo;
>
>Since then I've put the question to professors of
German, French, Italian, Spanish, and what have you.
All were stumped.  There the matter rests.  I conclude that
ethnic differences make certain notions impossible to
translate into other languages.

I gather from the Supplement to the *Oxford English
Dictionary* that *bend over backwards* originated in this
country and is seldom used in England.  The earliest citation
in the *OED* is for 1926.

Some of your readers might be able to cite a similar
idiom from another language. [*Willard Espy, New York, New York*].


#### EPISTOLA {Martin Harris Slobodkin}

I wonder if any other of your readers note a certain
deficiency in our English language.  That is the proper word
or expression which means thinking of the clever answer or
the witty retort after the event has happened.

Germans say *Treppenw&ouml;rter* literally 'step-words' while
the French say *les paroles d'escalier* or 'words of the
staircase.'  Both of these expressions mean that you've
thought of the clever response while going down the stairs
*AFTER* you've left the party.

Of course, no one uses steps anymore.  We use elevators
but &ldquo;elevator words&rdquo; seems too uplifting.  If we used the
English term, we could call them &ldquo;liftwords&rdquo; which does
have a lilt to it, but nobody would know what you meant.

May I suggest that we use &ldquo;wishwords&rdquo; for these
afterwards afterwords in the sense that &ldquo;I wish I'd said
that.&rdquo;

Do your readers have any other suggestions? [*Martin Harris Slobodkin, Cambridge, Massachusetts*].


#### EPISTOLA {F.W. Schaub}

If the *milli-helen* of W.K. Viertel [III, 4] is accepted
by the American National Metric Council, they will
probably insist that it be written *millihelen*, i.e., without
the hyphen.  Also the official symbol would be *mH*.

Before it is adopted that body may insist that history be
ignored and the definition be that a *helen* is the 'amount of
female beauty required to launch one ship.'  After all,
*centigrade* has been changed to *Celsius* (not lower case),
and for frequency the unit is a *hertz* (lower case) rather
than *cycle*.

Since it is planned to eventually substitute 3.6
megajoule (symbol *MJ*) for a *kilowatt-hour*, the redefinition
of *millihelen* to *helen* could be done at the same time. [*F.W. Schaub, Decatur, Illinois*].


#### EPISTOLA {Ben Bassett}

Ethel Grodzins Romm says silly hyphenation by
computers [III, 4] is no joke for marginal readers.  I would
carry that further: it is a serious roadblock for young
readers.

In Westchester County, N.Y., one of the nation's
richest and best-educated areas, eight Gannett newspapers
are promoting a Newspaper in Education program.  This
plan, it tells teachers, &ldquo;reinforces the things you teach.&rdquo;  So
look at some end-of-line splits from these newspapers:

>*boo-kends*  
*bul-lhorn*  
*brea-kaway*  
*chee-seburger*  
*di-mestore*  
*dinin-groom*  
*gues-swork*  
*houseb-roken*  
*looses-trife*  
*mor-gue*  
*pru-ned*  
*ris-ked*  
*shel-lfire*  
*shellf-ish*  
*so-mething*  
*someth-ing*  
*stil-lborn*  
*spo-kesman*  
*storef-ront*  
*surpri-se*  
*tee-naged*

These may evoke little more than ridicule from a
discerning reader.  I am concerned that some examples may
lead to sloppy writing and mispronunciation.

Reasonably acceptable pronunciation is one key to peer
respect.  English is full of oral traps.  The hazards compound
when newspapers omit diacrities from foreign words as
most of them do.  *Habitu&eacute;* without its accent easily becomes
&ldquo;ha-bi-too&rdquo; for a 14-year-old who lacks French and hasn't
heard the word.

Once the Linotype operator and the proofreader took
pride in their work; few absurd divisions of words got by.
Even when type is set electronically, means exist to provide
logical divisions, even though it may take an extra pair of
eyes.  This is a hard pill to swallow for companies already
saving millions through automation. [*Ben Bassett, Larchmont, New York*].


#### EPISTOLA {H.G. Frommer}

&ldquo;Aunt Minnie's Chicken Talk&rdquo; [III, 4] finally answered
my question of long standing, why Britons say &ldquo;keep your
pecker up&rdquo; when they mean the chin.

Other pseudo-X-rated expressions we heard during our
four-year stay in Scotland were: &ldquo;Give me a wee tinkle,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Knock me up sometime,&rdquo; and, as my 16-year-old Scottish
secretary announced one morning upon arrival at the office,
&ldquo;I didn't get my piece this morning.&rdquo;

The last one caused upraised eyebrows until she explained
that a *piece* is a 'brown-bag lunch.'  *Knocking up* means
'knock on someone's door,' and the *wee tinkle* has nothing
to do with the water closet.  Rather, it suggests the use of the
telephone. [*H.G. Frommer, Mequon, Wisconsin*].


#### EPISTOLA {W.S. Tower, Jr.}

Why does Barbara Walsh [III, 4] prefer *chili* to *chile*?
When she finds *chile* on a menu, it is almost certain to be
part of the phrase *chile con carne*, perfectly good
Mexican for a dish which presumably originated in that
part of the country which became Arizona, New Mexico
and Texas.  Why Americanize part of its name?  Would she
prefer 'kid al horno' to *cabrito al horno*, or 'turkey mole' to
*mole de guajolote*?

Incidentally, Francisco J. Santamar&iacute;a, in his monumental
*Diccionario de Mejicanismos*, defines *chile con carne*
as 'a detestable dish which, with the false designation of
Mexican, is sold in the U.S. from Texas to New York.'  He
must have eaten some of the canned stuff. [*W.S. Tower, Jr., Essex, Connecticut*].


#### EPISTOLA {Joyce A. McConeghey}

Re your review of *Words and Women* in the September
issue of VERBATIM: I quote, &ldquo;...the unassailable fact is
that all sages have always been male and we would defy...
anyone... to unearth evidence ...that the word has ever
been used to refer to a female.&rdquo;

I cite the following passage from the first page of
David Niven's *Bring On The Empty Horses:*

When Gertrude Stein returned to New York after a
short sojourn in Hollywood, somebody asked her, &ldquo;What is
it like—out there?&rdquo;

To which, with little delay and the minimum of careful
thought, the sage replied, &ldquo;There is no 'there'—there.&rdquo; [*Joyce A. McConeghey, San Francisco, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Marianne B. Garland}

Perhaps the Austin Awareness League would find
useful the avowed statement of Deacon Ephraim Stebbins of
long ago, quoted in Burgess Johnson's *The Lost Art of
Profanity*, Bobbs-Merrill, 1948.  Said Deacon Stebbins,
&ldquo;Unabridged dictionaries are dangerous books.  In their
pages men's evilest thoughts find means of expression.
Terms denoting all that is blasphemous, foul or obscene are
printed there for men, women, and children to read and
ponder.  Such books should have their covers padlocked and
be chained to reading desks, in the custody of responsible
librarians, preferably church members in good standing.
Permission to open such books should be granted only after
careful inquiry as to which word a reader plans to look up
and how he plans to use it.&rdquo;

I derived my appreciation of the language very early
from my father who was a merciless critic.  My mother was
a church organist, and the current minister telephoned our
home once and asked my father, &ldquo;Is your wife convenient?&rdquo;
My father replied, &ldquo;A strange question, and for what
purpose I cannot imagine, but yes, I believe I would say
that she is quite convenient,&rdquo; and hung up.  My mother
cried, the minister called again, and all turned out well
after my parents were finally speaking. [*Marianne B. Garland, Wellington, Kansas*].


#### EPISTOLA {Carolyn Farkas}

Reinhold Aman's letter in VERBATIM [III, 3] refers to
Professor Fowkes's quest for a palindromic English city
name.  Is that on the level?  (*Level*, by the way, is a Maryland
town northeast of Baltimore.) [*Carolyn Farkas, Cecil Community College North East, Maryland*].


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v4n2_1977-09)