---
title: "Vol IV, No 3 [December 1977]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## We Do Not Talk Only With Our Mouths
*Walburga von Raffler-Engel, Vanderbilt University*

IN THE PAST, linguists have analyzed language as if words
were the only means for conveying a message.  They have
ignored the fact that human communication is a combination
of words and gestures.

When an Englishman shakes his head he indicates *no*
as much as when he says so.  To a Greek this same head movement
means *yes*.  To say *no*, he nods.

Cultures vary greatly in the meaning of gestures.  I know
of one American girl who waved goodbye with the palm of
her hand open towards the Italian male whose attention she
did not appreciate.  Little did she know that in Italy one waves
goodbye with the back of the hand and that showing the palm
of the hand means 'come closer.'

Why have linguists taken so long to incorporate gestures
into the analysis of language?  Even those anthropological linguists
who actually looked at their *informants* did not analyze
body movements.  Most of the time, they made note of
them to serve as a prop for the time they would get down to
the real business of analyzing the verbal transcript.  In addition,
the bulk of their transcripts came from monologs.  Linguists
seemed to ignore the fact that most of natural language
occurs in dialog, within a conversational setting.

Stranger yet, the psycholinguists working with infants
by and large ignored the obvious: eye contact and touch between
mother and child, not to mention the infant's pointing
at objects.

What all these linguists did was to transcribe what they
heard and then work on their transcripts as if they were the
real thing.  What they did not realize is that spoken and written
language are different media of communication.  When we
read in a piece of literature that a professor asked a student,
arriving for a conference, why he had come, all the while
keeping an eye on his watch, we realize that this professor
did not encourage the student to speak.  When we look at the
linguist's transcript of such a speech act, we find no mention
of the professor's gazing at his watch.  An incomplete transcript
makes a fully accurate interpretation impossible.  The
nonverbal component of human communication is as vital
to the message as the verbal component.  Anthropologists
have recently become aware of how much information on
nonverbal behavior is provided by the written records of the
past.  A new branch of anthropology, called *literary anthropology*,
has developed with the task of extricating the forms
of the nonverbal behavior of ancient civilizations from their
writings, to be added to what otherwise may be deduced
from visible records on tombs and other pictorial representations.

Psychiatrists, of course, have always incorporated the
movement of the body in the analysis of human interaction.
Belatedly, linguists too have come to recognize that people
gesticulate while they talk.  In 1941, David Efron published
a remarkable book comparing the nonverbal behavior of assimilated
and nonassimilated immigrants in New York City,
showing how culture had influenced their body movements.
Nobody noticed.  In 1972, Efron's book was reprinted with a
new title, and *Gesture, Race, and Culture* sold very successfully.
In 1952, Ray Birdwhistell wrote his *Introduction to
Kinesics* relating gestural behavior to spoken language.  The
term *kinesics* caught on among the linguists of the time, but
in the 1960s, the *kineme* went the way of the phoneme.  Now
kinesics is definitely in again.  A series of books on body language
began to appear in the early 1970s, and this subject
is now covered by ever longer chapters in new textbooks.
Every meeting of linguists, psychologists, or anthropologists—
and recently, also sociologists—has its section on nonverbal
behavior.

The area is still new and the terminology is still in flux.
What I propose is a tri-partite division: (1) *Body language*
for bodily movements in general as they express the mood of
the individual, nervously walking back and forth, fidgeting
with his hands, or crossing his legs for a more comfortable
sitting position: (2) *Kinesics* for message-related body movements
which can substitute for a verbal expression or accompany
a verbalization, reinforcing it, e.g., a German speaker
can simply touch his forehead with his index finger or while
doing so may say that such and such a person is a bit nutty;
Mediterranean people have a rich repertoire of kinesic gestures;
Anglo-Saxons are supposed to &ldquo;keep their hands still&rdquo;;
and in one African language, numbers are always indicated
by the fingers; (3) *Social movements*, probably the most important
category of the three, comprises those movements of the
body that are obligatory within social interaction.  These are
movements which children may be explicitly taught, while
kinesic motions are generally acquired with verbal language.
Greeting formulas, for example, enter into this category.  In
Europe, upper-class youngsters learn how to kiss a lady's hand
without their lips actually touching the skin.  Black Americans
have developed the highly stylized art of the *soul hand-shake*.
This ritual may take up to fifteen minutes and is
seldom if ever practiced in inter-racial encounters.  The hand
may touch any part of the forearm—and even the elbow—
giving a warm sensation of companionship.  Among orthodox
Jews, members of the same sex may hug each other, but men
do not shake hands with women.  The Japanese, who find the
custom of hand shaking distasteful and unclean, greet each
other with a deep bow.  Persons of equal status get up at the
same time—not an easy feat to accomplish because the two
parties must ogle each other unobtrusively in order to synchronize
their movements.  When there is a disparity in status,
it is very important that the person of lower status be the last
one to get up.  If a subordinate were to get up before his superior,
the subordinate would feel highly embarrassed: it
would be tantamount to his having insulted his superior.

It is in the realm of social movements that the generation
gap is most apparent.  Some young Japanese refuse to bow
to their fathers, some young Europeans balk at handkissing
altogether, and some young women feel that they are not truly
liberated if they allow a man to hold the door open for them.

Research in kinesics is not easy.  It requires a great deal of
patience and technical know-how, first to videotape or film
the subjects and then to analyze their behavior.  One can start
from the meaning and compare all the body motions that go
on when an identical meaning is expressed verbally by any
of the interactors, or one can concentrate on body parts and
transpose on the editing tape all shoulder shrugs, foot tappings,
and so on.  Eventually, one is still confronted with the
task of checking each of these separate body movements within
all other movements that go on at the same time, thus forming
a gesture cluster.  Applauding with a sarcastic grin on one's
face is not the same thing as applauding with a cheer.

Beyond the gestural behavior of people in conversation
with each other, one can also research how people perceive
and eventually reproduce the kinesic behavior of a third party,
e.g., when talking about somebody who usually sits in a very
formal manner, people themselves often straighten their posture.
Making an analogy with *metalanguage*, I call this behavior
*metakinesics*.

The relationship between the original kinesic movement
of the model and the metakinesic movement of the reproducer
is not one of absolute identity but rather one of sameness of
proportion.  The speaker who reproduces a kinesic model does
so within his own body size, the speed of the ongoing conversation,
and the limits of the space available between him and
his conversation partner.  His reproduction may be faster or
slower and larger or smaller than the model, but it tends to
maintain the same proportional relationship which obtains
in the original for duration, range, and direction of movement.

Sex identification is very apparent in metakinesics; people
copy movements most readily from those of the same sex.  In addition
to a natural inclination toward sex identification, in
metakinesics one can observe strong sex taboos.  These taboos
seem much more pronounced in men than in women.

Men are more likely to copy men's behavior; they rarely
copy a woman's body movements in exactly the same way
she has made them.  A strong taboo seems to intervene, and
the movements are copied only approximately or incompletely.
One female subject, mentioning a woman wearing
a big earring, brought her hand to her ear in exactly the same
fashion the woman talked about was in the habit of doing,
while the male subject only touched his ear rather than his
earlobe, and his hand remained there for a briefer period.
Another male subject described a girl &ldquo;gently playing with her
hair.&rdquo;  He cupped his hand in the fashion that the girl had
done when stroking her hair, but he never actually touched
his hair.  On the videotape one sees the hand going up toward
the hair and then, almost suddenly, arresting itself and performing
the stroking motion in mid-air.  The same male subject
copied the eating motion of a woman by bringing his hand
up, but again he arrested it just short of touching his mouth.

The process of metakinesics is basically psychological.
The individual reproduces someone else's body movement
within his own physical capabilities and social constraints,
a process that is largely noninteractional.

The kinesic movements that go on during a conversational
exchange are of a different nature.  There is a constant
interaction by which one conversation partner influences the
other and vice-versa.  The reciprocal influence is strikingly
apparent in the body postures of interactors, which tend to
synchronize.  Sometimes they cross their legs, put their hands
on their laps, scratch their heads, and so forth in what has
been termed *interactional synchrony*.  At times, one person
who has not performed such an act in concert will &ldquo;stick out
like a sore thumb.&rdquo;  In most interactions, in couples as well
as in groups, there is a leader.  This dominant partner establishes
the tone of the conversation, which may be formal or
relaxed, and the other participants then adjust their postures
accordingly.

When an adult interacts with a child, he tries to accommodate
his nonverbal behavior to the age of the child.  The
adult sits close to a small child, touches the child when he
feels that the little one's attention is wandering, and makes
use of extended movements of the hand and the arm to illustrate
what he says.

In nonverbal behavior, as in all forms of human behavior,
there are elements that are innate and common to
all men, and there are specific forms which are culturally
conditioned.  Children are socialized into their cultures from
the moment of birth.  In North America, newborn babies are
usually separated from their mothers and are bottle fed by a
professional nurse at regular intervals.  In other cultures, babies
enjoy a playful body touch and rhythmic rocking by their
mothers, who also sing to them.

As children grow up, they adjust to the kinesic behavior
of their communities.  Eventually, they establish a pattern
of expectancy for gestural behavior similar to the expectancy
which makes one's mother tongue understandable and other
languages foreign.  When, in the Vanderbilt Linguistics Program,
this expectancy was tested by showing a videotape of
a conversational interaction involving a certain amount of
gesticulation, persons from low kinesic cultures hardly noticed
any details of the ongoing gesticulations, while persons from
high kinesic cultures—such as South Americans—recalled
most of the movements.  It is no surprise to find that bicultural
individuals have more than one kinesic code just as bilinguals
possess mastery of more than one language.

In truth, we do not talk only with our mouths.

## Explication de cricket
*Norman W. Schur, Weston, Connecticut*

Mr. Herbold's list of baseball metaphors in VERBATIM
[IV, 1] tempts me to submit an analogous list of cricket terms
which have similarly been taken into the general language
by the British.  From my British-American dictionary (No.
21 on the VERBATIM Book Club list) I have culled some
examples, to which I must append some interpretation and
explanation, since very few Americans have the remotest
notion about cricket and its mystique, and analogies to baseball
are treacherously misleading.  But let's try.

1\.  To *carry or carry out or bring out one's bat* is to 'stay
with it,' 'outlast the rest'—the exact nuance depending upon
the context.  This expression applies to the batsman (batter)
who is not put out during the match while his teammates
fall by the wayside, and therefore leaves the pitch ('field')
only at the end of his side's innings (yes, it has an -*s* in the
singular: an innings is 'the period of play during which a
side is *in* [or *up*]') carrying his bat with him, instead of leaving
it for the next batsman, as used to be done in former
times before everybody could afford his own bat.  His ten
teammates are all out; thus he has 'stayed with it' and 'outlasted'
them.

2\.  To do something *off one's own bat* is to do it 'on one's
own.'

3\.  To *get a duck* or *be out for a duck* is to 'fall flat on
one's face,' to 'fizzle.'  *Duck*, in this idiom is short for *duck's
egg*, a British variant of *goose egg*, meaning 'zero' (or *nil*, as
the British prefer to express it in scoring).  Thus, a batsman
who is out without scoring a single run is said to *get* or *be
out for a duck*.

4\.  If one gets a duck in both innings (in first class, or
major league, cricket, each side has two innings) one *bags a
brace*.  The term is used to describe a 'double fizzle,' as it
were.  You fall on your face, get up, and do it again.

5\.  A batsman who makes his first run is said to have
*broken his duck*.  Hence to *break one's duck* is to have 'broken
the ice,' 'made a start' and to 'be on one's way.'

6\.  To *have a good innings* is to 'have a good long life.'
*Innings* is used metaphorically, like *inning* in America, to
mean a 'turn,' an opportunity to accomplish an objective.
*Innings* applies especially to a political party's period of dominance,
or the term of a jobholder generally.  But in context,
a *good innings* means a 'life that is satisfying in both length
and accomplishment.'

7\.  To *hit* (or *knock) someone for six* is to 'knock him for
a loop,' 'knock the daylights out him.'  In cricket, a ball hit
beyond the boundary (roughly equivalent to *into the stands*)
scores six runs, and a six is analogous to a 'homer.'

8\.  A *maiden over* is a bowler's achievement.  He bowls
(pitches) six balls, and that constitutes an *over*.  If he can do
this without allowing any runs, this is called a *maiden over*
(a curious reference to virginity).  Metaphorically, then, a
*maiden over* is a 'successful ordeal,' one through which the
protagonist has emerged unscathed.

9\.  To *queer the pitch* is to 'queer the act,' 'spoil some-one's
chances,' 'gum up the works,' 'throw a monkey wrench
into the machinery' (or, as the British say, *a spanner into
the works*).

10\.  To *be on a good wicket* is, like *being on a good pitch*,
to 'be in a good spot.'  To *be on a good wicket* with someone
is to 'be in favor' with him.  To *be* (or *bat*) *on a sticky wicket*
is to be in a bad situation.  *Wicket* has come to mean 'situation'
generally.  Thus, the newspapers spoke of the &ldquo;American
wicket in Vietnam.&rdquo;

11\.  To *up* or *draw stumps* is to 'pull up stakes,' 'clear
out.'  The stumps are the three upright sticks which form part
of a wicket (here *wicket* means something else again) which
the bowler tries to break each time he bowls, and any fielder
with the ball in his hand can aim at as well while the batsman
is running, in order to score an out.  When the match is
over, the stumps are pulled out of the ground and everybody
goes home.

12\.  *At close of play* means (referring to anything) 'at
the end of the day.'

13\.  *To play a straight bat* (considered correct form) is
to 'play fair'—the very essence of cricket.  Which leads to...

14\.  *It isn't cricket*, a sentence and a sentiment with which
I'm sure we are all familiar.

Much of the above may be confusing, but space does
not permit a dissertation on cricket—a game, a way of life,
a religion.  Suffice it to say that in Britain as well as in America,
the national sport has been a fecund source of colloquialisms
found in the everyday language of those who may never have
attended a match.


#### EPISTOLA {(The Reverend) Frederick W. Cropp}

There is an almost universal misunderstanding of the
use of the ministerial adjective, the title &ldquo;Reverend.&rdquo;  All my
life I have tried without success to correct editors, newscasters,
parishioners, and the general public in the proper address
of the clergy.

The easiest way to remember the rule is to equate the
word *Reverend* with its counterpart, the formal use of *Honorable*.
No one would address a judge as &ldquo;Honorable&rdquo; Jones,
yet &ldquo;Reverend&rdquo; Jones is common practice.

The only time *Reverend* is used without an article before
it is in a public address or in a letter addressed to the
*Reverend Clergy* or *Reverend Fathers*, although now perhaps
the adjective could precede *Ladies* or *Sisters* in some
communions.

Always, in every other case, the correct form is *The Reverend
Mister* or briefly *The Rev. Mr.* (or *Dr.* or *Mrs., Miss,* or
*Ms.*) Jones.

Years ago, I wrote a bit of doggerel which states the case.
It reads, in part:

>The use of the &ldquo;Rev.&rdquo; when you speak to your preacher
Is as tricky a thing as I ever will teach yer;
For he's not &ldquo;Rev. Jones&rdquo; though a seminary grad,
He is &ldquo;Mr.&rdquo; Jones and that's all my lad. [*(The Reverend) Frederick W. Cropp, Santa Barbara, California*].

## Winking Words
*Philip Michael Cohen, Aliquippa, Pennsylvania*

Twenty years ago, a group of Cambridge students decided
to establish a sport where they could excel, the traditional
ones being tiresomely full of experts.  When they chose tiddlywinks
and began standardising rules and equipment, they
surely had no idea that it would become nationally prominent
(with the aid of the Goon Show players and Prince Charles)
and even take root across the Atlantic.  There is now a small
but enthusiastic community of U.S. winkers, concentrated at
Eastern colleges but with colonies elsewhere.

This form of tiddlywinks offers great scope for strategy
as well as physical skill, but even the most serious winkers
retain a lighthearted attitude toward the game.  This is particularly
clear in the vocabulary.  The two basic actions of
the game are called *squidging* (shooting a wink with a special
oversized wink, or *squidger*) and *squopping* (covering a wink
with another, thereby paralyzing it).

While HYTHNLBTWOC was beating Zoo at the 1974 North
American Championships, I was collecting vocabulary.  The
list which follows does not seem to have changed much since.

>*birthday* or *Christmas present*  an unexpected stroke
of good fortune, such as bad shot by an opponent.
>
>*bomb*  a long-distance shot used to break up a pile
of winks.  Also *v.i.* and *v.t.*
>
>*boondock*  to shoot (a wink) far from the scene of
action or off the mat.  Incidentally, winkers who
graduate & move away from the centers of activity
are said to be 'boondocked.'
>
>*Bristol*  an effective gromp (*q.v.*), developed at
Bristol U., in which the squidger is held perpendicular
to the pile and parallel to the line of flight.
>
>*butt*  to knock (a wink) on or off a pile by shooting
another wink at it on a low trajectory.  Also kick.
>
>*click off*  to remove a wink from another with a
shot that ends by just touching (clicking against) the
wink below, not moving it.
>
>*constipated*  said of a position in which one has
winks but, because they are squopping other winks,
they are tied down and useless.  (Free = unsquopped.)
>
>*dance*  (of a wink) to wobble around on another
wink, the rim of the pot, or the mat.
>
>*drunken wink*  a wink that behaves unpredictably
or bizarrely.
>
>*eat* to squop; especially, to squop thoroughly, completely
covering the lower wink.  Also, sometimes,
*chomp.*
>
>*Goode shot* a shot used when one has a wink touching,
but not on an unwanted pile.  The wink is pressed
hard into the mat and, when released, goes through
the pile, thoroughly scattering it.
>
>*gromp* to move a pile as a whole onto another wink
or pile.  Also *v.i.* and *n.*  Also *trundle*—an Ottawaism.
>
>*lunch*  to pot an opponent's wink to gain strategic
advantage; to trounce, especially in get lunched.
>
>*nurdle* to shoot (a wink) too close to the pot to be
pottable or otherwise useful.  Obsolete in England,
where it originated in the early 60s.
>
>*perversion*  any winks variation, such as Winks
Tennis.
>
>*Petrie piddle*  desquopping a wink by squeezing it
out from underneath a pile.
>
>*piddle*  to make microscopic adjustments in a pile,
usually to walk it off a friendly wink.
>
>*shot* an exclamation of commendation for a good
shot.  *Antonym*: *Unlucky*.  A Briticism, with some
currency in America.
>
>*sub* or *submarine* *v.t.* or *v.i.*  To shoot a wink
(usually one's own) under another.  In England called
an *autosquop* or *ULU*.  (The latter, pronounced
YOO-loo, is said to refer to an unfortunate habit of
the University of London Union team.)


#### EPISTOLA {William J. Cleere}

Here is a genuine entry from the Santa Cruz, California,
telephone directory:

>F&Uuml;TZI NUTZLE

Several years ago the Los Angeles Rams football team had a
player named Vivyen Leigh; I am not sure if he is still active.
An All-American college player of several years ago at Iowa
University was named Wonder Monds. [*William J. Cleere, Sunnyvale, California*]

## The &ldquo;Uphill Mississippi&rdquo; Phenomenon and Openness to Unfamiliar Ideas
*Robert L. Birch, Washington, D.C.*

The statement that the Mississippi river &ldquo;runs uphill&rdquo;
will usually cause a quizzical eyebrow to suggest further enlightenment.
When it is pointed out that the distance from
the center of the earth to sea level is greater at New Orleans
than at the latitude of Minnesota, since the spin of the earth
accumulates water around the equator, the responses begin
to diverge.

One common reaction is the statement that since the
Mississippi runs downhill &ldquo;relative to sealevel&rdquo; we should not
say that it &ldquo;runs uphill.&rdquo;  Other reactions range from observing
that, by this reasoning, Mount Chimborazo, in the Andes, is
taller than Mount Everest, since it pokes out further into space,
to the question as to whether it would take more energy to
pull a freight train &ldquo;uphill&rdquo; from Chicago to New Orleans
or &ldquo;downhill&rdquo; from New Orleans to Chicago.

Aside from its use as a psychological litmus paper, the
question of the proper terminology to use in discussing the
&ldquo;uphill Mississippi&rdquo; phenomenon can bring a number of magnitudes
of the shape of the earth into perspective.  Before
thinking about the hydrostatics of this problem I would not
have been able to guess whether the difference between the
equatorial and the polar diameter of the earth were fifty feet
or fifty miles.  When a friend brought it to my attention that
the difference is about thirteen or fourteen miles, I began to
imagine waterskiing up the side of a thirteen-mile-high mountain
of water as I traveled from the polar regions to the
equator.

The next question that began to tease my layman's instinct
for paradox was the question of what effect the slowing
or speeding up of the earth's spin would have on the
distribution of ocean waters and on the shape of the solid
part of the earth.

After some frustrating library search and discussion with
specialists, I found myself more than ever intrigued by the
apparent indifference of the academic world to a phenomenon
of such interest to me as a nonspecialist.  If the students in
colleges and universities are not given paradoxes to play with
they are quite likely to become dulled into the assumption
that science consists of a number of dried and categorized bits
of information, with no function for the sense of whimsy and
the play of the imagination.

The current phase of my inquiry has to do with the mathematical
handles that would be needed to correlate earth
rotation rate with the sea levels suggested by raised beaches
and similar phenomena.


### OBITER DICTA: *Ad Litteram*
*Noel Perrin, Dartmouth College*

One reason so few Americans write letters is that we
don't know how either to begin or to end them.  We were
taught, of course.  Older Americans learned in school to begin
a letter with something called the salutation, and to end
it with something else called the complimentary close, both
of these finely graduated in degrees of servility.  (And why
not?  They were copied from eighteenth-century England.
In that caste-conscious time and place, there was a proper
amount of servility to squeeze out for every recipient.  One
might sign one letter with a groveling &ldquo;I have the honour to
be, my lord, your lordship's most humble and most dutiful
servant&rdquo; and the next with a curt &ldquo;Yours ever.&rdquo;)  Younger
Americans, without ever having heard of salutations and
complimentary closes, have picked up the surviving simplified
forms of both, and feel awkward if they don't use them.

But they also feel awkward if they do.  Our age values
sincerity.  It is obviously insincere to sign every letter &ldquo;sincerely.&rdquo;
Or to begin every one, even to people you despise,
with the word *dear*.  Dear enemy.  Dear finance company
which is about to repossess my car.  Dear divorced husband.

Our age also values warmth.  Warmth involves personal
recognition—a warm smile is one that takes account of the
person smiled at.  But ritualized beginnings and endings by
their essence deny recognition.  Not only is the IRS official
who writes to question your deductions not &ldquo;yours truly&rdquo; (if
anything, you are his), but the stock phrase looks past you
as if you weren't there.

Letters written to companies are especially difficult.  Sex
as well as politeness is a problem.  Say you're writing to Texas
Instruments because you're not happy with your digital
watch.  Old style, you would begin the letter either &ldquo;Dear
Sirs&rdquo; or &ldquo;Gentlemen.&rdquo;  But new style?

There is no new style.  I have one friend who has started
writing &ldquo;Gentlepersons&rdquo;—but this is conscious mockery, and
not at all likely to catch on.  &ldquo;Sirs/Madams&rdquo; would be suitable
only for correspondence with the proprietors of a coed whorehouse.
If elided to Smadams, it's ugly in a smeary, smudgy
way.  (Most words beginning with *sm*- are.)

What that seems to leave is &ldquo;Hi, there,&rdquo; which may be
all right if you're a cheerleader, and &ldquo;Howdy,&rdquo; which works
in spoken discourse only, even in Texas itself.

Letters that companies write to individuals aren't easy,
either.  No one knows how to sign them.  &ldquo;Yours truly&rdquo; is fading
fast, except in IRS offices.  Regards are still popular, but
threatened, because no one is really sure what a regard is.
All agree that you must send several, and they must either
be your best ones or warm ones, but that doesn't help much.
Result: Many business men have begun to sign their letters
&ldquo;cordially.&rdquo;  It's warm, all right: *cor, cordis* 'heart.' But then
what happens to sincerity, if you claim to be writing from
the heart to all the people on a mailing list you have just
bought?

I have no solution to offer, except maybe to turn to extreme
simplicity, simplicity as great as the &ldquo;hello&rdquo; and &ldquo;goodbye&rdquo;
that make telephoning so easy.  A couple of thousand
years ago, an Egyptian cabinet minister sent a letter of official
commendation to one of his senior colleagues.  Here is
the complete letter.  &ldquo;Apollonius to Zeno, greeting.  You did
well to send the chickpeas to Memphis.  Farewell.&rdquo;  No problems
of false cordiality, no insincere sincerity, no struggle over
intimacy-level.  We could do worse.


### OBITER DICTA
*Nancy Barron, Santa Barbara, California*

The first task of the student abroad is to find a suitable
room.  This I did and was signing a lease in Munich, where
I had gone to live as a Fulbright Scholar.  The question of
*Kaution*, 'a deposit,' came up.  I inquired politely whether
it would be returned when I moved out.  But I erroneously
used *mich ausziehe* rather than *ausziehe*, so saying, &ldquo;If I take
off my clothes, do I get my money back?&rdquo;  The prurient landlord
leered while his good wife explained.

While helping a roommate transfer belongings to a new
apartment, a friend's overladen microbus was stopped along
the highway.  &ldquo;What do you think you are doing?&rdquo; the policeman
demanded.  &ldquo;Why I'm helping this guy move,&rdquo; was the
American's hasty reply.  Or so he thought.  He confused *sich
umziehen* with *umziehen* so that the German heard &ldquo;I'm
helping this guy undress and change.&rdquo;  Herr Offizer proved
less sympathetic than my landlady.  A traffic ticket was drawn
up, but at least it cited no charge of indecent exposure.

*Mich* is accusative.  But neither is the dative reflexive
safe.  I walked into a party one snowy evening, and at once
my host asked if he might take my coat.  &ldquo;No thanks, I'm cold,&rdquo;
I said when I should have phrased it, &ldquo;It is cold to me.&rdquo;  Conversation
stopped.  I had just announced that I was sexually
frigid.  Things went from bad to worse.  As I began to warm
up by the fire, I mentioned that now I was warm.  Only this
time, neglect of the reflexive rendered it, &ldquo;I am homosexual.&rdquo;
Thank goodness the company caught on before I blurted out,
*Ich bin nun heiss*, meaning &ldquo;I'm really turned on now, fellas.&rdquo;

Another trick the Germans play with their language is
the preposition ploy.  They simply Scotch-tape a preposition
like a prefix onto a verb, and presto, they have a viable new
word which likely has little to do with its parent.  Idiom
governs connotation of the compound.  The non-native speaker
must beware.  I once informed house guests that they were
welcome to stay with me, since I had often *umgebracht* friends
at my place before.  I should have said *untergebracht*.  Terrified,
they retreated to a nearby inn.  'To have (someone)
spend the night' is *unterbringen*, whereas *umbringen* means
'to murder' them.

Somehow I made it unscathed through one year at the
Universit&auml;t in M&uuml;nchen.  I certainly learned one thing: The
profs don't teach you all you need to know in a seminar listed
Deutsch Semester 3.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Glossary of Faulkner's South*](https://www.amazon.com/Glossary-Faulkners-South-Calvin-Brown/dp/0300019440)
Calvin S. Brown, (Yale, 1976), iv + 241 pp.

This is a useful, nontechnical glossary of Faulkner's words
and phrases written mainly &ldquo;... for any reader who did not
share with him the time and place called Yoknapatawpha—
that richly regional Southern culture of the period between
the two world wars.&rdquo;  As the jacket summary implies, all
readers will learn something from this book because the language
and culture of those decades (1919-39) have undergone
enormous change, and Yoknapatawphans who preserve the
old regional and social dialects as well as the forms and values
of those rural Southern folk institutions have little interest
today in the literary accomplishments of their late, eccentric
neighbor.

Calvin S. Brown is a rare exception among natives of
Oxford, Mississippi.  Now a distinguished professor of comparative
literature at the University of Georgia, he writes this
book with splendid credentials: he knows Lafayette County,
Oxford, Faulkner, and Faulkner's writings extremely well.  Although
there is no substitute for native competence in the
study of language and culture, he could have written an even
better book had he attended more closely to the resources of
cultural anthropology (and geography) in the delineation of
his field and of descriptive linguistics (and dialectology) in
the analysis and exposition of his materials.  These limitations
are reflected in the sometimes uneven and always nontechnical
content of the glossary.

The text includes an introduction, a set of abbreviations,
the glossary, and an appendix.  The glossary elaborates words
and phrases from those 22 novels and 27 stories that are set
in *or* relate directly to the South.  Including one-word transliterations
of dialect spellings and cross references, the glossary
has approximately 3,000 entries, about half of which are
genuinely interesting.  More than a few are so common that
it is difficult to imagine what kind of speaker of American
English is unfamiliar with *bird dog, corn bread, dandelion,
lawn mower, prissy, rabbit's foot, razor strop, suspenders,
skillet, trolley*, and *waterbug*.  And could any user of the
glossary have managed to get through *The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn* without understanding the large number
of words that appear in that novel and the present word list?
Even the most casual student of American literature should
have no trouble with *a-holt, ast, ax* ('ask, asked'), *bar'l,
beatin'es' b'ilin, bofe, caint, cheer* ('chair'), *clumb, coffin,
cottonwood, crope, deef, doan, doggery, done* (aux.), *fur*
('far'), *galluses, gwinter, jimson weed, kaze* ('because'), *Mars,
mourner's bench, nemmine, ourn, passel, p'int, plum, resk,
ruther, Spanish moss, straw tick, 'sturb, tote, tother, tow-head*
('sand bar with cottonwoods'), *trash* ('base people'), *truck*
('junk'), *vittles, water moccasin, yonder*, and *yuther*, among
the more obvious repetitions.

Against those dubious entries, however, stands a substantial
body of information.  Even with the elaborate discussions
of flora and fauna, place names, and historical figure
that seem extraneous here and even without authentic local
pronunciations that could have been supplied in broad phonetic
notation, Brown's vocabulary of artifacts and social interaction
makes the book a valuable reference work.  Descriptions
of the forms and functions of the *bluegum, eating and drinking,
froe, hame strings, lap-link, logger-head, maul, pot still,
renter, ridge pole, sharecropper, Silver Shirts, third and
fourth, vote-rousing picnics*, and *wagon stake* will not be
found elsewhere in a modest handbook.  Here is an example
of authoritative work:

>logger-head (*C*[*ollected Short*] *S*[*tories of William
Faulkner*]: *B*[*arn*] *B*[*urning*] 16): a double-ended,
U-shaped hook used (one on each side) to fasten the
TRACES to the HAMES.  The hames have a series of
holes (illogically called a ratchet), and the logger-head's
two hook-ends are fitted into two of these.
The choice of holes permits variation of the line of
draft and hence the depth of plowing.  (This term
seems to be unknown to lexicographers.)

Equally impressive in thoroughness, and perhaps more
useful in understanding Faulkner's South, are entries concerning
race relationships:

>*bluegum* (*S*[*ound*] (&amp;) [*and the*] *F*[*ury*] 84, 85; *CS*: [*A*]
*Just*[*ice*] 343, 344): a Negro whose gums are blue
rather than pink.  In folklore he is viewed with that
mixture of reverence and fear which constitutes awe.
He has many strange properties, such as a fatal bite,
and he is a particularly adept and powerful conjuror.
I know of no exact parallel to Versh's story, but it is
the general sort of tale frequently told about bluegums.

>*eating and drinking*: racial etiquette.  Whites and
Negroes were not expected to eat and drink together
*socially*.  The strength of the conviction depended
entirely on the nature of the occasion; it did not hold
at all for a casual snack on a job or on a hunt.  (In
the 1960s during the racially tense time when the
Jackson, Miss., airport was under heavy police guard
because of the invasions of &ldquo;freedom fighters,&rdquo; I saw
one of the white police guards and a black employee
of the airport sitting side by side on a bench drinking
Coca-Colas and chatting.  This would have astonished
outsiders, but was not even a matter for notice to
anyone who understood the conventions.) As the
number of persons involved or the formality of the
occasion increases, the taboo comes into effect.
Minnie and Miss Reba would drink together if they
wanted to, but in a larger group Minnie carried her
glass back to the kitchen because &ldquo;she declined to
drink with this many white people at once&rdquo; ([*The*]
*Reiv*[*ers*] 113).  When a group of whites had breakfast
at the sheriffs, &ldquo;they left Aleck Sander[black (*sic*)]
with his breakfast at the sheriffs, and carried theirs
into the dining room&rdquo; ([*Intruder in the*] *Dust* 114).
Similarly, Bayard Sartoris has to insist that the Negro
family eat Christmas dinner with him instead of
waiting until he has finished (*Sart*[*oris*] 347), just as
Ned sets aside the drink which Colonel Linscombe
pours for him in the company of a group of whites
in the colonel's office, and will not drink it until told
to do so (*Reiv*. 285).

And, despite the curious phonological description, no one
should object to the following explanation when balanced
against its instructive value to novice observers of Southern
language and culture:

>*nigra* ([*The*] *Town* 84): Negro.  This spelling represents
the normal pronunciation of many Southerners who
do not say *nigger*.  (The *knee-grow* pronunciation,
with both syllables stressed, is not indigenous to most
Southern speech.) Faulkner's mountaineers use *nigra*
where a north Mississippian of the same class would
use *nigger* (*CS*: *M*[*ountain*] *V*[*ictory*] 751, 756, 758.)

The Class system within the white caste is closely related
to sensitive problems of racial relationships that are critical
to real comprehension of social interaction in the complicated
microcosm of Yoknapatawpha.  This glossary provides excellent
sets of distinctions among renters, sharecroppers, and
poor whites, and, although journalists and sociologists (from
Cash and Dollard to Weller and McGill) have said much the
same thing, Brown's coverage is much more concise and everywhere
relevent to Faulkner's South:

>*shares, farming on* (*Sart.* 277; *S&amp;F* 298; *Abs*[*alom*,
*Absalom!*] 209; [*The*] *Ham*[*let*] 238): any of various
forms of farm tenancy in which the tenant pays his
rent in the form of an agreed upon share of his crop.
Such arrangements often, but not always, include
credit at the farm store or commissary.  The share of
the crop given to the owner depends on the nature of
the tenancy, the ownership of tools and animals used,
and the particular crop involved (see THIRD AND
FOURTH).  Faulkner refers to the three basic
classes in his referenct to &ldquo;the Negro tenantor-share-or
furnished-hand&rdquo; (*R*[*equiem*] *f*[*or*] *a
N*[*un*] 245).  The tenant simply rents the land for cash
and keeps whatever he produces.  The &ldquo;share-hand&rdquo;
provides his own equipment and pays one third of
his corn and one fourth of his cotton as rent.  A
&ldquo;furnish-hand&rdquo; (more often called a sharecropper) is
dependent on the owner for equipment, seed, food—
everything—and pays one half his crop.  This
payment includes the use of equipment, but food is
simply charged at the commissary, to be paid when
the crop is sold.

And many more interesting and useful entries are catalogued
in Brown's guide to Yoknapatawpha: a respectable set
of moonshine terms, e.g., *blind-tiger, bustskull, kettle, pot
still, run, and white mule*) and fine glosses of *coon, deer, fox*,
and '*possum hunting; of bears, barns*, and *boll weevils*; of
*easy riders* and *Uncle Bud:*

>Uncle Bud moved across the water  
To keep the boys from screwing his daughter,  
Uncle Bud.  
Corn in the crib what ain't been shucked  
And a gal in the house what ain't been fucked,  
Uncle Bud.

One surely would have appreciated the remaining stanzas
and the arrangement (guitar chords, at least) of this old
favorite.

Had Brown consulted Odum and Vance, he might have
improved the cultural geography of his book, e.g., the discussion
of *delta* is incomplete (failing to integrate the five components,
the basins of the Atchafalaya, Red, Ouachita, St.
Francis, and Yazoo rivers, each of which is legitimately described
as &ldquo;a delta&rdquo;) and, like the ambiguous term *Black Belt*
(apparently not part of Faulkner's lexicon), easily misunderstood
(*Mississippi Delta*: all five components with reference to
the river, but only the Yazoo with reference to the state).
Cultural maps, such as those provided by Odum and Vance,
would have been more useful than his reprinted essay from
*PMLA* in identifying the subregions of the South: from Virginia
to Texas there are at least 44 of these, and the heart of Faulkner's
South—Lafayette County, Mississippi—is set squarely in the
middle of the Interior Ridge of Tennessee and Mississippi,
from the Buford Pusser's &ldquo;Walking Tall&rdquo; County in McNairy
County in the north through Oxford to Philadelphia and the
badlands to the south.

Had he made better use of the available materials of
American linguistic geography, many entries could have been
improved with respect to both accuracy and sociohistorical
implications, e.g., several hundred of the entries in the word
list have been systematically investigated in the Linguistic
Atlas of the Gulf States project (based in Atlanta).  Its findings
might have improved some of Brown's entries.  A *fice*, for
example, is usually not just a 'small mongrel dog,' but a 'noisy
and contentious, dyspepsic little dog,' usually spelled *feist*
(probably from OE *fistan* 'to fart.' cf. Scot. *fist dog*, Eng.,
*feisty* and *fizz*).  This is reinforced in Faulkner's &ldquo;Shingles for
the Lord,&rdquo; where the dog, one of the central points of interest
in the story, is called &ldquo;that trick overgrown fyce,&rdquo; with *trick*
(a word omitted from Brown's list) surely meaning 'troublesome.'
Indeed, many Southern folk speakers believe the *feist*
(*fice/fyce*) is a breed apart, as distinctive as the Catahoula cur.

Although most of that information is available in any
good dictionary, as is so much of this glossary, the historical
dictionaries should have been used more carefully by the compiler.
The definition of *juke joint*, 'a cheap restaurant or
cabaret with music furnished by a jukebox,' is both misleading
and interesting.  It implies the place takes its name from the
coin-operated phonographs, which had no currency according
to the *Dictionary of Americanisms* before the end of World
War II (but check the release date of Glenn Miller's &ldquo;Jukebox,
Saturday Night&rdquo;).  At any rate, *jook joint* is older (DA 1942),
and *jookhouse* ('whorehouse'), according to L.D. Turner has
African etymons (Wolof and Bambara) and was observed in
Gullah in the 1930s.  The matter is interesting because, if
jukeboxes were played in juke joints during the days of the
WPA (i.e., prior to WW II), Faulkner's reference in &ldquo;Shingles
for the Lord&rdquo; is acceptable; if not, it is an anachronism.

Similarly, the glosses of *blind tiger, fatback, flying jenny,
side meat*, and *sowbelly* are incomplete, but the definition
and explanation of *greens* is perhaps the weakest.  If outlanders
are really to be taken into consideration, this will not likely
be helpful: &ldquo;any leaves that can be or have been boiled for
eating.  Greens, used alone, implies cooking.  If the leaves are
to be eaten raw, they are called *salad greens*.&rdquo;  Since virtually
all flora *can* be boiled for eating, a reader might assume that
Yoknapatawphans eat grass, if not the foliage of jasmine,
spiraea, honeysuckle, and Cherokee roses.  According to Brown's
introduction, such interpretation is not at all far-fetched: he
notes that the Shreve McCannons are unfamiliar with all of
those plants and that a college student at Cornell, &ldquo;A bright
girl from Brooklyn,&rdquo; thought Lena Grove was contemplating
dressed pelts when she said in *Light in August*, &ldquo;I have come
from Alabama: a fur piece.  All the way from Alabama a-walking.
A fur piece.&rdquo;

Brown also says in that same paragraph of the &ldquo;Introduction&rdquo;:
&ldquo;One man's obvious is often another man's puzzle.&rdquo;
Although a phonetician, lexicographer, or linguistic geographer
could easily turn that line against the author of *A Glossary
of Faulkner's South*, it would not be wise to do so.  There are
dozens, perhaps hundreds, of insights in this book that will
improve every reader's understanding of both Faulkner and
his South.  The native speaker always knows the dialect bet
ter than the observer, and, when that native speaker is also a
good literary scholar, his contributions to both lexicography
and philology are certain to be useful.  To have this book
nearby when reading Faulkner is to have the steady company
of a solid authority.

*Lee Pederson, Emory University*

## New symbol, new word.

VERBATIM takes pride in introducing the *questpersand*,
designed and defined by John Langdon, Wenonah, New
Jersey.

It is pronounced &ldquo;and?&rdquo;

## KILomoter or kiLOMeter?
*John R. Sinnema, Baldwin-Wallace College*

Newspapers have recently announced that the Federal
Highway Administration has drawn up plans to convert highway
speed limit signs to the metric system next year.  Signs
will read, for example: Speed Limit 80 km.

While scientists are sure to welcome progress toward conversion,
they may be at odds with each other over the pronunciation
of the word *kilometer*.  Linguists, in general, will
tolerate either pronunciation given in American dictionaries:
*KIL*ometer, accenting the first syllable; or ki*LOMeter*, stressing
the second syllable.  The *Oxford English Dictionary* and
the *Oxford Universal Dictionary* give only *KIL*ometer, as did
the 1927 edition of the 1901 *Webster's New International
Dictionary*.

Many teachers seem to prefer ki*LOMeter*.  Indeed, one
teacher has been known to have militantly promoted it and
attacked *KIL*ometer by displaying a poster showing someone
vainly pounding a &ldquo;meter&rdquo; with a mallet while saying, &ldquo;You
can't kill a meter.&rdquo;

Be that as it may, at least as long ago as 1940, Willibald
Weniger's *Fundamentals of College Physics* supported *KIL*ometer
with this note (p. 14):

>The names of metric units are accented on the first
syllable.  Confusion sometimes arises in pronunciation
of words ending in &ldquo;meter.&rdquo;  If such a word is the
name of a unit, it is accented on the first syllable, but if
it is the name of an instrument..., it is accented on
the syllable ending in the &ldquo;m&rdquo; of &ldquo;meter.&rdquo;

The stress on the second syllable, -*OM*eter, is known
everywhere in the instruments *thermometer, barometer, odometer,
speedometer, micrometer*, and in perhaps fifty others.
The word *micrometer* now seems to be used only to refer to
the instrument for measurement, the former usage *MI*crometer
now being supplanted by the word *micron*.  This gives a clue
to the reason for the double pronunciation of *kilometer*.  No
instrument is or has been indicated by it, only the unit of
measure.  Thus no confusion can result, whichever accent
is used.

## More Than Meets the -ine
*Sam Hinton, Lecturer in Folklore (and former Director of the Aquarium-Museum) University of California, San Diego*

LYNNE TIESLAU-JEWELL [III,3] and Jay Dillon [IV,1] have
discussed the use of the suffix *-ine* in converting an
animal name to an adjective.  They might like to know that
this ending can have a special significance to zoologists,
who might use it casually as a metaphor, but only under
special circumstances in referring to the animals themselves.
Thus an ornithologist might describe a colleague as
having an aquiline nose, but would not use the word
*aquiline* in reference to a bird of the eagle group.

The scientific name of an animal or plant consists of two
words: the generic name and the specific name.  These two
together give us the name of a species—the only taxonomic
category that actually exists in nature, usually defined as a
group of actually or potentially interbreeding populations,
reproductively isolated from other such groups.  The larger
hierarchical groups are artificial, set up by taxonomists for
their own convenience and according to their own rules.  The
*genus* may be regarded as a group of *species* (although there
are many monotypic genera, each with only one species, such
as *Homo sapiens*; any group-name, or *taxon*, may be monotypic).
The *family* is a group of genera, the *order* a group of
families, the *class* a group of orders, the *phylum* a group of
classes, and the *kingdom* a group of phyla.  But this is by no
means enough taxa, and it is often necessary to intercalate
such terms as *subspecies, superspecies, subgenus, supergenus,
subfamily, superfamily, suborder*, and so on, and some groups—
such as the opisthobranch snails—have so many classificatory
characteristics that specialists have used a number of less
conventional taxa, including *tribe, group, infra-family, division*,
and *subdivision*.

According to the rules agreed upon by the International
Congress of Zoology, whose hundred-year-old *International
Code of Zoological Nomenclature* is, although often revised,
one of the oldest effective instruments of international agreement,
two of these taxa are required to have standardized
endings.  All names of families must end in *-idae*, which is
added to the stem of the included genus that is regarded as
most typical of that family; and when subfamilies are set up,
their names are formed in the same way, but with the ending
*-inae*.  (The family suffix is from the Greek *eidos*, 'a resemblance,'
while *-inae* was invented for the purpose.)

Family and subfamily names are properly plural, and
cannot be applied to individual specimens without additional
words.  It isn't good form to say &ldquo;That fish is a Sparidae&rdquo;; if
you want to use the whole family name, it has to be in a
construction like &ldquo;Look!  A member of the Sparidae!&rdquo;  This is
awkward in informal conversation, and a custom—not sanctioned
by the Code—has arisen, allowing you to drop the
final *-ae*.  So, as an English-speaking ichthyologist, you can
say, quite correctly, &ldquo;I think you've got a Sparid there.&rdquo; (A
French colleague would reply &ldquo;Oui, c'est une Sparide.&rdquo;) This
would indicate that you knew the family to which the specimen
belonged but were not certain of the smaller categories.
You would not say &ldquo;It's a Sparine&rdquo; unless you were sure of
the subfamily, and willing to exclude other Sparid subfamilies
such as the Pagellinae and Boopsinae.

One word listed by Ms. Tieslau-Jewell is *accipitrine*,
meaning 'hawklike.'  This is fine when you want to endow a
non-hawk with hawkish characteristics, but would not be
used by one ornithologist to another in a conversation about
birds.  He or she might say *accipitrid* to indicate membership
in the family Accipitridae, but *accipitrine* in this context
would refer only to one of the accipitrid subfamilies—the
Accipitrinae (the &ldquo;true&rdquo; hawks and eagles).  This would considerably
narrow the subject of discussion, excluding such
subfamilies as the Circaetinae (serpent eagles), Circinae (harrier
hawks), Milvinae (&ldquo;true&rdquo; kites and fish eagles), Elaninae
(white-tailed kites), Perninae (honey-buzzards), Aegypiinae
(Old-World vultures; New-World vultures, by the way, are
in another family, Cathartidae), Machaerhamphinae (the
African bat hawk), and Pandioninae (the osprey).  (Not all
taxonomists agree with all of this; for instance, the osprey is
often placed in a monotypic family.)

This process of forming a vernacular word by modifying,
in a traditional manner, a technical word, exemplifies an
oral folk process among people to whom literacy is supremely
important.  There are no formal rules about it, and it's not
usually taught in taxonomy classes; it's just a custom.  And it
is a more complicated custom, requiring more memorization,
among botanists.  They (like the bacteriologists) have their
own Code of nomenclature.  The botanical Code says that all
plant family names must end in *-aceae*, except for eight very
important families whose names were well established back
in the chaotic B.C. (before the Code) years.  Plant subfamilies
end in *-oideae*, while the suffix *-inae* is used only to designate
a subtribe—a taxon between tribe and supergenus, rarely
used except in technical literature.  As a result, the vernacular
names of the family-groups are not as standardized as those
of the zoologists, and you simply have to remember the customary
way of informalizing each of them.  To indicate membership
in the Cruciferae, you say &ldquo;a crucifer.&rdquo;  A member of
the Euphorbiaceae is called &ldquo;a euphorb,&rdquo; with the accent on
the first syllable, or more familiarly &ldquo;a spurge.&rdquo;  &ldquo;A composite&rdquo;
belongs to the Compositae, a great family with 20,000 species.
&ldquo;A legume&rdquo; is a member of the Leguminosae, while a specimen
from the Scrophulariaceae would be termed &ldquo;a figwort.&rdquo;
This last is one of the well-established English names used at
the family level; others are &ldquo;the grasses&rdquo; for the family Graminae,
and &ldquo;the evening-primroses&rdquo; for the Onagraceae.

I'm not sure what customs are followed by the bacteriologists;
they seem rarely to speak in the vernacular.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Onomatopoeic Sounds in English and Spanish, Including Those of Animal, Man, Nature, Machinery and Musical Instruments, Together With Some That Are Not Imitative or Echoic*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Onomatopoeic-Including-Machinery-Instruments/dp/087917059X)
Donald R. Kloe, (Blaine Ethridge—Books, 1977), xi + 153 pp.

In even the most superficial way, the knowledge that
French dogs say *gnaf! gnaf!*, Japanese dogs say *han! han!*
and English dogs say *bow! wow!* demonstrates that speakers
of different languages hear the same sounds but reproduce
them differently.  English speakers say *dog*, French *chien*,
and Spanish *perro*, none of which is related, etymologically,
to the other, even in the grand scheme of the Indo-European
family of languages, to which all three belong.  But, surely,
one would expect onomatopoeic words to be similar.

The short story is that, in English and Spanish at least,
they sometimes are similar and sometimes not.  This dictionary
examines the similarities and the differences; it is a fascinating
piece of work, usefully arranged.  Most important, it
treats in a formalized way a segment of language rarely examined
very seriously or systematically, yet, for all that,
nonetheless revealing.  At bottom, it says &ldquo;Pooh! Pooh!&rdquo; to
the &ldquo;Bow! Wow!&rdquo; theory of language origin.

Just as surprising, in some ways, that certain sounds that
we take for granted as onomatopoeic have very similar counterparts
in Spanish is the revelation that many others about
which we might have the same feeling, have quite different
reflexes in Spanish.  The author, a Professor at North Carolina
State University, marks some entries &ldquo;Word which is truly
onomatopoeic&rdquo; and others &ldquo;Word with doubtful onomatopoeic
characteristics.&rdquo; Since he has provided no detailed
explanation of his techniques, we are left to wonder how he
arrived at such decisions.  For example, Kloe marks *coo* (as
in *bill* and *coo*) as &ldquo;truly onomatopoeic,&rdquo; which may be difficult
to find fault with.  However, *bill* and *coo* is similarly
marked, and, while that may be correct, the image of a bird's
wandering about uttering &ldquo;bill and coo&rdquo; strikes one as strange.
The Spanish onomatopoeic counterpart is *zurear*, yielding
*zurrrr, zurrrr* which, if one bears in mind the way Spanish
*r* is pronounced, reproduces the sound of a dove more faithfully
than *coo*.

Some of the close correspondences are interesting: [English/Spanish]
*cock-a-doodle-doo/quiquiriquiar* (reminiscent of
German *kikeriki*, Italian *chichirichi*, and French *coquerico*);
*cuckoolcucu; grr-grr/rr-rr; gobble-gobble/gluglu-gluglu*; and
*hoopoe, hoopoo/hoopoe*.

This book, as the title promises, doesn't confine itself to
animal sounds: under sounds of man we find *achool/achu*,
*boohoo/buhu*, and *gargle/gargarizar* among an assortment of
biological noises that are best left to Alka-Seltzer commercials.
There are some items missing: surely, if *susurrar* is onomatopoeic
Spanish for *rustle*, the English equivalents, *susurration*,
*susurrant, susurrous*, and *susurrus* should be shown.

Notwithstanding other, possible omissions—this review
was not conceived as a fault-finding apparatus—the book is
extremely useful and interesting.  Its organization provides a
two-column format, with each section (animals, man, etc.)
divided in two: the first gives English as the source and Spanish
as the target, the second, vice versa.  There are bilingual glossaries,
a complete index, and what looks like a pretty thin
bibliography.  The type is large enough for readers with a
seeing disability; in case the number of pages is off-putting,
it should be mentioned that the page size is 8-&frac12;"&times;11", but
why it is is unclear.

When will compilers of dictionaries, glossaries, and other
reference books stop setting headwords for entries all in capital
letters?  They are hard to read and impossible to spell
(since one cannot distinguish between words spelled with
small or with capital letters).

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Jewish and Hebrew Onomastics: A Bibliography* 
Robert Singerman, (Garland Publishing, Inc., 1977), xii + 132 pp.

This is *not* a book that gives the origins of Jewish and
Hebrew names, but it does provide comprehensive information
about sources where those origins and histories can be
found.  Following the bibliographer's succinct Introduction is
a list of 1195 books, periodicals, and articles, arranged under
such topical headings as &ldquo;Biblical Names: Reference and
Dictionaries,&rdquo; &ldquo;Ancient Near East,&rdquo; &ldquo;Greco-Roman Period,&rdquo;
and moving on through geographic categories to &ldquo;Individual
Jewish Names.&rdquo;  An interesting and useful Appendix provides
an alphabetical index of some 3,000 Jewish surnames treated
by Norbert Pearlroth in his column, &ldquo;Your Name,&rdquo; which
appeared weekly in the *Jewish Post and Opinion* between
September 1945 and September 1976.  That is followed by a
brief index of &ldquo;Individual Names,&rdquo; by which I suppose
Singerman means given names, though my experience with
people with the given names of Oppenheimer and Zakarbaal
has been, to say the most, small.

The titles alone of works published during the Nazi regime
are historically revealing: &ldquo;Law Regarding Jewish Given
Names (Second Decree for the Execution of the Law of August
17, 1938),&rdquo; &ldquo;Anderungen j&uuml;discher Namen&rdquo; [&ldquo;Jewish Name
Changes&rdquo;] 1939; some later works bearing on the period are
&ldquo;The Nazi Name Decrees of the Nineteen Thirties,&rdquo; and
&ldquo;Jewish Emancipation Under Attack.&rdquo;  In some cases, of course,
there are only some sections of the sources that deal with
onomastics, and these are noted.

At the price, this is not a book that any but the most
ardent onomastician is likely to rush to buy, but even the
more limited libraries should own a copy, for the work has
been prepared with great care and obvious devotion.  It is
a pity that the publisher did not see fit to spend the small
amount required to set the book in type rather than in that
awful IBM typewriter face.  However, it's the information
that counts.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Catch Phrases*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Catch-Phrases-Eric-Partridge/dp/0812885368)
Eric Partridge, (Stein and Day, 1977), XV + 278 pp.

At the outset, Partridge confesses that he does not know
what a catch phrase (or c.p., an abbreviation he uses throughout)
is.  No matter: vagueness affords him the opportunity to
include and omit material willy-nilly.

This may be a book of some interest and usefulness to
British speakers of English, because the entries are predominantly
British, but of somewhat less enchantment for Americans,
because many expressions are not included and because those
American c.p.'s that are treated are of questionable idiomaticity
and fact.  I fear that some of the informants on whom
Partridge relied for American c.p.'s just don't know their
stuff.

For example, after you, my dear Alphonse—no, after
you, Gaston is given as Canadian in origin (1959).  I heard
the c.p. in America in the 1930s and am under the distinct
impression that it was borrowed from an older vaudeville
routine satirizing French over-politeness.  In a quotation from
a letter from Dr. Joseph T. Shipley under remember Pearl
Harbor: &ldquo;after the airplane strike of 6 December 1941...&rdquo;
Dr. Shipley, as far as I know, is an American: an &ldquo;airplane
strike&rdquo; would, in American English, be usually taken to mean
that the planes are either not being manufactured or not
flying—not the same as an *air strike*.  Similarly, the &ldquo;day
that will live in infamy&rdquo; was Sunday, December 7, 1941—
regardless of the side of the dateline you were on—a fact that
used to be known to every schoolboy.  Curiously, we find,
&ldquo;Built like a brick shit-house, mostly preceded by he's.  A low
Canadian phrase, meaning 'he's a very well-made fellow:
C20.&rdquo;  Balderdash!  It is an American c.p. and almost *never*
applied to a man.  Besides, it is often followed, after a pause,
by &ldquo;...and not a brick out of place!&rdquo;  Another: &ldquo;all the traffic
will bear, often preceded by that's.  Literally, it relates to
fares and freights; only figuratively it is a c.p., meaning that
the situation, whether financial or other, precludes anything
more....  It is—Dr Douglas Leechman ['an authority on
Canadiana'] tells me—said to derive from a US magnate's
cynicism.&rdquo;  Poppycock!  First, what does &ldquo;said to derive&rdquo; mean?
Second, *traffic* means 'trade, custom,' and the c.p. means
'charge as much as possible.'  I have my doubts that it was
ever used in what Partridge considers its &ldquo;literal&rdquo; sense.

Although I am familiar with the Thurber cartoon and
have traveled for years in a crowd familiar with *The New
Yorker*, I have never heard anyone say &ldquo;All right—you did
hear a seal bark.&rdquo;  As far as I know, my hearing is unimpaired
with regard to c.p.'s *and* the bark of the seal.  Again, Partridge's
American informants have either slipped badly or took delight
in sneaking him some home-grown family expressions
that the rest of us don't know.  Where is &ldquo;Sure as God made
little apples&rdquo;?  &ldquo;Nobody here but us chickens&rdquo;?  &ldquo;No skin off
my teeth?&rdquo;  &ldquo;...or bust&rdquo;?

The general presentation of the book could have been
improved considerably by labeling Briticisms as well as
Americanisms.

Partridge's comments are folksy and frequently as long-winded
as they are inaccurate.  Pop goes the weasel, which
we (and Arthur Fiedler) have had up to here in America, is
described as &ldquo;Very English.&rdquo;  Polly put the kettle on and we'll
all have tea is described as &ldquo;increasingly obsolescent&rdquo; since
WW2, yet I have often heard English people refer to it jocularly
when they offer to put the kettle on to boil: &ldquo;I'll be Polly.&rdquo;

All in all, the *Dictionary of Catch Phrases*, which resembles
in spirit, if not in fact, Partridge's *Dictionary of
Clich&eacute;s*, might have seemed a good idea when conceived,
and Partridge undoubtedly had a good time compiling it and
writing the comments, but the result is uneven and, in places,
downright inaccurate.  It is also somewhat old-fashioned, to
wit Dr. Joseph T. Shipley's comment of 17 February 1974
that that's how (or the way) the cookie crumbles &ldquo;...is
a rather frequent expression in [New York].&rdquo;  Perhaps it is
among septuagenarians.  On the other hand, some informants
suffer either from a short memory or a long imagination.
Where was Moses when the lights went out?  is from an early
20c. riddle [the same vintage as &ldquo;What's black and white
and re(a)d all over?&rdquo;], the answer to which is &ldquo;In the dark&rdquo;
or, more elaborately &ldquo;Down in the cellar in the dark.&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *[Poplollies and Bellibones: A Celebration of Lost Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Poplollies%20and%20Bellibones%3A%20A%20Celebration%20of%20Lost%20Words%20Susan%20Kelz%20Sperling&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Susan Kelz Sperling, (Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), 128 pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

>For *dretching* the curly *crineted* child with a *fearbabe*,
the *killbuck* was sent to a *kidcote* without an *eyethurl*.[^1]

Someone has been having fun with the language, and
good fun it is, too.  A few hours spent with the *Oxford English
Dictionary* alone could produce enough archaic and obsolete
English words to satisfy any paleomorphophiliac, but Sperling,
unwilling to leave it at that, has ransacked the nether reaches
of Skeat's, Brewer's, Wright's and others' works to compile a
glossary of 300-odd words that have, for some unaccountable
reason, fallen into disuse in the language.  And odd, indeed,
many of them are.  Not content with a glossary, the author
has woven these relics into a collection of turngiddy tales (in
which Teneris the Knight is prominently featured), snirtling
telephone conversations with a Miss Fleak ['an insignificant
person'], hoful synonym studies, and iqueme poems that cannot
fail to confound and amuse.  I utter a short prayer that
crossword-puzzle compilers never learn of these words—I am
having enough trouble as it is.

Not all of the words are as obscure [at least to me—but
then I acknowledge an unfair advantage] as they might seem
(or, perhaps, ought to be).  For instance, I may be one of the
few, but there are some people about who know what a *zarf*
is and what *widdershins, welkin, tipsycake* [served at The
Bell Inn, Aston Clinton, Bucks.—note for British readers],
*spitchcock, prick-song, purfle, poop-noddy, misgloze*, and a
few others mean.  Whether you do or not, your adlubescence
at this romp through should be undiminished, and that's no
fadoodle.

***

[^1]: Gloze: For *tormenting* the curly-*haired* child with a
*something to frighten a baby intentionally*, the *fiercelooking
fellow* was sent to a *prison* without a *window*.</ftnote>


#### EPISTOLA {Robert C. Connell}

A.J. Pollock's discovery of the self-referring word [IV, 1]
should probably be shared with the Apostle Paul.  Writing to
Philemon, Paul finds Pollock's very example useful in verses
10 and 11 when he writes:

>I appeal to you for my child Onesimus [meaning 'useful'].
Formerly he ['Useful'] was useless to you but now he
is indeed useful to you and me.

Paul uses *useful* not only as a self-referring word, but a
paradoxical one as well.  Of course, Paul was also familiar
with the paradoxical sentence, quoting to Titus the classical
paradox by the Cretan poet, Epimenides: &ldquo;All Cretans are
liars...&rdquo;  (Titus I:12).

In fact, I believe Paul would have enjoyed your publication
and its Epistolae as much as we have enjoyed our
very first issue. [*Robert C. Connell, Portola Valley, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Jon Richfield}

In Verbatim [IV, 1], Alexander J. Pollock described
his discovery of self-referring words.  I am sure he will not be
surprised to hear that he is one of a goodly company.  Not
only did I do so independently some years back, but I was
not the first.  It is probably re-discovered several times a year,
as it is too simple and charming an idea to miss.

At first I called them *autonyms, paranyms*, and *heteronyms*,
but as a quick consultation with the *Shorter Oxford*
demonstrated that the originality of my terms was no greater
than that of my discovery, I called them *autoscrips, parascrips*,
and *heteroscrips*.

The *autoscrip* is what Mr. Pollock called a self-referring
term, e.g., 'word.'  *Parascrips* are self-referring in that they
describe opposing concepts: e.g., verb describes 'verbs,' but
is a noun.  *And* is a typical *heteroscrip* as is *dog*.  Neither describes
anything with an obvious connection to itself.  *Nonself-referring*
is not a heteroscrip by this definition.  In fact I think
it is a parascrip.  It defines something opposing what it itself
is.  This does not deny Mr.  Pollock's line of reasoning; I just
think that this system of definition is more powerful.  Whether
it is the best is another matter.

Certainly, as described so far it does not eliminate paradox.
*Heteroscriptive* is plainly a parascrip, *autoscriptive* is
arguably auto-, para- or heteroscriptive; i.e., no obvious
contradiction results from attributing *any* of the three qualities
to it.  *Parascriptive* is neither better *nor* worse, i.e., regarding
it as self-referring leads to no ambiguity, but does
lead to paradox.  Only heteroscription applies to it without
contradiction.  In cowardice I recommend that, in order to
avoid paradox and ambiguity, the definition of the three
terms be based on an algorithm until less empirical theory
evolves.  A modest suggestion follows:

>1:  Select the aspect(s) of its own nature to which
the word is to be considered to apply.
>
>2:  Consider the word as an autoscrip and as a parascrip
in turn.  If exactly one of the two terms applies,
apply that term as a definition and go to step 4.
>
>3:  If each case or neither leads to contradictions, or
neither applies clearly, apply the term &ldquo;heteroscrip&rdquo;
as a definition.
>
>4: Stop.

I also take tentative issue with limiting the field to nouns
and adjectives.  I grant that gerunds and participles were
included by implication, in that the classification of *nonself-referring*
was mooted, but why exclude pronouns, e.g., *it*?
In this sentence, if *it* is not an autoscrip (twice), what is *it*?
*What, that*, and *which* are similar cases, while *they* is a parascrip,
unless one is careless about antecedents or allows a
shareholding definition as in: *What* and *they* (*they* and *they?*)
are pronouns aren't they?&rdquo;

Pronouns may be a bit close to nouns, but what about
adverbs?  *Here* is an autoscrip, *there* a parascrip, unless you
stand far away from the page when you read this.  Of course,
you may say that *here* is always here to itself, while *there* is
never there.  Obviously their status as auto- or parascrips is
context-sensitive.  Facultative autoscrips?

Prepositions are less satisfactory.  I am not convinced
that say, *between* is a facultative autoscrip even if it is between
quotes.  Does it have any meaning by itself, or must it
be read in context?  If the latter, it is necessarily heteroscriptive.
Similar thoughts apply to articles.  Is *an* autoscriptive?  Is
*a* parascriptive—or *the* heteroscriptive?  If *you* don't know, I
don't (and if you do, I probably disagree!).  Interjections are
mercifully heteroscriptive, unless one classes expletives such
as *curses*, as used in comic books, as autoscriptive.

Another critical point is: to what aspect of itself must a
non-heteroscrip refer, to qualify for inclusion in the category?
E.g., one might consider the concept (as opposed to the term
or the letters), *abstruse* as being abstruse, or *abstract* as abstract,
in which case they are in fact autoscrips.  Now note:
they are then language-independent.  The Dutch *Afgetrokken*
is abstract and the Swedish *svarfattlig* is abstruse.  *Term* is
interesting, as it refers to itself as a term, but is language-independent
(as long as the concept *term* occurs in a given
language's vocabulary, that is).  *Useful* refers to itself as a term
*and* a concept and is a language-independent autoscrip.  English,
French, etc., are language-dependent autoscrips, being
parascriptive in all languages but one, as a rule.  In this case
the aspect referred to is the language.  &ldquo;Correctly-spelt&rdquo; refers
to itself as a string of letters forming a word, and is in this
sense a language-dependent autoscrip.

There is no reason, I think, to separate the autoscriptive
aspects of phrases, sentences or other utterances from those
of words.  Certainly the distinctions would be rather arbitrary.
(Compare *correctly-spelt, correctly spelt*, and *This is correctly
spelt*.)

This question of what aspect is referred to is rather important.
For example I can think of no autoscriptive verb
unless one regards such cases as *spells* or *sounds* as autoscrips.
Here the aspect described is surely just the character string
or phoneme string.  Cases such as *exists* are altogether too
difficult.  Certainly *exists* may be called autoscriptive in referring
to itself as a term or a character string; but as a concept?
Do concepts *exist*?

Also, a word can be autoscriptive, parascriptive, and
heteroscriptive simultaneously, depending on the aspect one
chooses to apply it to.  *Abstract* is concrete in the sense of the
string of letters (and therefore parascriptive), abstract as a
concept, and heteroscriptive in that it neither correctly nor
wrongly describes its own length or language.

Then one considers how trivial nonheteroscription can
get.  How about *printed, italicised, purchased, vibrating,
spoken, erased, bold-face*, etc.?

I suspect therefore that the concept is little different
from the existing problem in logic of self-referring statements
and as such is of no importance, practical or theoretical,
except as a mental excercise.  However, that is important
enough for me! [*Jon Richfield, Cobham, Surrey*].


#### EPISTOLA {Seamus Hosey}

I was interested to see Gary S. Felton refer to *Murphy's Law*
in his &ldquo;Exceptions to the Rule&rdquo; [IV, 1].  Perhaps he and your
readers would be interested to hear the complete Murphy's
Laws from the country of their origin.

>(1.)  In any field of scientific endeavour, anything that
can go wrong will go wrong.
>
>(2.)  Left to themselves, things always go from bad to
worse.
>
>(3.)  If there is a possibility of several things going wrong,
the one that will go wrong is the one that will do
the most damage.
>
>(4.)  Nature always sides with the hidden flaw.
>
>(5.)  If everything seems to be going well, you have
obviously overlooked something.
>
>(6.)  Mother Nature is a bitch.

In pondering on these profound truths, Mr. Felton might
bear in mind *Hosey's Law* — In any compilation of exceptions
to the rule, no additional information, however useless, may
be ignored. [*Seamus Hosey, Co. Laois, Ireland*].


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

Robert Fowkes' article &ldquo;Esrever Hsilgne&rdquo; [III, 2] has
already provoked considerable comment, but none of it
directed at what is, to me, the most interesting question it
raises — namely, the origin of the American term &ldquo;english&rdquo;
as used in billiards and other ball games.  (The English are
satisfied with the simple word &ldquo;side.&rdquo;)  For a long time I have
cherished the hypothesis that it comes from a mispronunciation
of &ldquo;anglish,&rdquo; since the ball always rebounds at an erratic
angle when put under spin.  I even thought that investigation
might uncover a French culprit in the woodpile, i.e., *angl&eacute;*,
'angled,' easily confused with *anglais*, 'English.'  (Compare,
for instance, the now discredited derivation of *cor anglais*,
'English horn,' from **cor angl&eacute;*.)

Professor Fowkes prompted me finally to look into the
matter.  Imagine my disappointment at learning (from the
*OED Supplement*, quoting the *Sunday Times*, 5 April 1959)
that the billiard term, traced at least as far back as Mark
Twain's *Innocents Abroad* (1869), supposedly comes from a
banal proper name:

>The story goes that an enterprising gentleman from
these shores travelled to the United States during
the latter part of the last century and impressed
the Americans with a demonstration of the effect of
'side' on pool or billiard balls.  His name was English.

I say 'supposedly' because the quoted etymology still strikes
me as very possibly apocryphal, whether or not my own is
closer to the mark.

At any rate, even assuming the shadowy Mr. English to
be responsible, after a little reflection it occurred to me that
the two hypotheses might, in fact, come together rather neatly.
The English, after all, stem from the Angles, who, we are told,
took their name from their original homeland in Schleswig,
whose shape was that of a fishhook (*angul*).  If so, we have
what would amount to a stunning etymological coincidence.
Considering the immense number of possible proper names
an itinerant billiard-shark might have, we could easily be
referring today to 'reverse smith,' 'reverse jones,' 'reverse
shapiro,' 'reverse urdang,' etc., none of which staggering
array of possiblities would have anything whatever to do
with the 'angle' that so expressively describes the trick shot
involved. [*Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University*].


#### EPISTOLA {Jeffery F. Chamberlain}

Five laws which excerpt the characteristics of the Intergalactic
Conspiracy to Deprive You of Your Right to Happiness:

>*Jenkinson's Law* — It won't work.
>
>*Pudder's Law* — Anything that begins well ends badly.
>
>*Borkowski's Law* — You can't guard against the arbitrary.
>
>*Sattinger's Law* — It works better if you plug it in.
>
>*Murphy's Law* (of which Mr. Felton quotes only a portion):
>
>>(1.)  Nothing is as easy as it looks.
>>
>>(2.)  Everything takes longer than you think.
>>
>>(3.)  If anything can go wrong, it will.

Two contributions to help explain the workings of
bureaucracies:

>*Oeser's Law* — There is a tendency for the person in the
most powerful position in an organization to spend all his
time serving on committees and signing letters.
>
>*Dow's Law* — In any hierarchical organization, the higher
the level, the greater the confusion.
>
>Two comments about The Present State of Affairs:
>
>*Price's First Law* — If everybody doesn't want it, nobody
gets it.
>
>*Kitman's Law* — Pure drivel tends to drive off the TV
screen ordinary drivel.

The next three Laws are the only rational observations
of which I am aware about the so-called quantitative &ldquo;social
sciences&rdquo;:

>*Hart's Law of Observation* — In a country as big as the
United States, you can find fifty examples of anything.
>
>*The Law of the Perversity of Nature* — You cannot successfully
determine beforehand which side of the bread to
butter.
>
>*Dibble's First Law of Sociology* — Some do, some don't.
>
>(Under this category is Felton's &ldquo;Third Law of Experimental
Psychology,&rdquo; which I have known as &ldquo;Harvard Law&rdquo;
and attributed to A.S. Sussman.)
>
>Under the well-known category of &ldquo;Miscellaneous,&rdquo; I
offer the *Law of Probable Dispersal* — Whatever hits the fan
will not be evenly distributed.  (Also known as — *The How-Come-It-All-Landed-On-Me
Law*), and my own contributions,
both of which are probably plagiarized:
>
>*Chamberlain's Laws*—(1.) The big guys always win,
and (2.) Everything tastes more or less like chicken.
>
>Finally, *Laurence Peter's Les Miserables Metalaw*: All
laws, whether good, bad, or indifferent, must be obeyed to
the letter.  (A Metalaw is a law about laws.) [*Jeffery F. Chamberlain, Rochester, New York*].

P.S. I have seen Ormly Gumfudgin's &ldquo;People never go there
anymore; it's too crowded&rdquo; attributed to Yogi Berra.  This
reminds me of the venerable oxymoron, &ldquo;good hitting always
stops good pitching, and vice versa&rdquo; which is supposed to
have been said first by the well-known dentist, Casey Stengel.


#### EPISTOLA {Mervyn Cripps}

*Cripps Law* — when travelling with children on one's
holidays, at least one child of any number of children will
request a restroom stop exactly half way between any two
given rest areas.

*The Fudge Factor* — a physical factor occasionally showing
up in experiments as a result of stopping a stop-watch a
little early to compensate for reflex error. [*Mervyn Cripps, St. Catherines, Ontario*].


#### EPISTOLA {Daniel N. Swisher}

Frank Schulman's article *&ldquo;The Sinister Side of the
Language&rdquo;* [IV, 1] *left* one amused but not very well
instructed in the *right* forms to use in the Romance
languages to which he refers.

In the first place, 'left' in Portuguese is *esquerda*, not
*esquierda*, and 'right' is *direita* (or, in some cases, *direito*), not
*derecho*.  In the second place, one would have expected a bit
more consistency on the part of the author in his handling of
genders.  For some reason, he regularly used the feminine
form in translating *left* and the masculine form in translating
*right*.  One hesitates to level the charge of linguistic male
chauvinism at Mr. Schulman but has little choice after absorbing
his ideas about the inferiority of the *left*.  When referring
to *right* or *left* as a direction, the feminine form is correct in
French, Spanish and Portuguese, since the word 'hand' is inferred,
which is feminine in all three languages (*main, mano*,
and *m&atilde;o*, respectively).  It is not proper to use the masculine
forms *droit, derecho*, or *direito* standing alone as meaning
'right,' but only when they are modifying a masculine noun. [*Daniel N. Swisher, Woodside, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Robert J. L. Waugh, M.D., Dunlap-Manhattan Psychiatric Center}

Cheers & *JEERS*

From *The New England Journal of Medicine*, Jan. 20,
1977: PLAIN WORD FOR &ldquo;PASSED FLATUS&rdquo;

*To the Editor*: The number of letters (N Engl J Med 295:
1204-1205, 1976) in response to the article on a flatulent patient
(N Engl J Med 295: 260-262, 1976) prompts me to add
what I consider an interesting phenomenon.

There seems to be a curious omission on this subject both
in the literature and in the English language.  I do not recall
any relevant treatise in the psychiatric literature and I do not
know of any commonly used single word in the English language
that means &ldquo;pass flatus&rdquo;—with the exception of a four-letter
word.

This four-letter word is &ldquo;fart,&rdquo; which is both a verb and
a noun.  Such awkward phrases as &ldquo;passed flatus&rdquo; or &ldquo;excreted
gas&rdquo; are always used instead of &ldquo;farted.&rdquo;  And a &ldquo;fart&rdquo;—as a
noun — can be visualized on x-ray.

It is also curiously interesting that concerning the other
(upper) end of the gastrointestinal tract, the language does
have usable single words: to belch and a belch, as well as to
eruct and an eructation.  The word &ldquo;fart&rdquo; appreciably arouses
more feelings of disgust than the words &ldquo;expelled flatus&rdquo; or
&ldquo;belch.&rdquo;

The matter gets curiouser and curiouser in our wonderland,
and I am awaiting etymologic studies on these words
and psychologic studies on a suitable patient.

***

LeMoyne Farrell of Ithaca, N.Y., referring to VERBATIM
[IV, 1], wonders whether the converted *bird in
the hand-me-down* is a duck-shooter's old insulated jacket.

&ldquo;...Such mismatches [between a text and the skills (language
and otherwise) of the reader] are of particular interest
as sources of difficulty in learning to read and write
for children *whose language and culture are different from
the majority*.&rdquo;  [Our emphasis.] — From the errata sheet accompanying
*Basic Skills Research Grants Announcement*, Summer
1977, published by the National Institute of Education, HEW.
The halt leading the blind?

## Words Across the Sea: the British Crossword Comes to America
*Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York*

The puzzle you see in VERBATIM is a British-style
crossword in pattern and clues, but the idiom is
American.

The difficulty one has with a British crossword puzzle
on this side of the water is not in the ingenious brilliance of
the clues, though they are clever: any bright word-minded
person can figure them out once he gets the hang of it.  Rather,
the difficulty is with British references to cricket, soccer teams,
English place names (Portland Bill and Tolpuddle have shown
up recently in *New York Magazine* offerings from the London
*Times*), and other insular items strange to Americans.  Since
about half of the letters are unkeyed, it takes insight to complete
the crossword.  (It may well be that when VERBATIM's
Anglo-American crossword puzzle reaches London, it will
baffle the British.)

In 1941, when I was still making American crosswords,
I saw my first British puzzle in an American magazine, the
now defunct *Blue Book*.  I had seen other British puzzles in
English publications, but I hadn't really understood them.
Now I decided to try to find out what they were all about.
The *Blue Book* puzzle was by-lined, &ldquo;Edited by Albert H.
Morehead.&rdquo;  My cunning little mind said, &ldquo;Ah, *edited*!&rdquo;  So I
wrote to Mr. Morehead, offering my services as a fellow who
could construct a crossword.  [The one concession Morehead's
British crossword made in its American debut was its pattern;
it had the standard American style, meaning no unkeyed letters.
But the clues were British style and certainly baffling
to those of us to whom such clues were new.]

Mr. Morehead invited me to his office.  At that time he
was bridge editor for *The New York Times*.  Because he played
bridge with Mr. Edwin Balmer, writer and editor of *Redbook*,
and because he was a most persuasive man, Morehead sold
the idea of the British crossword to Balmer, and soon they
were published in *Blue Book* and *Redbook*.  If you know anything
at all about the timorousness or conservatism of national
magazine policy, you will realize that Morehead pulled off
an astounding feat.

Morehead had first discovered the British crossword while
covering a bridge tournament in London and had fallen in
love with it.  Though a bridge editor and card expert, he told
me his life's ambition was to be a lexicographer (and so he
was to become, abandoning his lucrative *Times* bridge column
in later years).  During that first visit with him, I was delighted
to have him accept my offer to supply crossword puzzles,
even though he said he would create the clues.  I still
relish the first clue he threw at me: &ldquo;Wearing inside outside.&rdquo;
Answer in seven letters, *Tedious*.  Neat, to say the least.  Well,
I caught on fast and started an association with him which
lasted until he died, in the summer of 1966.  I salute him as
the pioneer of the British puzzle in America.

By now, *New York Magazine* has offered enough London
*Times* crossword puzzles so that the unkeyed pattern is readily
accepted here.  For many years, though, American puzzle
editors were circumscribed by the set of rules made by the
1924 pioneers of crosswords in this country: Hartswick,
Buranelli, and Petherbridge (this last member of the trio is
the illustrious Margaret Farrar).  These rules called for, among
other things: no unkeyed letters, not more than one-sixth of
the squares to be black, and not more than one word at a time
in a space.  The British crossword puzzle violates all of these
rules.  No American crossword editor, from 1930 to about 1960,
violated them, however—except Margaret Farrar, who permitted
Marc Connelly, the playwright, to make a few British-style
crosswords for the Sunday *New York Times*.

The great advantage of the British crossword is the elimination
of &ldquo;junk&rdquo; puzzle words such as those that pertain to
Philippine trees, Hindu arcana, and extinct flora and fauna—
words that are useful because they &ldquo;fit.&rdquo;  Now, all answer
words can be good, the clues can be witty, tricky, even naughty,
but always they are amusing or delightfully baffling.  The
solving of this type of puzzle gives mental stimulation and is
a source of satisfaction, once it has been mastered.  The solver,
then, knows he has won a battle of wits.  It's the only kind
of puzzle I care to solve, for its interest never palls, provided
the clues are good.

Do not approach these puzzles thinking the clues will
prove to be too hard.  Each clue carries an honest definition
for the word it identifies; it but cloaks the word in a clever
disguise.  The disguise is a sentence, which, if you analyze it,
gives you a blueprint of the answer.

Bring your powers of reasoning into the fray, and you,
too, will look forward to each new puzzle with joyful and
eager anticipation.


#### EPISTOLA {Alan A. Grometstein}

As a mathematician, I found A.J. Pollock's article on
&ldquo;Self-Referring Words&rdquo; [IV, 1] an interesting example of rediscovery.
The fact that the concept of 'nonself-referring'
can lead to paradox has been familiar to some mathematicians
and logicians since, roughly, the beginning of the present
century.  It is a pleasure to find the paradoxical nature of the
concept recognized in a linguistic setting.

Various logicians, among them pre-eminently Bertrand
Russell, noted that the antinomies of logic tended to contain
the concept that Mr. Pollock calls 'nonself-referring,' and
which in mathematics is usually called 'impredicable,' as contrasted
with 'predicable.'  (Perhaps a more accurate pair of
terms would be 'self-impredicable' and 'self-predicable.')

Some apparent paradoxes can be resolved.  That of the
Spanish barber, e.g., (who, you may remember, shaved everyone
in his town except those who shaved themselves) can be
settled by denying the possible existence of such a person.
Similarly, when Gonseth (1933) suggested the difficulty facing
a librarian who wished to compile a bibliography of all bibliographies
which did not list themselves, we can counter by
saying that such a task cannot be carried out.

But other paradoxes cannot be so resolved, since part of
the paradox shows the existence of the 'product' in question.
In Russell's terminology, the question whether the word 'impredicable'
is predicable or, alternatively, is impredicable
(after all, it ought to be one or the other, right?)  is a genuine
antinomy: we cannot simply deny the existence of the word.

Research into this type of question—the subject being
generally called 'metamathematics'—continues apace.  Not
too long ago, G&ouml;del showed (roughly speaking) that within
any discipline of logic or mathematics, theorems could be
validly formulated which could not conceivably be proven
true or proven false.  The prototypical such theorem is the
famous, &ldquo;This theorem cannot be proven true,&rdquo; which poses
obvious difficulties to someone trying to prove or disprove it.
The theorem quoted is simply a formalization of the similar
one, &ldquo;This sentence is false,&rdquo; which opens Mr. Pollock's article.
G&ouml;del's work is taken as demonstrating that mathematics is
intrinsically 'incomplete' in that questions may be posed
which cannot be answered.

There is a related question: is mathematics consistent?
That is, having proven some theorem, say, Theorem X, are
we sure that the antithesis of Theorem X, say, Theorem anti-X,
cannot be proven?  It would be unfortunate if we could deduce
both X and anti-X from valid argument.  But there is
now reason to believe that a proof of consistency cannot be
achieved—not simply that we do not know one at the moment,
but that one cannot conceivably exist.  As someone said,
&ldquo;We know God exists, for mathematics is consistent; but we
know the Devil exists, for we cannot prove that consistency.&rdquo; [*Alan A. Grometstein, Stoneham, Massachusetts*].


#### EPISTOLA {Henry Kaminer, M.D.}

I found &ldquo;The Encompassing Circle&rdquo; [IV, 1] well written
and very informative.  There was, however, one error
which I have seen often repeated elsewhere.  The slang term
*gringo*, applied to Americans by Mexicans, stems not from
the first words of a song, but from the American's mispronunciation
of the Mexican's term of contempt for them.  The
Mexicans called the Americans *griegos* or 'Greeks' because
they could not understand the American's speech (speaking
English or Spanish) — it was Greek to them!  I'm sorry I can't
quote learned references, but as a psychoanalyst and an ex-soldier
I find it hard to believe our bold troopers would be
singing &ldquo;Green grow the rushes, oh!&rdquo;  (not *lilacs, oh!*) — and
not a more bawdy song.

Anyway, if that were the case, we should all be called
*gringoes*. [*Henry Kaminer, M.D., Tenafly, New Jersey (Similarly, from D.E. Schmiedel Las Vegas, Nevada)*]


#### EPISTOLA {Frederic G. Cassidy}

Referring to &ldquo;Charmed and Other Quarks&rdquo; [VERBATIM
III, 3], I wonder whether Mr. August A. Imholtz, Jr.,
is not — however amusingly and imaginatively — running
around Robin Hood's barn to find a non-Quark?

It's perfectly true that Joyce's words are compounded
from many languages — but why settle on German (except
that one may know it better than half a dozen other equally
implausible candidates) when the closest one can come to any
appropriate sense is a mess of white-curd cheese, rubbish, or
trifles?  Poppycock (see etym)!

Has not Mr. Imholtz rather easily daffed off the known
English senses or past uses of *quark*?  That the West Highland
frogs gurgle and quark does not require that Joyce's birds
gurgle (though some birds do) merely because they quark.
Joyce was quite clearly enjoying onomatopoeia in this phrase,
and we should listen carefully.

For an Englishman, the *r* in *quark* would be merely
graphic, indicating length on the *a*: the gulls would be not
*quarking* but *quaaking*.  But for Joyce the *r* most surely counted
for itself.  And gulls do not merely *quack*; they have an added
quality, prolonging the resonance of their call, which is well
represented by *r. Quark* is very exactly the sound the gulls
were making.

Whether Joyce was already playing in his mind with
*Muster Mark* and therefore heard the gulls rhyming with it,
or whether he heard the *quark* first and that led him rhymingly
to *Mark*, must remain an irresoluble mystery.  But — let us
rejoice — one need not go stravaiging from the sea-coast of
Ireland to that of Bohemia to be charmed by the gulls of
Joyce quarking for Muster Mark or to be gulled by the charms
of Germanic etymology.  In any case, when Irish gulls talk
about cottage cheese, they have the decency to call it bonnyclabber. [*Frederic G. Cassidy, DARE, University of Wisconsin*].


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v4n3_1977-12)