---
title: "Vol IV, No 4 [September 1977]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Regional Report No. 1 —The Bay Area
*Jean Montgomery, Mill Valley, California*

In San Francisco and its suburbs, a whole generation has
grown up giving voice to a kind of English that is, if not
broken, at least oddly bent.  In the Bay Area, the farmer 'tills
at the soil,' our country is the 'most favorite nation' and we
have 'no truck for other countries.'  A real estate dealer is a
'realator,' and *et cetera* becomes 'essetera.'  'Dippity,' we say,
and 'Klu Kluck Klan.'  'In view of becomes 'in lieu of,' and
an action may not resound to someone's credit.  *Sure* turns
into 'sheer,' and *actually* becomes 'acksh'lly,' in a nasal rasp
that could drill through plate steel.  Common usage gives us
'deteriate,' and 'high arky' (as contrasted, presumably, with
'low arky' and an 'arky' in between).  'Respitory' ailments
often keep company with a fever, which is shown by the
'merkurry' rising in the 'thermomaner.'  To 'hannel' a high
'tempature,' doctors 'avocate' bed rest and 'aspirn.'  Essettera.

To be 'bummed out' is to be discouraged.  But around
here, someone who is 'bummed all the way out' heads for
the railing of the Golden Gate bridge.

Part of the responsibility for our bent language rests with
the print media.  Our newspapers carry ads for raincoats &ldquo;dry
cleaned and repelled&rdquo; and for a detergent that comes in a
&ldquo;mini-giant&rdquo; box.  A politician's former wife is quoted by one
newspaper as saying, &ldquo;I loved my husband very much and
wanted to accommodate.  After a while I realized I was chasing
a windmill.&rdquo;  The *Chronicle* reports that the San Francisco
Police Department is revising its manual because the old rule
book has become too &ldquo;large and topsy.&rdquo;  A splendid new category
of crime is cited by one paper: the &ldquo;ultra-heinous crime—
a fatal arson attack&rdquo;; another reports that privacy is &ldquo;trounced
upon&rdquo; when telephone lines are tapped.

Some newspaper columnists run on and on and on.  This
haunting thought appeared in a column in the weekly *Mill
Valley* Record: &ldquo;You should never look over your shoulder or
somebody may be gaining on you if you don't tow the line.&rdquo;
The county daily, *Independent Journal*, not to be outdone,
offers headlines such as HARMONY PERVADES AT DEBATES FOR
CANDIDATES, and THEATER GROUP BATTLES SURVIVAL.

A movie reviewer in the *Journal's* Sunday supplement
merits special attention.  Recently, he wrote that a film had
a &ldquo;series of mishaps upon the like of which many a petard
had been hoist.&rdquo;  The actors failed to sparkle in the clutches.
Even worse, they turned the playwright's &ldquo;Saroyanesque
flibberty-gibbeting in a mundaneity that is almost tragic.&rdquo;

We are equally innovative in our oral communication,
supported and proclaimed by the broadcast media.  It is from
radio that one can learn about the gentleman who has been
&ldquo;laid low by prostrate trouble&rdquo; and the car driver who unintentionally&rdquo;
stepped on the exhilarator.&rdquo;  Talk show guests
have referred to &ldquo;unwrinkable garments&rdquo; and &ldquo;recycable
articles.&rdquo;  Unruffled by the pitfalls of her subject, one guest
hastens to explain why people are unable to make their meanings
clear when they &ldquo;commucate together&rdquo;: &ldquo;It's the ambigitty
of language,&rdquo; she says.  A Berkeley school teacher has
another explanation: &ldquo;Nobody talks to each other any more.&rdquo;

In the ambigitty of talk-show conversation, one can hear
about &ldquo;wheel chairs and other types of illnesses&rdquo;; of &ldquo;back-watering&rdquo;
when a boat's course is reversed; of a suicide that
was &ldquo;self-inflicted&rdquo;; of an event that &ldquo;really irates&rdquo; the speaker
and gets his &ldquo;dandruff up&rdquo;; and of a bird with its wings akimbo.
[The meaning of *akimbo* is probably lost forever.  The
caption that accompanied a recently published newspaper
photograph of a parachutist floating down in an awkward
position said that he had &ldquo;both arms and legs akimbo.&rdquo;]

Some talk-show ambiguities are sheer (not 'sure') delight:

&ldquo;It's easier than shooting a barrel of monkeys&rdquo;; &ldquo;He cooked
the golden goose&rdquo;; &ldquo;Why hang yourself by shooting in the
dark?&rdquo;: and &ldquo;It happened kind of out of a bolt of blue.&rdquo;

A newscast commucator reports that Oakland has been
given the anchor of the carrier *Oriskany* as a &ldquo;massive momentum&rdquo;
of that city's favorite ship.  A trial lawyer, it is said,
kept his client off the witness stand so that the client &ldquo;would
not be pillaged by his enemies.&rdquo;  Nor is the Reverend Mr.
Spooner without his followers.  A &ldquo;keace-peeping&rdquo; force soon
showed up to prevent the pillaging.  Once, when a cabinet
officer resigned, we heard that in his job he had been the
eye of many a storm.  And one newsman, in particular, appeared
to be especially well satisfied with the quelling of a
recent high school disturbance: it had been, he smirked, &ldquo;nipped
on the vine.&rdquo;

In electronic adland a clothing store burbles about a
bargain &ldquo;so fantastic it's unreal.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Glad is what happens&rdquo; on
another commercial.  The ad itself, though, has turned into a
*this*.  Now 'this.'  More news after 'this.'  Listen to 'this.'

Verbosity and pretentiousness abound.  The University
of California at Berkeley, for instance, announces the hours
during which its business office &ldquo;may be accessed.&rdquo;  A teacher
in Mill Valley has drawn up a &ldquo;prioritized list of all components
of the school program.&rdquo;  Our people are busy *critiqueing,
leafleting, scapegoating, conferencing,* and *pickpocketing*.
One San Francisco appliance dealer boasts of a stove which
will not only roast and broil, it will also *rotisse*!

Conversely, our most banal remarks are tagged with
cringing little pleas for encouragement: &ldquo;Hospitals are for
sick people, right?&rdquo;  and &ldquo;Like, I'm into macram&eacute;, okay?&rdquo;

We 'relate' to steaks and 'munch out' on sandwiches.
We enjoy &ldquo;authentic early-English pizza.&rdquo;  And after dinner,
lolling about on a 'chase-lounge' and enjoying the euphoria
that accompanies a full stomach, any one of us like feels majoo-berized
(*majooberized* is a nonce word used in these parts
for 'pleasantly relaxed').

The San Francisco police have just announced a new
program for &ldquo;carrying out crime and punishment.&rdquo;  Rather
than be caught up in critiqueing that one, I shall join the
others in the country whom &ldquo;apathy has by the throat.&rdquo;  That
means, I'm into believing this piece is finished.  I mean, it's
the end, right?

## How to Turn a Baseball Phrase
*Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York*

When I read John O. Herbold II's article on baseball
&ldquo;To Understand America (and Americans)&rdquo; [IV, 1], it sped
me on to do my own pet thing on baseball.  The locutions of
the game announcers are little short of entrancing (at least,
the first time around).  Here are a few I have collected.

The impetus for this collection was supplied by Ralph
Kiner, who, along with Lindsey Nelson and Bob Murphy, is
a Mets broadcaster.  I love them all dearly, but that doesn't
prevent me from being amused at what they say.  Ralph's
gem came when he described a first baseman holding a position
different from normal when holding a runner on first
base and still being ready to field a ball.  He said, &ldquo;There are
quite a few innovations that have come out of baseball, some
of them old and some of them new.&rdquo;

However, my point is that if anyone wants to announce
baseball games, he needs a stock of phrases.  If a batter hits
safely between the shortstop and second, or second and first,
the announcer will call that &ldquo;a seeing-eye base hit.&rdquo;  If the
outfielder can throw a &ldquo;strike&rdquo; from far away to any base or
home plate to nail a runner, he has &ldquo;a howitzer of an arm.&rdquo;
A hitter who can send that ball out of the park, like Willie
Stargell, Greg Luzinski, etc., has &ldquo;awesome power.&rdquo;  A baseball
that is pitched and almost catches the batter full in the
guts is said to be &ldquo;in his kitchen.&rdquo;  Base-stealing speedsters
are characterized by the words &ldquo;he can fly,&rdquo; or &ldquo;he has a
world of speed.&rdquo;

A ballplayer who is not an infielder, outfielder, or pitcher,
and is thus doomed to be a catcher, wears &ldquo;the tools of ignorance,&rdquo;
catcher's gear.  (If it starts to rain, the crowd dons
&ldquo;foul-weather gear.&rdquo;)

Batters inspire various locutions.  If a hitter at the plate
is given to lashing his bat in circles while waiting for the
pitch he is &ldquo;cowtailing his bat around.&rdquo;  If he is at bat during
a long &ldquo;dry spell,&rdquo; waiting to get a hit, the sportscaster may
say &ldquo;he comes up wearing a size 19 collar,&rdquo; meaning he has
failed till now and may be about to fail for the 20th time.  If
the batter gets a little foul ball to preserve his turn at bat on
the third strike, then he &ldquo;got a piece of it.&rdquo;  But if Lady Luck
smiles and he hits a homerun, then he &ldquo;got all of it.&rdquo;  One of
my favorites is the phrase for a towering pop fly that shoots
straight up to the sky and comes down in the same area, usually
caught by the catcher.  The announcer says, &ldquo;He could have
hit that ball in a silo.&rdquo;  A homerun that becomes a well-traveled
ball, going some 500 feet or more, is called &ldquo;a tape-measure
homerun.&rdquo;

Pitchers also inspire the poets of the mike.  One like Nolan
Ryan, who can throw a baseball at 100mph-plus, is said to
be &ldquo;throwing smoke.&rdquo;  When his fastball gets a third strike
that catches the hitter &ldquo;looking,&rdquo; then &ldquo;he blew it right by
him with a blazing fastball.&rdquo;  Sometimes a pitcher, who has
been victimized by a hitter who scored a homerun his last
time up, resents it bitterly.  This pitcher is not squeamish
about firing a fast one right at the batter's body, anywhere—
arm, leg, torso, or head.  About such a pitcher the man
at the mike may say, &ldquo;He'd hit his own grandmother if she
was up there with a hot bat.&rdquo;  When a relief pitcher comes
in because the starter is beginning &ldquo;to dig a big hole for himself&rdquo;
(putting men on base with walks and hits), he is called
a fireman who must &ldquo;put out the fire&rdquo; his predecessor started.
Sometimes this will result in a mixed metaphor.  The announcer
may say the reliefer fireman &ldquo;came in and slammed the door,&rdquo;
that is, he got the necessary third out and prevented any
scoring.  Of course, just the opposite may happen.  He may be
unfortunate enough to release a &ldquo;nice fat pitch, right over
the heart of the plate,&rdquo; thus giving the batter a chance to
get it all.  If a homerun results, this is called &ldquo;a gopher pitch,&rdquo;
because the batter surely can go for it.  When a strikeout occurs,
usually on a perfect pitch that the batter does not go for, this
pitch is said to be &ldquo;right down the pipe.&rdquo;

Some phrases belong to individual players, as with the
Willie Mays &ldquo;basket catch,&rdquo; a method of snagging fly balls
by holding the glove and ungloved hand to form a basket low
and in front of one's body.  And Brooks Robinson, Oriole third
baseman, earned the sobriquet of &ldquo;the vacuum cleaner&rdquo; because
he sucked in everything that came his way.  We all know
that Babe Ruth was &ldquo;the Sultan of Swat,&rdquo; and Jimmy Wynn,
a more or less diminutive hitter with homerun potential, is
called &ldquo;the toy cannon.&rdquo;

Umpires earn vituperation simply because no decision
can please both sides.  When members of the team at bat,
who are sitting in the dugout, grow vociferous about balls
being called strikes against their teammate, they may hoot
and holler at the umpire, implying he is blind, biased, or
unfit for his job.  This is called &ldquo;heat from the dugout.&rdquo;  If
the umpire can't take it anymore, he may approach the chief
offender and tell him to shut up.  Further offense may make
the umpire flare up enough to eject the culprit summarily
from the game.  Such an umpire is said to have &ldquo;a short fuse.&rdquo;

There are many more colorful locutions, of course.  I do
want to say that all the above are superior to a cry of &ldquo;Holy
cow!&rdquo;  On that note, I'll be &ldquo;Going, going, gone,&rdquo; as I run
all the way home.

## Moribund Metaphors Rise Against
*Sam Hinton, La Jolla, California*

Though language has been described as &ldquo;a cemetery of
dead metaphors,&rdquo; many of the corpses are still used in
what was once a secondary sense, their metaphoric context
forgotten.  The earlier figure of speech was often in a language
not understood by present speakers, and only by patient
research—or by consulting the results of such research in an
etymological dictionary—can the nature of the original metaphor
be known.  Nevertheless, today's users of a language
frequently invent new words or phrases in which they unconsciously
repeat the hidden comparison.

There are many reasons for creating a new expression—
to make the language more vivid, to signify a concept not
adequately described by an older term, to disassociate an
expression from undesirable connotation, to provide an ingroup
recognition signal, and so on.  Neologisms are always
current among young people, as one manifestation of the
revolt that is necessary if the young are to accede to their
culture's dominant positions.  With equal universality the
elders resist being deposed, and one manifestation of this
resistance is their anguished cry that their language is being
polluted, degraded, bastardized.  The elders of my generation
have come up with a metaphor of their own to express the
terrible danger they see: &ldquo;The English language is an endangered
species!&rdquo;

A typical example of this attitude appeared in &ldquo;Curmudgeon-at-Large,&rdquo;
Cleveland Amory's regular column in *Saturday
Review* (2 Oct. 1976, p. 51), although Mr. Amory was more
restrained and more humorous than many writers on the
same subject.  &ldquo;Young people nowadays,&rdquo; we are told, &ldquo;intend
to go through life using only five expressions,&rdquo; which are
&ldquo; 'Right on,' 'With it,' 'Far out,' 'Get it all together,' and 'Let
it all hang out.' &rdquo;  He then goes on to say that he has conducted
a small poll and concludes that to these young persons
&ldquo; 'Right on' means 'With it,' 'With it' means 'Far out,' 'Far
out' means 'Get it all together,' and 'Get it all together' means
'Let it all hang out.' &rdquo;  There is no doubt that some young
folk don't always express themselves very clearly to us elders,
but even a confessed curmudgeon might find some surprisingly
pleasant affinities with his youthful informants if he would
listen to how they really use their terms.  He might even realize
that they are working under the same traditions that shaped
the &ldquo;standard&rdquo; language, and that he and they—and their
common remote ancestors—are pretty much the same sorts
of people.

*Right on* is most often heard as an exclamation of hearty
agreement, used as a Member of Parliament would use &ldquo;Hear!
Hear!&rdquo;  The same metaphor, using a precise spatial location
to represent verbal accuracy, is found in older expressions,
such as &ldquo;Very much to the point!&rdquo;  or even &ldquo;You've hit the
nail right on the head!&rdquo;  A statement that is *right on* in a clever
way is officially known as an *epigram* from Greek -*gram*
'writing' plus *epi*- 'on.'  (Please, may I say &ldquo;write on?&rdquo;)

*With it* has several meanings and is by no means new.  I
heard it in the 1930s when working for a carnival; a person
who was *with it* was a fellow-carny, a *compeer*—which comes
from an earlier word for with—Latin *com* 'with' plus *par*
'equal.'  The 'with' roots are widely used in a figurative way,
as in *sympathize* ('suffer with') and *compatible* ('endure with').
The most usual use of *with it* is in application to a person
who is deeply immersed in some activity, and an expert in
it; our ancestors had a very similar metaphor in mind when
they coined the word *accomplished*—'filled with.'

*Far out*, like *right on*, often occurs as an exclamation
of approval and could be replaced by any number of standard
words with the same idea of being &ldquo;outside&rdquo; of ordinary experience.
*Extraordinary* can be analyzed as 'beyond that
which is ordinary'; the roots of *exceptional* mean 'taken out,'
and *exquisite* comes from 'seek out.'  *Superior* and *superb*
also denote something that is far out, this time in an upward
direction, while *delightful* uses not 'out' but the similar 'away,'
and means 'enticed away.'

To *get it all together* is to attain a state of composure,
and *composure* is from French words having the sense of
'put together.'  The person who has *got it all together* is *collected*
('gathered together'), and not *distraught* ('pulled apart').
This term more often refers to someone who is operating at
peak efficiency—that is, who is *coordinated* ('arranged together')
and *competent* ('together in seeking').  When applied
to the head—&ldquo;I've got to get my head together&rdquo;—the expression
indicates a desirable state of mental *integrity* ('entireness')
and *health* (from a Germanic root meaning 'wholeness').
All these carry the same implication of 'being together' in one
piece—the opposite of unhealthy *schizophrenia*, or 'split mind.'

Someone with a real mental problem is said to be *off
his rocker*, which is not very different from the literal meaning
of *delirium*—'out of the furrow.'

*Let it all hang out* is an admonishment to be natural,
*uninhibited*—which itself means 'not held in.'  *Unconstrained*
('not bound together') and *unconfined* ('not imprisoned') are
in the same family of metaphors.  To *let it all hang out* can
also mean to be forthright, to be *explicit*—'folded out.'  This
usage also implies honesty—a word having the same meaning
in Latin and said to have been derived from the name of a
plant whose transparent seed-pods disclosed the seeds within.

There are many other interesting words in the bright
lexicon of youth.  One is the adjective *cool* as applied to someone
displaying *sang-froid* ('cool blood,' of course) or *non-chalance*,
which is literally 'not hot'—in other words, *cool*!

At the other end of the temperature scale, young people
are likely to feel *burned up* where one of their elders would
be *incensed*, from Latin *incendere*, 'to set on fire.'  Another
word relating to fire can signify delight, as in the phrase
&ldquo;That just stokes me out of my gourd!&rdquo;  Without using slang,
this could be rephrased as &ldquo;That kindles in me a feeling of
ecstasy!&rdquo;  *Kindles* is obviously related to *stokes*, while *ecstasy*
('standing outside of myself') is not very different from the
rest of the phrase.  The word *gourd* is a synecdochic use of a
metaphor for the human head, which has cognates in a good
many languages.  Early Latin had the word *testa* 'a jug' which
became a Roman slang word for 'the head' and eventually
the standard word for the organ in several Romance tongues.
The German *kopf* probably arose in the same way.

Sometimes a new term is created to replace an old one
whose literal meaning is implied too faintly.  *Goodbye* has
become an automatic expression indicating the end of a human
contact, and can be used peremptorily or angrily, its original
derivation from 'God be with you' completely forgotten.  Many
young people have therefore discarded it, preferring *have a
nice day* as possessing a conscious context of well-wishing.
And even the not-so-young may be heard to say *bye-bye*,
which no modification of tone or emphasis can render unfriendly.

One sad thing about the language of youth is the rapidity
with which a good expression becomes obsolete.  At one time
the Haight-Ashbury population used *to run with* 'to understand
and agree' to be *au courant* ('running with') with someone.
I think it a pity that so vivid a term is no longer used.
Do you *concur*?  (Latin *con* 'with' plus *currere* 'run.')

## Bleep That Slur!
*Andrew E. Beresky, New York, New York*

Within the past few years, several American dictionaries
have found fit to squeeze in a new derogatory entry which
has no place in lexicons already crowded with derogatory
terms.  The word is *honky*, the latest of ethnic slurs which
won its quick acceptance mainly through the medium of
television.

On practically every TV situation comedy, crime series,
and talk show, as well as on news shows, the discriminatory
term has been bandied about indiscriminately to apply to all
white people.  Even so-called liberal whites have cutely picked
it up to show that they are &ldquo;right-on&rdquo; with the cause and are
&ldquo;telling it like it is.&rdquo;  This is simply not the correct usage of
my personal pet derogation.  Not every white person can qualify
as a honky.

I, for instance, am a honky by nature of birth, albeit
second and one-half generation.  But not by the wildest stretch
of the imagination could I consider President Carter to be
one.  Henry Kissinger need only utter a few words to be
dubbed, rather erroneously, as a honky.  Meanwhile, former
special Watergate prosecutor Leon Jaworski may not sound
like one, but the mere signing of an autograph is a dead
giveaway.

Ace TV crime fighter Karl Maiden and band leader
Lawrence Welk both look like honkies—and are.  On the
other hand, Boris Karloff had the distinctive air of a grand
honky—but wasn't, though his fellow bogeymen Peter Lorre
and Bela Lugosi were.

It is believed that *honky* was started on its way to biased
faddism several years ago when Rap Brown used the term in
front of TV news cameras.  Mr. Brown may have been an
astute political activist, but he hadn't learned his prejudices
well.  Or perhaps he learned them too well.  It's highly implausible
that the word, as used by Brown then and by all
others now, stemmed from *honky-tonk* which my dictionary
describes as 'a cheap, sordid saloon, cabaret, etc.'  Heaven
knows, every race and ethnic group has its share of honky-tonks.

No, I maintain that *honky* was, and is a deliberate mispronunciation
of *hunky*, one of white Anglo-Saxon America's
most popular ethnic (but not racial) slurs that gained wide
usage during the era of this country's most impressive growth
and development.  Of the latest dictionary editions that list
*honky* for the first time, only *Funk* &amp; *Wagnall's Standard
College Dictionary* (1974) apparently agrees.  It states, parenthetically,
that the word is &ldquo;possibly derived from hunky.&rdquo;

*The Random House College Dictionary* (1975) merely
states &ldquo;origin uncertain.&rdquo;  Curiously, while neither *Webster's
New 20th Century Unabridged* (1976) nor *Webster's New
World Dictionary of the English Language* (1972) makes any
mention of the term, *Webster's New Collegiate* (1976) lists
two alternate spellings—*honkie* and *honkey*—but offers no
etymology except to say that it is &ldquo;usually used disparagingly.&rdquo;

Most dictionaries are in accord that *hunky* is used to
describe 'an unskilled or semi-skilled workman of foreign
birth; especially a Hungarian.'  True, the word may have its
roots in the application by white Anglo-Saxon Americans to
immigrant Hungarians.  But in fact it was also applied to
those foreign-born, regardless of skill or profession, coming
from other middle and eastern European countries, especially
Poland, Russia, Czechoslovakia, Lithuania, Yugoslavia, and
so on.  Foreigners with other accents or heritage, such as
Germans, Italians, Jews, Scots, Swedes, etc., could not earn
that distinction.  They inherited their own ethnic slurs.  But
whatever the accent of the non-honky, he quickly learned
to apply the term.

My maternal grandfather, for instance, often told the
story of his working as a water boy for a work crew building
a railroad near Pittsburgh shortly after he came to this country
as a youngster from Czechoslovakia, more than a century
ago.  On the job, he befriended a Scottish-born timekeeper
who delighted in applying a double epithet to my grandfather.
In a strong, inherited burr, the timekeeper would call my
grandfather, rather redundantly, &ldquo;my little gr-r-reenhor-r-rn
hunky.&rdquo;  Perhaps what delighted my grandfather most in
retelling the story was the fact that the young Scot was
Andrew Carnegie.

Before a new TV season is upon us, I personally hope
that *honky* will not again be inserted in scripts as freely as
*whitey* and *Mr. Charlie* were tossed about a few years back.
But at least these terms were original, not borrowed from
other derogations.  To borrow the discriminatory term of
*honky* to denote any white person is a cop-out on discrimination.

## Diplophrasis
*Philip E. Hager, University of Puget Sound*

My letter in the February 1976 *VERBATIM*, listing
phrases in our language in which synonyms are joined by
*and (aches and pains, alas and alack, bits and pieces*) and
other examples of hendiadys and merism elicited many additions
from readers.  These contributions, and examples
which have subsequently surfaced in my casual reading, appear
in the list below.  Many similar phrases permeate the
Bible, legal documents, and the ritual language of Freemasonry. 

Collectors of these &ldquo;binomial&rdquo; phrases have given them
fond names, such as &ldquo;tandems,&rdquo; &ldquo;so and so's,&rdquo; &ldquo;twofers,&rdquo;
&ldquo;sandwiches,&rdquo; and &ldquo;double-deckers&rdquo;; the second edition of
Henry Fowler's *A Dictionary of Modern English* labels them
&ldquo;Siamese twins.&rdquo;

As acknowledgment of the interest of several correspondents
who collect &ldquo;threesomes,&rdquo; I append a few examples
of &ldquo;trinomials&rdquo; at the end of my list.

>*aches and pains*  
*act and deed*  
*aid and abet*  
*alas and alack*            
*all and sundry*            
*assault and battery*       
*bag and baggage*           
*beck and call*             
*before and after*          
*betwixt and between*       
*bib and tucker*            
*bill and coo*              
*bits and pieces*           
*body and soul*             
*bound and determined*      
*bow and scrape*            
*bread and butter*          
*bright and early*          
*by and by*                 
*cease and desist*          
*coming and going*          
*cut and thrust*            
*day and night*             
*decline and fall*          
*ditch and delve*           
*down and out*  
*dribs (drips) and drabs*  
*each and every*  
*east and west*  
*ebb and flow*  
*ever and ever*  
*fair and just*  
*fair and square*  
*far and near*  
*fast and furious*  
*fast and loose*  
*fear and trembling*  
*fine and dandy*  
*fire and brimstone*  
*first and last*  
*fits and starts*  
*flotsam and jetsam*  
*free and easy*  
*friend and foe*  
*frills and furbelows*  
*fun and frolic*  
*fun and games*  
*fuss and fume*  
*gall and wormwood*  
*good and thick*  
*good and tight*            
*grace and favor*  
*grand and glorious*        
*great and small*           
*grunt and groan*                                        
*hale and hearty*           
*hard and fast*  
*head and heels*            
*head and shoulders*        
*heart and soul*                                           
*heaven and earth*          
*heirs and assigns*  
*hem and haw*               
*here and now*              
*high and low*                                         
*high and mighty*           
*hither and thither*  
*hook and crook*            
*hoot and holler*           
*hot and heavy*                                           
*hot and strong*            
*house and home*  
*hue and cry*  
*huff and puff*             
*hustle and bustle*                                          
*in and out*                
*ins and outs*              
*intents and purposes*  
*jot and tittle*            
*kit and caboodle*                                        
*kith and kin*              
*law and order*             
*leaps and bounds*          
*length and breadth*        
*lewd and lascivious*                                         
*lo and behold*             
*long and endless*  
*long and short*            
*look and see*              
*might and main*                                         
*mix and match*             
*moan and groan*  
*near and far*              
*nerve and fiber*           
*new and different*  
*nice and cozy*  
*nice and soft*  
*nice and warm*  
*nip and tuck*  
*nook and cranny*  
*north and south*  
*now and then*  
*null and void*  
*odds and ends*  
*on and on*  
*one and all*  
*over and over*  
*p's and q's*  
*part and parcel*  
*peace and quiet*  
*pick and choose*  
*pride and joy*  
*pure and simple*  
*quick and easy*  
*rags and tatters*  
*rank and file*  
*rant and rave*  
*rich(er) and poor(er)*  
*right and left*  
*right and proper*  
*root and branch*  
*rough and ready*  
*rough and tumble*  
*rules and regulations*  
*sackcloth and ashes*  
*sere and yellow*  
*sit and wait*  
*sixes and sevens*  
*so and so*  
*so and so's*  
*sound and fury*  
*spick and span*  
*spit and image*  
*stand and deliver*  
*stress and strain*  
*stuff and nonsense*  
*tattered and torn*  
*thick and fast*             
*thick and thin*            
*time and tide*             
*to and fro*                
*toil and moil*             
*toss and turn*             
*town and gown*             
*tried and true*                          
*trials and tribulations*  
*twists and turns*          
*up and around*             
*up and down*               
*up and up*                                   
*use and wont*              
*various and sundry*        
*vim and vigor*  
*waifs and strays*          
*ways and means*                                
*wear and tear*             
*weep and wail*                                          
*well and good*  
*whims and caprices*  
*whys and wherefores*  
*widows and orphans*  
*wine and dine*  
*wit and wisdom*  
*withered and died*  
*[w]rack and ruin*  
*young and old*  
>
>*Examples of &ldquo;trinomials&rdquo;:*  
*bell, book, and candle*  
*cool, calm, and collected*  
*deaf, dumb, and blind*  
*dwindle, peak, and pine*  
*eat, drink, and be merry*  
*fair, fat, and forty*  
*hook, line, and sinker*  
*man, woman, and child*  
*signed, sealed, and delivered*  
*sugar and spice and everything nice*  
*vim, vigor, and vitality*  
*world, flesh, and the devil*  


#### EPISTOLA {Karl F. Heumann}

I raise the ante in the freight train (or boxcar) competition
with this fragment that Fineman says he kept out of *The
Physical Review* (but published in *Science*):

>...the rare-earth local moment-free electron-like
conduction electron exchange integral compling...

He goes on to say that &ldquo;Hyphens are generally avoided in
the freight train construction except where they add significantly
to the confusion.&rdquo;

As long as I have the editor's attention I will ask if readers
know of another word, besides 'mantissa' (or mantisa), that
is believed to derive from both Welsh and Etruscan? [*Karl F. Heumann, Bethesda, Maryland*].


### OBITER DICTA: *What Emerges in an Emergency?*
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

To some of us who dabble in etymology the field is an
intriguing, if perilous study.  It seems to undergo alternating
periods of approbation and condemnation.  But unawareness
of etymology is, perhaps, in the main, more of a blessing than
a bane.  Relatively few people bother to ask themselves what
the segments of words like *emergency, constitution*, or *challenge*
mean.  And it is just as well, or language might cease
to function altogether.  Still, an occasional curious cove may
wonder what emerges in an emergency, while most of his fellow
creatures treat it as an approximate synonym of *crisis* or
*danger* or the like, and for them it remains just as opaque in
formation as, say, *sycamore, identity*, or *carburetor*.

But *emergency* is obviously somehow derived from *emergence*
(which has the same termination as that seen in *difference,
continence, reticence*), ultimately from a Latin present
participle of *&emacr;merg&omacr;, -ere* 'come forth, rise up.'  Whether
this derivation occurred in old French or in learned Latin
(**emergentia*?) or both is not too clear or too relevant here.
Yet *&emacr;merg&omacr;* = *&emacr;*'out of' + *merg&omacr;*'immerse, dip, sink, plunge,'
and *&emacr;mergere* means 'rise up (like some sea monster?) out of
(the deep?).'  A *merg-anser* is a diving bird (literally a 'plunging
goose').  The present meaning of *emergency* did not emerge
or crop up until the seventeenth century, and Samuel Johnson
was still condemning it a century later as &ldquo;a sense not proper&rdquo;
(cf. E.L. McAdam, Jr. and George Milne, *Johnson's Dictionary,
A Modern Selection*.  New York: Pantheon Books, 1963,
p. 165).  It would be rash to venture a guess that the rhyme
with *urgency* helped to promote the present meaning.

What happens in a *merger*?  One firm or organization
often becomes swallowed up (or down) and loses its identity.
Yet we often act as if *merge* meant 'blend, join together, enter
into a union on more or less equal terms.'  Some linguists—
not all—speak of *mergers* as if they were the equivalent of
blends.  In old legal terminology, however, the English translation
of French *merger* (infinitive) was often 'drown.'  Not
long ago two colleges in our vast university were 'merged.'
The undersigned, a member of the smaller and better one,
mumbled in a faculty meeting, &ldquo;Etymologically, yes,&rdquo; whereupon
the presiding dean asked, &ldquo;What was that?&rdquo; and received
the reply in simplified English translation, &ldquo;We're being submerged
!&rdquo;  We were, and most of us regarded it as an outrage.

Where is the *rage* in *outrage?*  Nowhere, etymologically,
and the same holds true for the *out*.  For, although we
may be &ldquo;put out&rdquo; and feel intense rage at what we regard
as an outrage, the word itself contains neither of the two
elements of which it might seem to consist.  For it is from
French *outrage*, cf.  Old French *oltrage, ultrage* (cf. also
Italian *oltraggio*, which may or may not be independent of
the French).  The source, then, is Latin *ultra* 'beyond' plus
a suffix -*age*, reflecting possibly a Latin ending -*&macr;ticum*.  The
formation is therefore not unlike that of the neologism
*outage* heard so frequently during recent power failures.
This may have been modeled on some such word as
*shortage*, with overtones of *wattage, voltage*, etc., but its
formation is very similar to that of *outrage*, and there is
scant cause for *outrage* at the upstart.  It is, of course, hard
to believe that there is no association, by popular or
unpopular etymology, with *rage*, and rage is certainly
reflected in reaction to outrages like outages.  The pronunciation
of the second element also attests to some such
association (the word rhymes with *spout age* rather than
with **sproutidge*).  An elementary school teacher of mine
over five decades ago said, &ldquo;When rage gets into us, we are
enraged; when it comes out, we are outraged.&rdquo;  She
vouchsafed much interesting misinformation (e.g., &ldquo;A.D. =
'after death' &rdquo;) and may have kindled the spark of my
interest in etymology, thus contributing to the delinquency
of a minor.

It may be somewhat *discomforting* to be *discomfited* and
also to find out that the words are not related, except in their
prefixes.  A glance at an etymological dictionary will reveal
their actual sources.  A bold knight once *demeaned* himself
bravely in combat, discomfiting all he encountered, in fact.
I think of a page in Chr&eacute;tien's *Lancelot* where the two words
occur in close proximity, and the English translator used *demeaned*
and discomfited as their equivalents.  But the analogy
of *debase* has probably caused *demean* (cf. its derivative *de-
meanor*) to assume the sense of *de*- plus *mean* 'base.'  Hence
apparent etymological transparency results in new semantic
directions with usurpation and replacement of the old.  This
does not always happen, of course.  For, although the *clan*
may seem *destined* to hold *clandestine* sessions, no etymological
connection between that word and *clan* or *destine* can
be made, nor does a fancied one impart any new sense to signifier
or signified.

Sometimes old folk-etymological association prevails,
and its venerability lends an acceptance long after the process
is forgotten.  *Obliterate* once meant to wipe out a letter (*litera*);
but association with two unrelated words *oblitum* 'blotted
over' and *obl&imacr;tum* 'forgotten' has extended the meaning in
such a way that a merger has obliterated the &ldquo;real&rdquo; etymology
and relegated it to oblivion.  In examples like *aggravate, transpire,
lackadaisical* (and maybe the wretched *viable*—for I
seem to share some of Edwin Newman's prejudices) similar
processes no doubt occurred.  When we are old enough to have
witnessed the processes, we feel revulsion—once a mistake
for *repulsion*, perhaps.  When they happened ages ago, we
bow in veneration, blissfully aware that veneration has some
connection with Venus, but not pedantic enough to confine
it to one deity.

If we were not endowed with etymological oblivion, we
could never (etymo)logically board a train, or sail on a steamer,
or play a silver woodwind in a dilapidated wooden hut,
experiences we might not want to miss.  Or would we?


#### EPISTOLA {Jacques C. Richardson}

Willard Espy wonders [IV, 2] at the inability of Frenchmen
to *bend over backwards*.  The equivalent expression in
French is *se mettre en quatre (pour)*....  It means, literally,
'to transform oneself into four parts,' and is used typically as
follows: *Je me suis mis en quartre pour lui faire plaisir* 'I bent
over backwards in order to please him.' [*Jacques C. Richardson, Paris*].

***

*Similarly, from Viviane de Charri&egrave;re, Paris; Joseph G. Foster,
McKeesport, Pennsylvania; Donald E. Schlesinger, Bronx,
New York*.


#### EPISTOLA {Martin H. Slobodkin}

*Since writing* [my letter] [IV, 2], I have received a
number of ingenious suggestions for &ldquo;wishwords,&rdquo; or words
that we regret not having said at the party we just left.

The best suggestion by far was relayed to me by Mr.
Daniel Pomerantz of Lexington, Massachusetts, who told
me that his mother had heard the late great Dorothy Parker
use *departee* for 'staircase wit.' [*Martin H. Slobodkin, Cambridge, Massachusetts*].


#### EPISTOLA {John W.P. O'Brien}

...I have used *departee*.  The name of its originator,
alas, can no longer be recalled. [*John W.P. O'Brien, Flushing, New York*].


#### EPISTOLA {Bill Solomon}

...I'm inept at repartee but good at *departee*... It
appeared some years ago in *Saturday Review* (Goodman
Ace, maybe?).[Bill Solomon, Shawnee Mission, Kansas].


#### EPISTOLA {Mrs. D.C. Mullery}

...I suggest *postpartee*.  Many years ago, *The New
Yorker* contained a witty article in which the author composed
*prepartee* before a social event.  Of course, the necessary
remarks were never made, leaving him bereft of *repartee*
and frustrated by *postpartee* afterward. [*Mrs. D.C. Mullery, San Mateo, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Philip Arthur Walles}

...In England a person who has failed in this way
often confesses to being *after-witted*. [*Philip Arthur Walles, Mawgan Porth, Cornwall*].


#### EPISTOLA {J. Gombinski}

I have one or two suggestions....

1.  *Treppe* equals 'stairs/staircase' not 'steps'

2.  The French say *l'esprit d'escalier* not &ldquo;les paroles d'escalier.&rdquo; [*J. Gombinski, London*].


#### EPISTOLA {Alden Stahr}

...How about *post-riposte*? [*Alden Stahr, Columbia, New Jersey*].


#### EPISTOLA {Virgil Quinlisk}

...From the late 1920s or early 1930s, I have known
that as *cab wit*....  My guess is that it came out of the Round
Table at the Algonquin.  If that guess is correct, then I also
guess that Winchell gave it currency. [*Virgil Quinlisk, Wichita, Kansas*].


#### EPISTOLA {Virgil Quinlisk}

*Similarly, from Pyke Johnson, Jr., Old Greenwich, Connecticut*

An English equivalent might well be *after words* or
*afterword*. [*Virgil Quinlisk, Santa Barbara, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Alden Stah}

...An obvious [suggestion]... is *whistler*.  I offer this
based on the story, possibly apocryphal, that tells of Oscar
Wilde's admiring a mot of Whistler's: &ldquo;I wish I had said
that,&rdquo; said Wilde.  &ldquo;You will, Oscar.  You will.&rdquo; [*Alden Stahr, Columbia, New Jersey*].

## Unconsciously Appropriate and Inappropriate Metaphors
*Donald Hawes, North Wembly, Middlesex*

Mixed metaphors have often been collected and commented
upon, as in Eric Partridge's *Usage and Abusage*.  &ldquo;Little warning,&rdquo;
wrote Fowler in *Modern English Usage*, &ldquo;is needed
against [mixed metaphor]; it is so conspicuous as seldom to
get into speech or print undetected.&rdquo;  But what has less frequently
been observed is the unconsciously appropriate or
inappropriate metaphor, which has a certain affinity with
the &ldquo;Freudian slip.&rdquo;  Here are a few examples of what I mean.

>The artist has allowed his imagination *to run riot*.
>
>[Caption to a picture of the Gordon Riots in London,
in The Open University Course A202, Unit 2, p. 69]
>
>If, to broaden the canal to take, say, twenty per cent
more traffic, it's necessary to halve the dividend, this
will gain little favour with shareholders—that is,
until such time as a rival appears, and then shareholders
may prefer *to ditch* the canal and buy the
rival's shares.  [The Open University Course A202,
Units 5 and 6, p. 60]
>
>She has even taken a look at Boulez's music; but in
charity I will not dwell on the mess of inaccurate
facts and insensitive comments she produces *on that
score*.  [Book review in *The Times*, 25 August 1977]
>
>Fine weather brought out the traffic in the South-east
yesterday as many people drove to the coast.  Heavy
traffic started in mid-morning.  An RAC patrolman
said: &ldquo;It was as though *the floodgates had been
opened*.&rdquo;  [*The Times*, 30 August 1977]
>
>She has been &ldquo;deliberately resting&rdquo; while the surgeon
has sorted out her knee.  &ldquo;You don't want *to make a
great song and dance about it*, though, people think
you're falling to pieces,&rdquo; she says....  [*The Observer*,
28 August 1977]
>
>...the establishment of Ruskin College began (though
surely *to a smaller degree* than he suggests) to change
things for those like Jude.  [*The Times Literary
Supplement*, 9 September 1977, p. 1070]

I have noticed many more in recent years, but unfortunately
I have not made a note of them.  Their prevalence can be
estimated by the fact I collected four of the above examples
in two weeks' normal reading of periodicals.  Perhaps correspondents
to VERBATIM will be able to supply more and better
examples.  I would call this usage as much a fault as using a
mixed metaphor, since it usually has a paradoxical effect of
incongruity.  On the other hand, I must admit that I sometimes
welcome the amusement it gives me, especially when I find
it in a tedious or grandiose piece of writing.


### ADDENDA
*Deborah Storms, Evanston, Illinois*

I enjoyed Clair Schulz's whimsical article, &ldquo;We Shall
Know Them by Their Roots&rdquo; [Verbatim, IV, 2].  However,
my roots in the youth culture demand that I point out three
inaccuracies in Mr. Schulz's classifications.

First, I suggest that *The Beatles* properly belongs in the
category of band names inspired by music itself, not by insects.
Second, the group name *Ars Nova* is not a reference to
a type of star, but rather, to the style of music composition
characteristic of the fourteenth century in France and Italy.
This group's music had a decided medieval flair.  Finally, the
name *Procul Harum* certainly does not refer to a variety of
living quarters for women (in which case the latter word
would have been spelled *harem*), but instead consists of two
Latin words.  These two words translated mean &ldquo;at a great
distance/of these&rdquo;: a mysterious name for a group whose
music was considered by some teenagers back in the sixties to
be of the &ldquo;mind-bending&rdquo; variety.


#### EPISTOLA {Elizabeth Johnson Tsang}

...Some of the names were rumored to have secret meanings.
For example, *Three Dog Night* was supposed to be an Eskimo
expression: the coldness of the night was measured by how
many dogs were needed to keep warm.  *Lovin' Spoonful* was
usually explained as a junkie term for heroin heated in a spoon
before being injected.  *Moby Grape* was the punch line to an
old riddle, &ldquo;What's big and purple and swims in the ocean?&rdquo;
In the category of suggestive names, I would place *Wild
Cherry, Queen, Kinks, Kiss* (The Seat of Affections), *Hot
Tuna, Soft White Underbelly, Cream, The Tubes*, and
*Badfinger*.  Punning names include *Harper's Bizarre* and
*Mothers of Invention*.  Among my favorites are *It's a Beautiful
Day, Commander Cody and the Lost Planet Airmen, Prairie
Oyster, Steppenwolf*, and *Buffalo Springfield*. [*Elizabeth Johnson Tsang, Oakham, Massachusetts*].


#### EPISTOLA {Ken Smith}

Clair Schulz's article reminded me that I used to be
heartened when teaching in Liverpool during the '50s by the
puns which appeared in pop groups' names.  Apart from the
*Beatles*, there were the *Fourmost* and a variety of more or
less erudite groups like *Troy Dante and the Infernos, Johnnie
Kidd and the Pirates, Mark Antony and the Avengers, Dave
Sherwood and the Foresters, Bee Bumble and the Stingers*,
and *Peter Jay and the Walkers*... [*Ken Smith, Lydney, Gloucestershire*].


#### EPISTOLA {Stefan M. Silverston}

Since the article &ldquo;The Seat of Our Affections&rdquo; in *VERBATIM*
[IV, 1] cites one allusion to the nose, I thought I should mention
that the customary expression for &ldquo;X became angry at Y&rdquo;
in Old Testament Hebrew is, literally, &ldquo;X's nose burned at
Y.&rdquo;  For example, in Genesis xxx 2, And Jacob's anger was
kindled against Rachel..., and in many other places. [*Stefan M. Silverston, Nashua, New Hampshire*].

(Note the *correct* usage of &ldquo;literally.&rdquo;)

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Lexicon of Black English*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Lexicon%20of%20Black%20English%20J.%20C.%20Dillard&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20) and [*Talkin and Testifyin: The Language of Black America*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Talkin%20and%20Testifyin%3A%20The%20Language%20of%20Black%20America%20Geneva%20Smitherman&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
J. C. Dillard, (Seabury Press, New York, 1977), xiv + 199 pp. and Geneva Smitherman, (Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1977). 291 pp.

Despite major differences in focus and approach, these
two recent additions to the ever-growing literature on Black
English share certain basic assumptions about that much-debated
dialect.  In terms of its historical development, both
authors hold to (indeed Dillard is identified with) the Creolist
theory, which traces the present-day Black English vernacular
to a Plantation Creole, to a plantation-maritime pidgin,
to an African origin.  Both consequently also refute and attack
the positions of those who hold that language borrowings
and influences moved only in one direction—from the
dominant to the suppressed culture; and both are eager to
cite words in the White English lexicon whose not merely
Black but African origins have been well documented, primarily
through the work of David Dalby (e.g., *okay, hip,
cat, badmouth*).

More significantly perhaps, particularly in the case of
Dillard, is their insistence on the importance of dealing with
Black English within the context of Black social and cultural
life.  Dillard organizes his work around &ldquo;sociolinguistic domains&rdquo;
and stresses the importance of discourse over sentence
as the primary carrier of meaning.  Smitherman calls
&ldquo;style&rdquo; that whole dimension of communication beyond syntax
that conveys the message.  Each believes that the main
source of communication dysfunction between Blacks and
Whites lies not in a difference of syntax nor in a difference
of lexicon (though these differences are real) but in a difference
of discourse style—those patterns of personal linguistic
interaction integral to Black life but foreign, frequently unsettling,
and sometimes frightening to Whites.  The simplest
example of this style is the sometimes spontaneous, sometimes
formulaic or ritualistic interaction between listners and
speaker that is characteristic of Black discourse.  Most White
speakers would be insulted and distracted by precisely the
behavior that tells the Black speaker his hearers are really
with him—shouts, calls, interjections—all manifestations of
confirming or condemning comment, some linguistic, some
kinesic.

Thirdly, both Dillard and Smitherman condemn those
&ldquo;remedial programs&rdquo; based on the assumption that Blacks
are &ldquo;linguistically deprived.&rdquo;  The notion that Black children
suffer from a paucity of verbal interaction they see as patent
nonsense.  Blacks come rather from a culture rich in oral tradition,
one that uses that tradition as a continuing acculturating
medium whose wide store of tales and folk heroes is
still known to most Black children (tales whose African and
Caribbean analogues Dillard cites).  Each sees Black English
as richly metaphoric and imagistic, its speakers adept at
creative compounds and the double entendre, frequently
extraordinarily skilled in traditional verbal battles and
games which are integral to their world, a world in which
the baddest dude is often the one with the best rap.  (A
word, by the way, whose meaning in Black English differs
from the meaning it took on when assimilated into White
English.)

Having said all that, it remains to be said that these
two books are radically different and that none of the above
constitutes the main argument of either.

J. C. Dillard's *Lexicon of Black English* is not the inventory
of words and definitions the title might suggest, but
rather an apologia for a lexicon, an attempt to justify the
need for and the legitimacy of such a compilation, yet to be
made.  It is at the same time an implicit presentation of
guidelines, clues, and caveats for the would-be researchers
and compilers.

Arguing that vocabulary differences will be greatest
where cultural differences are greatest, Dillard places heavy
emphasis on the significance of conjure and root-work in the
Black experience, noting its pervasive manifestations in
blues lyrics and in folk trickster tales.  Though linguistic
transfer is greatest in areas with a high degree of interracial
contact, such as prostitution, narcotics traffic, and music,
he warns against and laments previous over-emphasis on
these areas where the yield of words of demonstrable Black
(i.e., Afro-Creole) origin is small.  Too much study has
focused on inner-city &ldquo;jive talk,&rdquo; ignoring the reality that
great numbers of Black English speakers do not know the
hustlers' terminology.

In his own research for this preliminary lexicon Dillard
relies heavily on early blues lyrics, on the work of folklorists
and anthropologists, and on unpublished materials of the
Louisiana WPA project.  The writings of Black authors are
naturally of particular interest; their comparative reliability
is assessed for the future lexicon-makers (with Richard
Wright coming out on top).  Dillard's direction is always
toward the roots of the Black experience and away from the
cultural crossover points.

These roots he finds in the sociolinguistic domains of
conjure, religion, folk tales, sexual practices, and music,
each of which he focuses on separately, while carefully noting
ties among them.  In each he finds a significant number
of words pecuilar to the Black lexicon.  These may be words
unknown to White English, or shared words whose meaning
or usage differs in Black English.  Of more than passing
cultural interest is his finding that numerous sexual terms
which White English reserves for the male, Black English
applies indiscriminately to male or female (e.g., *nut, grind,
grinder, rider, getting one's ashes hauled*).

The work is of value for those interested not only in
language, but in culture—of any color.  It succeeds in being
both readable and scholarly—no mean feat, particularly in
the field of linguistics.  Documentation is thorough and accessible,
hypotheses clearly stated as such, and even those
presentations which do get a bit convoluted for purposes of
proving his point manage to contain nuggets that make the
meandering worthwhile.  You don't have to buy the whole
argument or be a linguist to enjoy the book.

Geneva Smitherman's *Talkin and Testifyin*: The
*Language of Black America* suffers from several serious
weaknesses, chief among them a lack of focus and direction.
Its attempts to cover everything about Black English from
history to syntax, to lexicon, to its reflection of the
&ldquo;African world view,&rdquo; to discourse modes, to the identity
crises and cultural conflicts of its speakers, to teaching techniques
in inner-city schools make for much superficiality
and little substance.  Moreover, although there is no indication
that any of its chapters appear elsewhere previously,
the book reads like a hastily pieced-together pastiche of
parts of earlier essays: it is marked by overlapping, repetition,
shifts in tone and style, lack of coherence, and failure
to develop any central argument.

Despite these drawbacks, it might provide the novice a
good introductory survey to the subject, were it not for
other failings.  Ms. Smitherman digresses to the point of distraction
on subjects whose relevance to Black English is
never made clear.  Her tone varies from an emotional, attacking
one to a condescending cutesy one, with a bit of
textbook chattiness (&ldquo;Now let's look at,&rdquo; &ldquo;Check it closely&rdquo;)
thrown in for good measure.  Frequent incorporations of
Black English into her expository style usually fall flat.  And
she asks us to take a great deal on faith.  Each chapter has
footnotes, but specific statements do not.  Trying to pinpoint
the source for great numbers of her claims regarding a Black
or African origin for words and phrases is maddening (and
also, I think, impossible).  Often her implicit criterion seems
to be that she's heard an expression all her life among Black
people: hardly different from the attitude of Whites who
reject out of hand African origins of what appear to be
Americanisms of long standing.

Illustrative support is amply provided but it is frequently
too weak to support her argument, valid though that argument
might be.  She tells us, for example, that many Black
speakers are verbally clever and linguistically creative; most
language-sensitive people who have frequent contact with
Blacks would agree.  Then in support she offers prosaic, trite
sayings, retorts, and sallies that don't begin to do justice to the
vitality of Black English.  No nonbeliever will be led to the
linguistic light through her preaching.

Ms. Smitherman is at her best in the book's final
chapters, when she deals with language attitudes and the
role of the schools.  She exposes the horror of the &ldquo;educationally
patronizing and linguistically stultifying&rdquo; drill exercises
being foisted on Black children in the name of providing
them with the dominant dialect so they can &ldquo;get ahead.&rdquo;
She does a good job of taking language teachers to task for
their obsession with correctness and unconcern with effectiveness.
She's right on target with: &ldquo;The public school is the
main institution that continues to perpetuate myths and
inaccuracies about language&rdquo; [p. 191], myths that linguistics
research has long ago exploded.  Educators and language
teachers might well attend to her comments on the
problems inherent in bi-dialectalism and to her suggestions
regarding primary-level reading instruction.

Overall, however, the book remains disappointing.  It
looks distressingly like an attempt to cash in on a burgeoning
market.  Black English and its speakers deserve better.

*[Nancy LaRoche, Hartford, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Michael Berry, New York, New York}

I've always been curious about the origin of the goodby
wave *Toodle-oo*.

Now I know.  The other day I heard an English friend
say, *&Agrave; tout &agrave; I'heure!*  It came out, *Toodle-oo!*

## Humpty Dumpty's World
*Francis Griffith, Port Washington, New York*

Until a few years ago eggs were graded as small, medium,
and large.  Today, search as you will, you won't find small
eggs in any supermarket.

Small and medium are pejoratives in the lexicon of advertising
agencies.  Giant, monster, and mammoth have taken
their place.  The small tube of toothpaste is now the giant
economy size, a community gathering is a monster rally, and
a garage sale is a mammoth event.  Hens now lay only medium,
large, extra-large, and jumbo eggs.

Porno movies intended for emotionally and intellectually
stunted adolescents are labeled &ldquo;for mature audiences.&rdquo;  *Permanent*
means 'temporary,' as in *permanent wave*.  Comic
strips are dull, sadistic, or just plain stupid, but comic they
are not.  Ginger ale, once a tawny liquid with a taste of ginger
so sharp it made your eyes water, is now a pale insipid mixer
which contains about as much ginger as a welsh rabbit contains
a rabbit.

Sex, once the property of living things only, is now ascribed
to inanimate objects.  A car is advertised as a sexy import,
a shaving cream is described as masculine, and perfume
as intensely feminine.

Builders who invade a pleasant countryside, bulldoze
its trees and shrubs, cart away its topsoil, construct hundreds
of jerry-built look-alike homes, smear the earth with blacktop,
and erect garish billboards advertising their depredations
are called developers and the scarred landscape they leave
behind is called a development.

*Liberal* once meant 'humane' as opposed to 'doctrinaire.'
A liberal was one who espoused the rights of the weak, defenseless,
and poor who were incapable of speaking for themselves.
In today's world a liberal is one who advocates the
destruction of the unborn, the senile, and the incurably ill
because they are in the way.

Totalitarian oligarchies officially call themselves *democracies*
as, for example, the Democratic Republic of East
Germany or the People's Republic of China.  A *terrorist* is a
freedom fighter if we agree with his aims.  Bombing civilian
populations is called *pacification*.

*Gay* is another word whose pristine meaning has been
reversed.  Once a synonym for innocent joy, it now connotes
the morose homosexuals who, humorless and tense, gather in
sleazy bars and other public places in a mood anything but
joyful and innocent.  It has taken on such a homosexual connotation
that teachers avoid it in their classrooms.  Wordsworth's
&ldquo;A poet could not but be gay in such a jocund company&rdquo;
causes today's kids to hoot and holler.

Even the BBC avoids *gay*.  When the British ambassador
to Ireland was assassinated a couple of years ago, his friend
Sir Christopher Soames paid a spontaneous radio tribute to
him.  &ldquo;He was gay...&rdquo; said Sir Christopher in innocence and
truth.  The broadcasting officials were stunned and dropped
the awkward word when the tribute was rebroadcast.

The long-haired young people who proclaim that they
are *doing their own thing* are doing everybody else's.  Fearing
to be different, they dress alike, think alike, speak alike, act
alike.  Their common uniform is a pair of ragged denims, a
soiled T-shirt, and shabby sneakers, and they wouldn't be
found dead wearing a clean shirt, necktie, or bra.  They all
listen to the incessant pounding of the same rock bands and
the nasal shrieking of the same vocalists, and they hold the
same opinions on every subject from abortion to Zen.

Every language changes as time marches on.  Words are
created, acquire new meanings, thrive by use, and die from
disuse.  A linguistic system perishes when it no longer helps
us to see the world around us as it really is.

Many of the verbal changes occurring today obscure
reality.  Unlike those that have gone before, they are planned,
the result of a conscious effort by an individual or group to
manipulate attitudes and beliefs.  They are calculated perversions
of truth, intended to mislead and deceive.  Old words
are clothed with new and entirely opposite meanings, as in
the nazi and fascist national anthems which extolled liberty
and justice.

During the course of centuries some words have taken
on antithetical meanings.  *Let*, for instance.  Hamlet's threat
when Marcellus and Horatio try to prevent him from following
his father's spirit, &ldquo;By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him
that lets me,&rdquo; is meaningless unless we understand that in
Shakespeare's time *let* meant 'prevent,' the opposite of what
it means today except in the restricted tennis sense of *let* ball,
which the naive believe to be an illiterate corruption of *net
ball*, a variant.

Another example is *fast*, a word which is a bundle of
contradictions.  A man is fast if he is tied to a stake and unable
to move, and he is fast if he runs a hundred yards in ten
seconds.  No matter whether he is a tightwad or a spendthrift,
he is fast.  If he abstains from eating and drinking, he is said
to fast, and if he eats and drinks to excess he is said to be leading
a fast life.

But the forces which brought about the semantic alterations
of *let* and *fast* over the years are not the same as those
that have reversed the meanings of so many words today.
*Let* 'to hinder' has a different etymological origin from *let* 'to
permit.'  *Fast* developed new meanings gradually without
conscious effort on anyone's part, following a natural order.
Its original meaning was 'firm,' which suggested strength and
persistence in movement.  This led into 'to run fast', that is,
to run without slackening, which in turn introduced the notion
of rapidity.  'Living too fast,' a later development, followed
almost logically from the preceding meanings.  The resulting
contradictory significances were unplanned and normally
developed.

But many of today's reversals are deliberately contrived.
In advertisements, editorials, headlines, and in fact in any
place where language is used to influence opinions and actions,
instances can be found without too much effort.  When *large*
means 'small'; *economy* 'waste'; *mature* 'immature'; *permanent*
'temporary'; *develop* 'destroy'; *democratic* 'totalitarian';
*gay* 'glum'; *liberal* 'inhumane'; *doing your own thing* 'following
the crowd,' our language is setting the world on its
ear.  The mind reels at such semantic reversals.

We are living in a Lewis Carroll topsy-turvydom, an
environment in which language does not always correspond
with reality and where things are not always what they seem
to be.

If our image of the world is sometimes like a distorted
image in a wavy mirror, the fault, dear Brutus, is not in our
stars but in our language.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *The Way Women Write*
Mary Hiatt, (Teachers College Press, 1977), vii + 152 pp.

[Available directly from the publisher: 1234 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10027.]

This is an important, informative book that reports on
the results of the author's systematic investigation of 50 books
written by women and 50 written by men.  The conclusions,
stated in the briefest way, are that women's writing is different
from men's, but not for the reasons commonly adduced (i.e.,
word selection and tone).  As readers of VERBATIM may
already be aware, I am more concerned with style and appropriateness
of language than with &ldquo;correctness,&rdquo; and *T3W*
provides an excellent, readily understandable example of
stylistic analysis that ranges from the study of such features
as sentence length, choice of adverbs, adjectives, verbs, etc.,
to that of more subtle characteristics like structural balance,
rhetorical effectiveness, and use of similes.

The book is important because of its conclusions and
informative because in its exemplary analysis of style it is a
paragon of clarity and organization.  The analysis of style is
not a simple subject, and I know only of Louis T. Milic as
the leading academic researcher in the field.  Professor Hiatt,
author of *Artful Balance*: The *Parallel Structures of Style*
(Teachers College Press, 1975), which is not familiar to me,
has provided not only a study that is revealing but a readable
introduction for any who are interested in how style can be
analyzed: I have not seen such a clear exposition of polysyndeton,
asyndeton, and other rhetorical devices since reading
Barr's Introduction to my textbook copy of *The Orations
of Cicero* (where all the examples are, of course, in Latin).

*T3W* makes a substantial contribution to the subject of
male/female differences (*Vive!*)—if that is, indeed, a &ldquo;subject&rdquo;
—and to language analysis, both of which are often
approached by either stodgy or hysterical investigators.  The
only other sane approach I have seen is *Words and Women*,
by Casey Miller and Kate Swift [reviewed: III,2,9].  Now I
must read *Artful Balance*.

*[L. U.]*


#### EPISTOLA {K.B. Weatherals}

I was amused by Gary Felton's article in the May edition,
and should like to contribute some of my favourites to
the codified, and sometimes indistinctly perceived, laws to
which we are subject, and against which we sometimes stub
our toes:

>*Cook's constant* (my version)—a variable by which an
experimental datum has to be multiplied to result in an answer
acceptably close to the theoretical.
>
>A *glitch*—is an inherent, built-in, organic fallibility in
a design, plan, equipment or any human contrivance.
>
>*Finagle's laws*: First—The likelihood of a thing happening
is inversely proportional to its desirability.
>
>Second—Once a job is fouled up, anything done to improve
it only makes it worse.
>
>*Murphy's first law*(corollaries)—
>
>
>(1.)  It is impossible to make anything foolproof because
fools are so ingenious.
>
>(2.)  Any wire or tube cut to length will be too short.
>
>(3.)  After any machine or unit has been completely assembled,
extra components will be found on the
bench.
>
>(4.)  After the last sixteen mounting screws have been
removed from an access plate, it will be discovered
that the wrong access plate has been removed.
>
>*Lowery's law*—If it jams, force it.  If it breaks, it needed
replacing anyway.
>
>*Zumwalt's first law*—The probability of failure is directly
proportional to the number and importance of the people
watching the test.
>
>*Dobbins's law*—When in doubt, use a bigger hammer.
>
>*Everitt's form of the second law of thermodynamics*—
Confusion (entropy) is always increasing in society.  Only if
someone or something works extremely hard can this confusion
be reduced to order in a limited region.  Nevertheless,
this effort will still result in an increase in the total confusion
of society at large.
>
>*Jone's law*—The man who can smile when things go
wrong has thought of someone he can blame it on.
>
>*Matsch's maxim*—A fool in a high station is like a man
at the top of a high mountain—everything appears small to
him and he appears small to everybody.
>
>Apart from my personal contribution, all the other laws,
etc., are quoted from *Malice in Blunderland* of which the
name of the author and publisher escape me.

[*K.B. Weatherals, London, England*].


#### EPISTOLA {David L. Gold}

To Elaine Von Bruns' &ldquo;Illicit Threesomes&rdquo; can be added
*Gaza Stripper* inhabitant of the Gaza Strip. [*Haifa, Israel, Haifa, Israel*].


#### EPISTOLA {Calvin K. Towle}

Elaine Von Bruns's &ldquo;Illicit Threesomes&rdquo; [IV,1] were not
only amusing but pregnant.  As I looked at them, they gave
birth to others, right in front of my tongue:

>*down and outspoken*  recommended dress for Plain Janes  
*world warpaint*  general international mobilization  
*to hell and gonorrhea*  last stage of Byronism  
*tertiary stagecoach*  third one of the day  
*venerable sagebrush*    old bushes  
*snail's pacemaker*  yet another triumph of medical science  
*horsehide and seek*  minor league baseball

Also, like political opinions when closely examined,
some of Ms. Von B's originals changed form as they coupled
and tripled, producing new variations.  I hope the lady won't
mind these changes, which are not necessarily improvements:

>*bottlenecktie*   worn by St. Bernards in the Alps  
*bird in the handshake*   an unsigned agreement  
*scotch on the bedrocks*  alcoholic refreshment during a marital quarrel  
*draw and quarterdeck* stacked cards  
*threadbare knuckles*  John L. Sullivan in old age

More examples could be given, of course, such being
the agglutinative nature of the language.  I shall stop here,
however, lest someone accuse me of being a wordplayboy. [*Calvin K. Towle, W.W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc.*]


#### EPISTOLA {Josef Brand}

I found Elaine Von Bruns' &ldquo;Illicit Threesomes&rdquo; addictive.
Because I couldn't dropkick the habit, I'm sending along
the following:

>*Hero and Leander sandwich* snack for passengers crossing the Hellespont  
*hot dog in the manger* food given grudgingly to members of the Holy Family  
*quid pro quo vadis* answering a question with a question  
*fife and humdrum*  uninspired music  
*Koechel listing to the portside* playing Mozart while the ship goes down  
*income-uppance tax* penalty for not paying the tax in the first place  
*with might and Main Street* movie about a small-town librarian who enlists in the Marines  
*the Infra-red Army*  Soviet spy system  
*three-quarter time and tide* a waltz that waits for no man  
*pen and inkling*  a written hint

[*Josef Brand, Brooklyn, New York*].


### CORRIGENDA

Volume IV, Number 2, &ldquo;We Shall Know Them by Their
Roots&rdquo;:

>1.  *Taj Mahal* is a person, not a group.
>
>2.  *Runaways* is not &ldquo;an all-female band&rdquo; (unless the
drummer has been to a Danish surgeon lately).
>
>3.  *Booker T. and the M.G.'s* bears no reference to automobiles
since *T.* is *Booker T. Washington's* middle
initial and *M.G.'s* are members of the Memphis Group.
>
>4.  *Fleetwood Mac* is not a Cadillac on a hamburger but
a hybrid name taken from the band's rhythm section,
drummer Mick Fleetwood and bassist John McVie.

*[Joe Fusco, Menlo Park, California]*

The *Sopwith Camel* rock group is named after a World
War I biplane, and should be listed among the methods of
travel rather than among the wildlife.

*[Victoria Nowell, Chilliwack, British Columbia]*

Mr. Schulz had better brush up on his Latin if he thinks
the name *Ars Nova* an astronomical reference.  It means,
quite simply, 'New Art.'  

*[Andrew Baird, Princeton, New Jersey]*

## Schweppes, le 'drink' des gens raffin&eacute;s
*Myrna Knepler, Chicago, Illinois*

Why is it that a high priced condominium is advertised
in American newspapers as a *de luxe* apartment
while French magazines try to sell their more affluent
readers *appartements de grand standing*?  Madison Avenue,
when constructing ads for high priced non-necessary items,
may use French phrases to suggest to readers that they are
identified as super-sophisticated, subtly sexy, and privy to
the secrets of old world charm and tradition.  In recent years
French magazines aimed at an increasingly affluent public
have made equally canny use of borrowed English words to
sell their wares.

The advertising pages of the *New Yorker* and the more
elegant fashion and home decorating magazines often depend
on blatant flattery of the reader's sense of exclusiveness.  Time
and time again the reader is told &ldquo;only *you* are elegant, sophisticated,
discriminating and rich enough to use this product.&rdquo;
Of course the &ldquo;you&rdquo; must encompass a large enough
group to insure adequate sales.  Foreign words, particularly
prestigious French words, may be used to reinforce this
selling message.

French magazines often use English words in their advertising
to suggest to potential consumers a slightly different
but equally flattering self-image.  The reader is pictured as
someone in touch with new ideas from home and abroad who
has not forgotten the traditional French arts of living, but
is modern enough to approach them in a completely up-to-date
and casual manner.

Of course, each language has borrowed words from the
other which have, over the course of time, been completely
assimilated.  It is not these that the advertiser exploits but rather
words that are foreign enough to evoke appealing images of
an exotic culture.  When the French reader is urged to try
&ldquo;Schweppes, le 'drink' des gens raffin&eacute;s&rdquo; or an American consumer
is told that a certain manufacturer has &ldquo;the *savoir faire*
to design *la cr&egrave;me de la cr&egrave;me* of luxurious silky knits,&rdquo; the
foreign words do not say anything that could not be as easily
said by native ones.  What they do convey is something else.
They invite the reader to share in the prestige of the foreign
language and the power of the images associated with that
language's country of origin.

In each country a knowledge of the other's language is
an important sign of cultivation.  Today, English is the language
studied by an overwhelming majority of French students,
and the ability to speak it well is increasingly valued
as a symbol of prestige as well as a marketable skill.  Despite
the decrease in foreign language study in the United States,
French has maintained its reputation as a language people
ought to know.  Adding a few obviously foreign words from
the prestige language not only increases the prestige of the
product itself but also flatters the reader by reminding him
that he has enough linguistic talent to understand what is being
said.  As in the &ldquo;only-*you*-are-elegant, -sophisticated, -discriminating-and-rich-enough&rdquo;
appeal, the advertiser must be careful
not to exclude too many potential customers, and the
foreign expressions are usually transparent cognates or easily
understood words.  A French reader may be urged to buy cigarettes
by being told that &ldquo;partout dans le monde c'est YES &agrave;
Benson and Hedges&rdquo; while the *New Yorker* reader can consider
a vacation on &ldquo;an island [off the coast of South Carolina]
where change hasn't meant commercialism, and tranquillity
still comes *au naturelle*.&rdquo;

Even monolinguals are not excluded from this flattery.
The word can be given in the foreign language and then translated;
the reader is still in on the secret: &ldquo; 'go&ucirc;t' is the French
word for taste and Christolfe is the universal word for taste
in vases.&rdquo;

The prestige of a foreign term and its possible ambiguity
for the reader may serve to disguise a negative fact about the
product.  A necklace of Perle de Mer advertised in an American
magazine is not composed of real pearls made by nature
in the sea but of simulated pearls produced by a large American
manufacturer.  By the same token, when a French advertisement
for a packaged tour offers &ldquo;aller et retour en classe
coach&rdquo; the prestige of the English word *coach* disguises the
fact that it is the less luxurious form of airline transportation
that is being offered.

But the most important function of borrowed words in
advertising is to project an image of their country of origin
in order to create for the reader the illusion that the product,
and by implication its user, will share in the good things suggested
by that image.  French names like *Grand Prix, Coupe
De Ville*, and *Monte Carlo* attached to American car models
help the advertiser to get across the message that the car is
luxurious, sophisticated, and elegantly appointed and that
driving such an automobile reflects positively on the taste of
its potential owner.  In almost all cases French names are reserved
for the more expensive models while American words
are favored for small meat-and-potatoes cars like *Charger,
Maverick, Pinto* and *Bronco*.  Similarly, the French reader
is likely to encounter a large number of American technical
terms in ads for appliances, radio and television equipment,
cameras, and &ldquo;gadgets de luxe,&rdquo; since the manufacturer benefits
by associating American mechanical skill with his products.
An advertisement for French-made hi-fi equipment
appearing in a French magazine spoke of the product's
&ldquo;push-pull ultra lin&eacute;aire, 6 haut-parleurs, 2 elliptiques et 4
tweeters ... mont&eacute;s sur baffle.&rdquo;

Images, which are used again and again, are often based
on myths of the other country's culture.  Words like *tomahawk*
and *trading posts* are used in French advertisements to evoke
images of a western-movie America of naturalness, freedom,
and adventure in order to sell products like &ldquo;Chemise de 'cow
girl,' &rdquo; &ldquo;bottes Far West,&rdquo; and vests in the style of &ldquo;Arizona
Bill,&rdquo; irrespective of the real West that is or was.  The name
*Monte Carlo* attached to an American-made car trades on
the American consumer's image of a once-exclusive vacation
spot, now available as part of low-cost travel packages.  Thus
the name *Monte Carlo* can convey to an automobile a prestige
that the real trip to Monte Carlo has long since lost.

Those images that are not completely mythic are usually
gross stereotypes of the other country's culture.  Few Americans
would recognize the image of American life presented
in French advertising—a new world filled with eternally
youthful, glamourously casual, up-to-date men and women
devoted to consuming the products of their advanced technology.
Similarly, few French men and women would recognize
the nation of elegant and knowing consumers of food,
wine, and sophisticated sex pictured in American ads.

The image of France as a nation of lovers, bold yet unusually
subtle in their relations with the opposite sex, is often
called upon to sell perfume and cosmetics, sometimes of French
origin but packaged and advertised specifically for the American
market.  An ad which appeared several years ago in the
*New Yorker* showed a bottle of perfume labeled &ldquo;voulez-vous&rdquo;
implanted next to a closeup of a sexy and elegant woman,
her face shadowed by a male hand lighting her cigarette.  The
text: &ldquo;The spark that starts the fire.  Voulez-vous a new perfume.&rdquo;
*Audace, Robe d'un Soir*, and *Je Reviens* are other
perfumes advertised in American magazines with pictures
and copy that reinforce the sexual suggestiveness of the prominently
featured French name on the label.

It may be surprising for Americans to learn that English
names are given to perfumes sold in France to enhance their
romantic image.  *My Love, Partner*, and *Shocking* are some
examples.  Advertisements for French-made men's cosmetics
in French magazines may refer to products such as *l'aftershave*
and *le pre-shave*.  Givenchy's *Gentleman* is advertised to
Frenchmen as an eau de toilette for the man who dares to
appear at business lunches in a turtleneck sweater and has
the courage to treat love in a casual manner.

The recent swelling of the list of Americanisms used in
French advertising and in French speech has pained many
Frenchmen and has even caused the government to take action.
For a number of years the leader in this &ldquo;war against
anglicisms&rdquo; has been Ren&eacute; Etiemble, a professor at the Sorbonne.
Etiemble, through magazine articles, radio and television
appearances and his widely read book, *Parlez-vous
franglais?*, struggles vehemently against what he most often
refers to as an &ldquo;invasion&rdquo; of American terms.  He does little
to disguise his strong anti-American sentiments.  American
words are rejected as agents of a vulgar American culture
and both are seen as threats to the French way of life.  According
to Etiemble &ldquo;[the] heritage of words [is the] heritage of
ideas: with *le twist* and *la s&eacute;gr&eacute;gation, la civilisation cocol-coolique*,
the American manner of not living will disturb and
contaminate all that remains of your cuisine, wines, love and
free thought.&rdquo;  It would be difficult to find a stronger believer
in the power of words than Etiemble.

In response to the concerns of Etiemble and others, a
series of committees composed of highly placed French scientists
and language experts were charged with the task of
finding Gallic equivalents for such popular terms as *le meeting,
le marketing, le management*, and *le know-how*.  The
recommended replacements are: *la r&eacute;union, la commercialisation,
la direction*, and, of course, *le savoir faire*.  The replacements
do not seem to have taken root.

At the end of 1975 a more radical step was taken.  The
French National Assembly passed a law banning the use of
all foreign words in advertising in those cases in which a
native alternative has been officially suggested, and instituting
a fine against violators.

Both Etiemble and the government purists rely strongly
on the &ldquo;logical&rdquo; argument that most loan words are not needed
because there already exists a native equivalent with exactly
the same meaning.  Yet a look at the advertising pages of
French and American magazines will show that borrowed
words are used again and again when there are obvious native
equivalents.  Certainly the English words in &ldquo;c'est YES &agrave; Benson
and Hedges&rdquo; and &ldquo;Le 'drink' des gens raffin&eacute;s&rdquo; could be translated
without loss of literal meaning—but they are not.

It is precisely because of the connotations associated with
the culture of its country of origin, not its denotations, that
advertisers find the borrowed word attractive.


### OBITER DICTA: *Public Servants*
*Noel Perrin, Darthmouth College*

The names of our governmental institutions are too opaque.
Almost every one of them is Latin in origin, the real meaning
hidden in that utterly alien speech.  This gives them a false
grandeur.  We have a president.  What's that?  The first man
of a company, a college, the country.  But where does it come
from?  From *sideo, sidere* 'to sit,' and *pre*- 'in front.'  We really
have a Sits-in-Front.  Just another chairperson.

We have a city of Washington, where he does his ruling.
This city is known to everyone who presides over a TV set as
The Nation's Capital.  A resounding phrase, and meant to be.
But what's its origin?  *Nation*: from *natus* 'to be born, to be a
native.'  *Capital*: from *caput* 'a human head.'  The Headplace
of the Natives.  Just what explorers were constantly finding
in nineteenth-century Africa.

One day a year, to keep our leaders modest, all governmental
names should be rendered into English.  Then we
would remember that a *senator* is nothing but a *senex* 'an old
man' —and *Congress* itself just a bunch of old folks shuffling
along.  *Con* 'with' and *gradi, gressus* 'step.'  The 95th Step-Together.
An *ambassador*, for all his diplomatic immunity
and social pretension, we would recognize as own brother
to the butler.  The word comes eventually from Gothic *andbahti*
'service' cognate with Gallo-Latin *ambactus* 'a servant
or vassal.'

Most of all, we could reflect on the FBI.  *Federal*, from
*foedus*, a league or treaty.  *Bureau* from French *bureau* now
meaning an 'office' but once meaning an 'office desk,' and
before that a 'cloth to be spread on a desk.'  It in turn from
Old French *burel* 'woolen cloth,' and that from Latin *burra*
'a shaggy garment, sheep shearings, coarse hair for stuffing.'
*Investigation*, from *vestigare* 'to track.'  (*Vestigium* means a
'footprint.')  The League of Desk Cloths Used for Tracking
Down.

## My Grandmother's &ldquo;Spaghetta&rdquo;
*Charles L. Todd, Hamilton College*

My Grandmother Todd, who died at ninety-one in
1944, was no bigot, but like many Yankees who
settled in New York State's westernmost county, Chautauqua,
she was uncomfortable with words and proper names that
sounded &ldquo;foreign&rdquo; to her, especially when they originated
with the Italians and Poles who settled in that rich grapegrowing
area.  For instance, words ending in the short Italianate
&ldquo;i&rdquo; she would &ldquo;prettify&rdquo; with a broad &ldquo;a.&rdquo;  Whenever
she cooked up a &ldquo;mess&rdquo; of spaghetti or macaroni, it immediately
became &ldquo;spaghetta&rdquo; and &ldquo;macarona&rdquo; (that word &ldquo;mess,&rdquo;
by the way, was usually associated with the bullheads I brought
in from the Cassadage lakes, or the dandelion and cowslip
greens I picked in the early spring).  Oddly enough, the nearby
towns of Laona and Fredonia, became &ldquo;Lay-ony&rdquo; and &ldquo;Free-dony,&rdquo;
just as Cousin Sarah and Aunt Louisa became &ldquo;Sary&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Louisy.&rdquo;  I have long pondered these little linguistic aberrations
of my grandmother, and I finally, somehow, reached
the conclusion that those broad &ldquo;a's&rdquo; she reserved for the foreign
words and names were part of the ethnocentricity
which often crops up in rural (especially Yankee) America—
an attempt to elevate the speech of the newcomers.  While
Benito Mussolini was making Italian trains run on time and
seemed like a respectable, though noisy, fellow, he was &ldquo;Mr.
Mussolina&rdquo; to Grandmother, but when he began to act up
in Ethiopia, and became a pal of that man Hitler, she went
back to &ldquo;Mussolini&rdquo; —hitting hard on the &ldquo;eenie.&rdquo;  We had
a young &ldquo;Eye-talian&rdquo; boy, named Luigi Petronelli who used
to help out during the haying season.  He was a good hand
at &ldquo;mowing away,&rdquo; and Grandmother always had a glass of
ice cold, pure Concord grape juice waiting for us between
loads.  Luigi, however, would retire to his old Model A where
he had stashed away a bottle of wine.  Having a keen sense
of smell, Grandmother soon caught on, and would go to the
back door and call out &ldquo;Luiga Petronella—you come in here
and drink what's good for you!&rdquo;  Luigi never tried to straighten
her out about his name, but he was adamant about the unfermented
grape juice.  Grandmother was very fond of the
&ldquo;Opry&rdquo; programs which came to us via radio on Saturday
afternoons, and one of her favorite singers was &ldquo;Giovanna
Martinella.&rdquo;  Not even the mellifluent Milton Cross, whose
Italian came so trippingly off the tongue, had any effect on
her determination to make those &ldquo;Eye-talian&rdquo; names more
elegant.

The same treatment was accorded the Polish people who
moved into nearby Dunkirk to work in the steel mills, and
who occasionally went into vegetable farming in Chautauqua
County.  She liked the morning polka hour on Buffalo's radio
station, WGR, sponsored by Dom Polski (a national Polish
group), but Dom Polski invariably became &ldquo;Dom Polska.&rdquo;
I might add that she was delighted to learn that Polaski, N.Y.,
where Cousin Sary lived was prounounced Polas-sky, &ldquo;the
way it should be.&rdquo;  My friend, Ed Roski, whose father was
injured in the steel mill, became &ldquo;that poor Rosk-eye boy.&rdquo;

We had few people of French descent in the area, but
they had long accepted the fact that all &ldquo;er&rdquo; endings, as far
as Grandmother and her fellow Yankees were concerned,
sounded just like that—and nothing more.  &ldquo;Neighbor Bellanger,&rdquo;
for example, tried hard for a few years to hang on to
&ldquo;Bellan-jay,&rdquo; but it was no use.  The same thing happened,
of course, to that &ldquo;Frenchy&rdquo; actor Charles Boyer, whom
Grandmother used to see occasionally on the movie screen
in Fredonia, and also to that other Frenchy, &ldquo;Morris Chevaleer,&rdquo;
of whom she disapproved.  Some of her Fredonia
friends had been to &ldquo;gay Paree&rdquo; and knew better—but Grandmother
said they were &ldquo;putting on airs.&rdquo;  All this made life
difficult for me when I returned from my college French
classes and told her her new silk crepe scarf that she wore
over her hat was not called &ldquo;Georgietta,&rdquo; but rather &ldquo;Georgette.&rdquo;
She would immediately remonstrate that &ldquo;Georgietta&rdquo;
was the more elegant way of saying it, and it often reminded
me of the way in which she crooked her little finger when
she lifted up her cup of tea.  I am told by one of my linguist
friends that this might be called &ldquo;hyperurbanism,&rdquo; but I'm
not sure that it isn't simply linguistic ethnocentricity, or perhaps
even a form of xenophobia.  I strongly suspect that native
Cape Codders and Nantucketers are similarly affected
when the mainlander folks stream in during the summer
months.  I also recall vividly the nudging and grinning that
went on when I spoke in the Morganville, Kansas, town hall
one night and came out with &ldquo;to-mah-to&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;ta-mayta,&rdquo;
and got equally careless with my &ldquo;eithers&rdquo; and &ldquo;neithers.&rdquo;
I should have been more careful since the chairman of that
meeting had informed me previously that the town was
founded by one Morgan, Captain of a Yankee Clipper, who
chose his future residence because it was &ldquo;the futhest place
in the good old U.S.A. away from both the oceans.&rdquo;

I think what actually got me started on all this is my
name &ldquo;Lafe,&rdquo; pronounced as in &ldquo;safe.&rdquo;  Most of the letters I
get from strangers who don't know any better are addressed
to &ldquo;Lief&rdquo; Todd, indicating sound Nordic origins.  But, alas,
this isn't true, for &ldquo;Lafe&rdquo; is what my Yankee forefathers contrived
out of Lafayette, who visited Fredonia, New York,
during his triumphal tour of the Eastern states in 1825.  My
grandmother's mother was invited onto the platform after
he spoke; managed a graceful curtsey, and had her hand kissed
by the gallant Frenchman.  Great-grandfather, I am told, got
the giggles and kidded her about it for years, but Greatgrandmother
was overwhelmed, and named her first boy
child after the General—a name inherited by my father and
myself and several others in the family.  Naturally, Lafayette,
as a &ldquo;Frenchy&rdquo; would pronounce it, couldn't survive in
Yankeeland, so it became &ldquo;Lay-fay-ette&rdquo;—with, thank heaven,
no final broad &ldquo;a&rdquo; as in &ldquo;Georgetta.&rdquo;  But that final &ldquo;ette&rdquo;
sounded too feminine for a boy-child, so it was quickly reduced
to &ldquo;Lafe.&rdquo;  The same vowel transformation took place
in most small villages named after the great Frenchman,
though oddly enough most big city streets and hotels bearing
the name went unscathed.  Try asking a Throughway attendant
how to get to &ldquo;Fye-etteville&rdquo; in New York State!  It has
always been a great boon to me incidentally to know that
the State of Arkansas boasts a town named &ldquo;Lafe,&rdquo; but I am
less happy when I read regional novels, mostly about the southwestern
mountain country, and find the village idiot named
&ldquo;Lafe.&rdquo;  Why not Zeke, or Luke?

The city-bred mother of a great-uncle of mine went the
whole hog, as Grandmother put it, and named a son, &ldquo;Marquis
de Lafayette Todd,&rdquo; with all the right sounds in it.
Years later, however, he was reminded by his congressman
out in California that titles of nobility are not used in democratic
America.  My great-uncle, totally unperturbed, went
to court and had his name changed to Marcus de Lafayette,
frequently shortened to &ldquo;M.D.L.&rdquo;  Todd.  But Grandmother
taught me to call him &ldquo;Uncle Lafe,&rdquo; and I did.

I once got up the courage to ask Grandmother why she
said &ldquo;spaghetta&rdquo; and &ldquo;macarona.&rdquo;  She looked puzzled for a
moment, and then exclaimed, &ldquo;Why, Land o' Goshen, I guess
I just spleen against eating those Eye-talian sounding things!&rdquo;
As for &ldquo;Georgietta&rdquo; she simply allowed it sounded silkier and
prettier that way!  I must have been at least ten years old, by
the way, before I learned that her favorite expletive wasn't
&ldquo;Atlantic Ocean!&rdquo;

Cheers & *JEERS*

Have you noticed how advertising copywriters have
recently been attracted to the &ldquo;clever&rdquo; use of *double
entendre*?  Some of the visual and textual puns are apt, others
emerge as what we must call &ldquo;bent metaphors.&rdquo;  To wit:

'Who could make light of themselves better?&rdquo;  [Benson &
Hedges 100's Lights.]

&ldquo;Get a leg up.&rdquo;  [*Time*; accompanying a picture of flamingos,
one with its leg tucked up.]

&ldquo;Get the Big Apple and the Big Avocado in one bite.&rdquo;
[*New York/New West*; no amount of research has turned up
any evidence that California is ever referred to as &ldquo;the Big
Avocado.&rdquo;]

Christmas jeer: &ldquo;In the holiday spirit of giving, Barney's
is happy to give you Sundays 'til Christmas to shop.&rdquo;
[Advt. in *N.Y. Times*.]

&ldquo;Custom Calibration—exclusive technological breakthrough
enables the wearer to personally accurize the
watch to one's own unique lifestyle to an accuracy of less
than 10 seconds per year ... without the use of tools or the
need to open the case.&rdquo;  [Advt. in *Wall St. Journal* by
Hammacher Schlemmer for a solar-powered watch; that is,
if your lifestyle calls for getting up an hour after you should,
arrive 45 minutes late for appointments and 15 minutes
early for cocktails.  —Daniel James, Ivoryton, Ct.]


#### EPISTOLA {Walter Newman}

Eric Partridge is doubly mistaken in his &ldquo;A Dictionary
Of Catch Phrases&rdquo; [IV, 3].

The correct wording of the catch phrase is *not* &ldquo;After
you, my dear Alphonse —no, after you, Gaston.&rdquo;  It is &ldquo;After
you, my dear Alphonse—no, after you, my dear Gaston.&rdquo;

It is *not* Canadian in origin.  It originated in a Hearst
(King Features) comic strip called, &ldquo;Happy Hooligan.&rdquo;  The
cartoonist was F. Opper.  It appeared all through the 1920s
and into the 1930s.

Alphonse and Gaston were two supporting players in
the strip's cast of characters.  They were very dapper Frenchmen
(top hats, frock coats, moustaches and imperials like
Napoleon III).  So courteous were they that in moments of
extreme danger to themselves they would forgo escape in
order to invite each other to go first.

Opper originated another phrase that had a short vogue
just before the 1920s: &ldquo;And her name was Maude.&rdquo;  Maude
was a mule in one of his strips.

And *you*, I regret to say, are mistaken in calling *Where
was Moses when the lights went out?*  an early 20c. riddle.
It can be found in &ldquo;Huckleberry Finn&rdquo; by Mark Twain
(Chapter XVII), a novel copyrighted in 1884.  And it reads
as though it had originated long before that. [*Walter Newman, Sherman Oaks, California*].


#### EPISTOLA {Raymond S. Brown, M.D.}

In Eastern Virginia, in Mobjack Bay country near
Williamsburg, where the York River meets the Chesapeake
Bay, is a small band of folk known as Guineamen who speak
a dialect that is said to be similar to Elizabethan English.
The legend is that these people are descendents of deserters
from Cornwallis' army at the time of the surrender.  H.L.
Mencken, in *The American Language, Supplement Two,*
gives a similar explanation (p. 224).  The difficulty with this
theory is that there are no Hessian or German names in the
community, as would be expected if the persons who came
to Guinea were the rank and file of Cornwallis' army, who
were mercenaries from Hesse.

In Michael Pearson's book *Those Damned Rebels*, a history
of the Revolutionary War from the point of view of the
British, an interesting fact was noted (p. 397).  When Cornwallis
found that help was not going to arrive because the French
fleet under DeGrasse had barricaded the British from rescuing
him and his army, he decided to make a forced march north
to join up with other British troops.  He assembled boats and
his choice of the assembled troops, and the assumption here
is that the troops chosen to accompany him would be primarily
British.  They attempted on October 16, 1781, to cross
the York River to Gloucester to head north but &ldquo;a York River
storm came up&rdquo; [having been in several York River storms, I
know that they can be devastating] and many of the boats
were blown down the river to the area that is now Guinea.
The men in these boats would have been British and would
have had a community of interests to hold them together.

Cornwallis sued for surrender the next day.  The troops
at Yorktown were soon moved to Williamsburg and subsequently
west into the Valley of Virginia, where the security
seems to have become lax.  Many of these troops remained
in the valley, especially in the Charlottesville area, and there
we do find some German dialects and many German and
Hessian names.

The British soldiers who landed at what is now Jenkins'
Neck, in Guinea, had no difficulty in settling down.  Having
a common background, similar interests, and a probable fear
of being taken as prisoners of war, they are assumed to have
remained in the area and to have maintained in this isolated
part of the country their dialect, which they brought from
England.  As the country government became more organized
and was able to demand payment of taxes from these people,
they paid them in the coin with which they had been paid
by Cornwallis: guineas; hence they became &ldquo;Guineamen.&rdquo;

The principal surnames of those who still speak this dialect
are Brown, Smith, West, Jenkins, Hall, Robins, Rowe,
Belvin and Shackelford.  With the advent of the central school
system, radio, and television, the dialect is fast disappearing
and probably not more than two or three hundred people
speak it today. [*Raymond S. Brown, M.D., Gloucester, Virginia*]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v4n4_1978-02)