--- 
title: "VOL V, No 1 [May, 1987]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Tosspots and Wraprascals
*Andrew E. Norman, Palisades, New York*

One of the English language's most colorful and expressive
techniques for forming nouns seems to have
passed out of fashion over the last century or two.  As defined
by Professor Leon Lipson of Yale Law School, who introduced
me to this word category in 1973, such nouns are composed of
a transitive verb followed by its direct object and denote the
implicit subject of the verb.  I call them &ldquo;tosspots.&rdquo;

Even the most straightforward, practical &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; bristle
with energy and imagery in comparison with commoner
types of composite nouns—*breakwater, scarecrow, pickpocket,
shearwater* (a bird that flies swiftly and smoothly a few
inches above the surface of the sea).  A *toothpick* has its
primary purpose built into its name, but it is just as likely to
be stuck into a canap&eacute;, whereas a *picktooth* springs into action
as one utters the word.  A *flycatcher* 'bird' knows its job
and will do it when it has to, but a *catchfly* 'plant' vibrates
with lethal greed.  A *circuitbreaker* is obviously designed to
perform its function, but can one rely on it?  A *break-circuit*
will do what it says, no doubt about it.  A *screwdriver* promises
results but neither tells how it will put the screw in place
nor offers to remove it if necessary, while a *turnscrew* tells its
whole story.

These qualities of energy, imagery and succinctness
make &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; ideal for invective, frequently with a humorous
twist.  Here are some particularly rich categories:

Troublemakers: *scapegrace* 'wild and unprincipled,'
*rakehell* 'lewd and dissolute,' *scarebabe* (*-bairn* in Scotland),
*drawblood, flingbrand, blowcoal, makebate* (as in 'debate'),
*stirpassion* and *stirstrife* (why the wildflower *loosestrife* is accused
of this propensity I know not), *spitfire* and *shitefire*
(though not *strikefire*, which is high-proof gin).  *Fusspot* may
be read either as 'potfusser' or as 'pot of fuss'; similarly, *fuss-budget*.
Such ambiguities are the spice of &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; hunting.

Criminals: *cutthroat, cutpurse, suckpurse* (extortionist),
*burngrange* (a rural specialist; Absalom ignited Joab's fields
just to attract his attention), *drawlatch, pickpocket*, and
*picklock* (which is also a tool, and if one could find a *pick-wick*
nowadays those Zippo lighters would last forever).
*Stretch-halter* and *stretch-hemp* (and *stretch-neck*, for which
the *OED* cites only Conan Doyle's *The White Company*)
clearly signify wishful thinking by the speaker, but a *stretchrope*
is only a bellringer, and *Stretchlegs* is a personification
of Death.  Frustration of justice is implied by *scapegallows,
slipgibbet*, and *sliphalter*.  A *lickhalter* is just a knavish wag.

Flatterers and toadies: *scrapeshoe, clawback*, and *scratch-book,
suckfist, pickthank(s), lickspittle* (also*-spit*) and, possibly,
*flattercap*, though perhaps only when he is gushing over
millinery.

Parasites: *lickladle, -box, -dish, -platter, -trencher*, and
*-spigot* (not to be confused with a *suckspigot*, who comes
later).

Contempt for extremes seems to be inherent in the form.
If one bends over backwards to avoid such epithets as *spend-,
slip-* or *slidethrift, spillgood*, or *scattergood*, one incurs hostile
mutters of *sparethrift* or *sparegood, scrapepelf* or *scrape-good,
pinchfist* or *skinflint* (also *flay*- or *fleaflint*), *pinchgut*
(usually reserved for a ship's purser), *scrapescall* or *pinch-,
scrape-, spare-, scratch-* or surprisingly, *sharepenny* (*share* =
'shear').  But a *lickpenny* is something that costs too much (as
in &ldquo;Law is a *lickpenny*, Mr. Tyrrell,&rdquo; in Scott's *St. Ronan's*).
And *catchpennies* are cheap goods priced for quick sale.

Join your friends in a drink or two, and if you're not a
*tosspot* or *blowpot*, you're a *suckpint, suckspigot, suckbottle*,
or *blowbottle*.  Abstain, and you're a *drink-water* (not a *catch-water*
nor yet a *spurnwater*, which are both kinds of ship's
scuppers).

Heap a second helping on your plate and provoke a chorus
of *stretchgut, fillbelly, lickfingers, flapsauce*, or *stopsauce*.
Make a mess, and you're a *spillbread*.  A *spurncow*, however,
is neither a dieter nor a vegetarian but a cattleherder (as in
*cowpoke*; *spurn* = 'spur').  And a *fillpot* is neither a glutton
nor a sot: the *OED* gives it, along with *filldike* and *fillknag*,
as an epithet for the weatherful month of February.

Truly the &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; is harsh on flattercaps and short on
flattery.  It makes our most dedicated healer a *sawbones*,
Heifetz or Menuhin a *scrapeguts*.  It gives us *killjoy* and
*spoilsport* (a *stopgamble* is not a *spoilsport* but the act of one,
just as *lickfoot* is the act of a *lickspit*).  It ridicules the *tattletale*
or *telltale* (which can also be a piece of cloth or yarn tied to
rigging to indicate apparent wind direction) and the *rattletrap*
or *claptrap*, to which I should like to add the *wagjaw*.
It exposes the shirking *scrimshank*, who presumably preserves
his legs from unnecessary exertion.  A *suckegg* may be either
an avaricious person or a weasel, or just a young person.  A
*cracktryst* cannot be relied on, a *lackwit* should not be listened
to, and a *choplogic* should be avoided altogether.  *Smell-fungus*
was Sterne's pseudonym for Smollett; it was later used
by such writers as Washington Irving and Frances Trollope
for grumbling *findfaults* in general.

Not every &ldquo;tosspot's&rdquo; connotation is derogatory, of
course.  *Burnewin* is not a *wajgaw* but a blacksmith (*win* =
'wind').  A butcher is a *killbuck* or *killcalf*.  A *chafewax* sealed
the Lord Chancellor's documents until the post was abolished
in 1852.  *Screw* better expresses prisoners' attitudes toward
their guards than the literal and neutral *turnkey*.  Nor is the
*daredevil* inherently evil, though less than unalloyed admiration
is implied in *tossplume*, *dashbuckler* or *swashbuckler*.
(Note that *buckler* = 'shield.'  The corruptly back-formed
verb *swashbuckle* suggests that Errol Flynn buckled a swash.)
Simple respect is so ill at ease in the &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; form that I have
found only two examples, both obsolete: *shunthank(s)* and
*speaktruth*.

As for &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; that exclusively denote women, all I
have found accuse them of immoral behavior: *flingdust* and
*flingstink*, and the milder *shaketail* and *wagtail* (which is also
the name of a bird that performs the gesture in a less suggestive
manner).

Rounding out the human &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; are three interesting
foreigners.  A *catchpoll* or -*pole* was originally a *chasepoll*, a
borrowed French witticism equating a tax collector's pursuit
of his prey with a farmer's pursuit of his chickens ('poules').
Also from the French comes *fain&eacute;ant* for 'do-nothing,' though
there appears to have been some false etymology at work in
this case—the original was *faignant*, a simple present participle.
Finally, *shunfield* ('battlefield,' that is) is attributed to
Hobbes, who coined it to translate *phugoptolemos* in the
*Odyssey*.  (A *shunpike* is not a person but a free road that
parallels a toll road.)

There is a cluster of &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; beginning with *make*-,
some of which do or can refer to persons, but their backs are
often broken by hyphens, and a first-class &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; retains a
hyphen only to clarify pronunciation (e.g. *drop-piss, stretch-halter*).
In one or more of the *OED*, *Webster's 2nd* and the
*Random House Dictionary*, I have found *make-ado, -belief,
-faith, -fire, -fray, -game, -king, -law, -mirth, -peace, -shame,
-sport, -talk*, and -*way.  Makeweight* is not given a hyphen,
whereas *make-work* and *make-rime* are; what ties them together
is that they do only what they are said to do—any secondary
function forfeits the name.  In contrast, *makeshifts*
perform innumerable functions.

Several plants and animals, in addition to those already
mentioned, have earned &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; names for various reasons,
usually strikingly apparent and often quite whimsical.  Several
varieties of grass are called *dropseed*, but only stangury is
*drop-piss*.  I have never grown *stonecrop*; now that I know it
as *prickmadam* I am tempted to try.  *Breakstone* and *break-bones*
are straight translations of 'saxifrage' and 'ossifrage' (or
perhaps the other way' round?).  Among the birds may be observed
the *scaredevil* (a swift) and the *dipears* (I wonder; I
have never seen a bird's ears), and the nicely contrasting cases
of the *turnstone* (which does) and the *killdeer* (which doesn't
but says it does).  The *whippoorwill* would merit special status
among &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; because of its tucked-in adjective if one
could be sure it was falsely boasting of its own obsessive
sadism rather than odiously begging somebody else to do it or
even, perhaps, reporting a crime.  There are two fish, the
*suckstone* ('remora') and the *jumprock* (another sucker, native
to the southeastern U.S.), and a worm, the *lockdor*.  *Spincop*
is a pleasant name for the spider, though perhaps inferior
to 'webster' (see Michael Innes's *The Spider Strikes*).  The only
quadruped I have found besides the *suckegg* ('weasel') is the
Indian elephant in the elegant, if hyphenated, role of *carry-castle*.

The &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; is heavily indebted to mariners.  In addition
to the birds, fish, and objects noted above, it has given us
*dreadnaught* (or - nought) for a formidable ship or war; *stop-water*,
a *makeshift* devised when proper caulking is impossible;
*cutwater*, which is not only a bird but the bow of a ship,
or a rope or cable in front of it, or a construction on the upstream
side of a bridge; and *halyard*, the rope that hauls up a
sail—sails having been attached to *yardarms* when ships were
square-rigged.

The rest of my collection are scattered all over the
language.  After a hearty *breakfast*, one may seize one's *carryall,
holdall*, or *catchall* and board a *jerkwater*, which was a
train that stopped frequently to do just that, consequently
becoming an adjective for towns so benighted that no train
could be expected to stop there for any other purpose.
*Lacklustre* is strictly an adjective in the U.S., but it is acceptable
as a noun for such a condition in England, where *stick-jaw*
is gummy candy, a *spitfrog* is a small sword and a
*lockspit* is a trench no wider than the tool it is dug with, used
to mark ('lock') the turf ('spit') either to assert a legal claim or
to guide the diggers.  *Breakneck* is also usually met as an adjective,
but as a noun it means either a fall of that kind or a
place likely to produce one.  A *drawstop* on an organ does
what it claims.  And a *scarefly* is either a device or an epithet
for Jupiter or Beelzebub, according to the *OED*.

Any &ldquo;tosspot&rdquo; hunter is sure to chase up blind alleys.
Among those that have deceived me: *tipstaff* (he may do it,
but his title comes from the metal tip on his staff), *quitclaim*
(surprisingly, 'claim' is the verb; *quit* = 'quits' or 'even'),
*bobtail* and *bangtail* (*bob* and *bang* = 'crop,' and these are
just bobbed examples of humdrum past participle formations),
and *lockjaw* (not conclusively eliminated, but 'locked
jaw' is given as an alternative form).

There are more than enough pleasant surprises, however,
to keep one's spirits high.  Deep from the subconscious
suddenly leaps *stickum!*  A stray puzzle supplies *wraprascal*, a
voluminous cloak that could conceal a sword or bludgeon—
and leaves one wondering whether a *crossword* does what it
says or merely tells the solver to do it.

This is a serious problem in the world of games.  *Spoilfive*
is legitimate, I think, for it is the rules that do the spoiling if a
specified sequence of cards does not appear.  In the 20th century
sport of *crinklefender*, too, I am persuaded that the
game, not the player, is the subject of the verb.  I fear the
reverse is true in *leapfrog, shove-ha'penny, drawgloves* and
*blowpoint* (a relative of darts).  The names of these games are
really directions to the players, like 'pick-up-sticks' and 'capture
the flag.'  Nor is *sweepstakes* a &ldquo;tosspot,&rdquo; because the race
does not sweep the stakes, the winner does (or used to, before
changing social mores added shares for second, third and
fourth).

Perhaps the best thing to do with &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; is to make up
new ones.  The champion is undoubtedly James Thurber, who
enriched his beloved language with some twenty-four in one
short article called &ldquo;Do You Want to Make Something Out of
It?&rdquo; (included in *Thurber Country* and *Alarums and Diversions*).
His contributions range from the *grabcheck* ('a big
spender, a generous fellow') to the *tossgraver* ('an eloper... a
*grablass*') and the *smackwindow* (the common June bug, or
*bangsash*).  It was here that Thurber introduced the unforgettable
&ldquo;*kissgranny*.  1.  A man who seeks the company of older
women, especially older women with money... 2.  An over-affectionate
old woman, a *hugmoppet*, a *bunnytalker*&rdquo; and
&ldquo;*pressgrain*.  A man who tries to make whiskey in his own
cellar; hence, a secret drinker, a *hidebottle*, a *sneakslug*.&rdquo;
What makes Thurber's achievement even more remarkable is
that he was not consciously coining &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo;; he was losing
sleep trying to think of words with specific letter combinations
such as &ldquo;abc&rdquo; and &ldquo;sgr&rdquo; to use in Superghosts.

Surely we need more &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; to strengthen and enliven
our language, though not as much as we need more
Thurbers.  But unearthing old &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; is still rewarding.
My latest find is the mysterious *flexpeng*; not only can the
*OED* give no derivation, it is not even sure it means a
gudgeon.

And the rule against hyphens must not be taken too
seriously.  It might stop us from giving adequate thought to
the question of *shut-eye*: who or what is the subject of the
verb?  Above all, it would deprive us of Professor Lipson's
doubly unique—negative and imperative—discovery: the
*forget-me-not*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Recently elected to non-resident membership in the
Overseas Press Club of America was an editor of a
Chinese medical journal who rejoices in the name of Young
Sick Kim! [K.S. Giniger, New York]

## &ldquo;Till Death Us Do Part&rdquo;
*Archibald A.  Hill, University of Texas at Austin*

My local paper, the *Austin American Statesman*, published
an amusingly ambiguous headline in its issue
for Sunday, January 15, 1978, which read &ldquo;and until death
do they part.&rdquo;  On the following Friday, the Associate Editor,
Rowland Hathaway, published (in his column &ldquo;Close Calls&rdquo;)
an apology for having made a mistake.  In the meantime, there
had been violent protests from readers.  A typical response
was that of a parent concerned because children were not
taught proper grammar anymore, and that this headline was
&ldquo;the straw that broke the camel's back.&rdquo;  It seems clear, however,
that a good deal more of grammar and language structure
was involved than merely the use of the wrong pronoun.

To begin with, it is evident that headline writer, editor,
and all respondents, recognized that the required meaning
was 'until death parts them,' not the meaning that the printed
form of the sentence seems to have, namely 'they will part until
death unites them.' Indeed, the story for which the headline
was written was about a couple who became united in spite
of barriers and would be together until the expected death of
one of them from cancer.  From the point of view of ambiguity
and its resolution, the reaction of readers is clear indication
that when there is conflict between the meaning of a narrower
context and a wider context, it is the wider one which
prevails.  But beyond ambiguity, there are other interesting
points, particularly in the history of the passage.

As everyone knows, the passage misquoted is from the
*Book of Common Prayer*.  The first form of it appeared in the
Edward Sixth *Prayer Book* of 1549, where as the *OED* points
out, it was required that both bride and groom should respond
that they married &ldquo;to have and to hold til death us
departe.&rdquo;  The verb at that time could be used transitively, to
mean 'separate,' and the form here used was without the
usual third person singular ending since it was a subjunctive
use.  Even at that time the position of an object pronoun immediately
before the verb was somewhat unusual, and I can
only guess that the form of the phrase was chosen to bring out
the iambic rhythm of weak-strong, four times repeated.  (I am
assuming that the sequence &ldquo;and to&rdquo; in &ldquo;and to hold&rdquo; counted
as a single syllable, rapidly pronounced with weak stress, as it
is today.)

The first change which affected the phrase was that the
transitive use of *depart* became obsolete in the 17th century,
since the conservative Convocation that revised and readopted
the *Prayer Book* in 1662, after the fifteen-year
Cromwellian suppression, evidently felt that the meaning of
the phrase was no longer clear.  In consequence, *depart* was
changed into *do part*, the form in which we now all know it.
The change was ingenious, since the only alteration was of
one unstressed vowel, and syllabic structure and rhythm were
preserved intact.  Evidently, understood or not, the phrase
was still remembered after the long interregnum.

A further change has affected the revised phrase, *do
part*.  As late as the 17th century, phrases of this type, with *do*
as auxiliary and the main verb as an infinitive, were common
variants of the simple verb form, and were often available for
rhythmic effect.  Thus Shakespeare's Ariel uses the forms side
by side without difference of meaning:

>There I couch when owls do cry  
On the bat's back I do fly.

A typical early grammarian of the 16th century says &ldquo;it is all
one to say 'I do speake...' and 'I speake...' &rdquo;The disappearance
of the construction as a common usage seems to
have taken place in the first half of the 18th century, since
Johnson in 1755 condemns the use of *do* and infinitive as a
&ldquo;vitious mode of speech.&rdquo;[^a1]

In modern usage, unless an author is being consciously
archaic, the auxiliary do occurs mainly in a few uses only.
One is emphatic and occurs with stress, as in &ldquo;I *do* like good
music,&rdquo; or as an assertion after a denial, as in &ldquo;You don't like
cabbage,&rdquo; and the reply &ldquo;I *do* like cabbage.&rdquo;  Another is the
form combined with -*n't* which gives a negative that negates
the whole sentence, in contrast with other negatives that
negate single parts.  Thus &ldquo;You *don't* need money&rdquo; contrasts
with &ldquo;You need no money.&rdquo;  A final use is as a question form,
always in the order auxiliary, subject, and main verb, as in
&ldquo;*Do* you speak French?&rdquo;  This familiar order is the one
adopted by the headline writer in &ldquo;do they part,&rdquo; though his
form is not a question and is inappropriate as a rendering of
the *Prayer Book* phrase.

Another, and very minor, change has also taken place.
We still on occasion use the endingless subjunctive form of the
verb for unreal, or as yet unrealized situations, but much less
freely than did speakers of sixteenth-century English.  Thus
the English professor to whom the question of the propriety of
the headline was referred, rightly said that the modern form
would be &ldquo;until death parts us,&rdquo; with an inflected verb, and
without auxiliary.

A final change is one which still seems to be in progress,
and which is not yet universally accepted.  This is that the case
forms of the pronouns are no longer the sole indicators of actor
and goal of action.  For pronoun forms such as it and *you*
position is, of course, the sole indicator since these forms have
no distinct accusative forms.  For the others, accusative forms
certainly frequently occur after the verb *to be*, and for a sequence
like &ldquo;It's me,&rdquo; the accusative is probably used at least
informally by most Americans, though purists still object.
Also, though accusative forms occur only rarely before the
verb, the position is then occasionally interpreted as indicating
the actor.  I remember seeing a widely circulated
advertisement some years ago which showed an astonished
man evidently replying to an unquoted statement—&ldquo;What!
*Me* fly my own airplane!&rdquo;  The use here could be described as
an indication of a &ldquo;contrary to fact&rdquo; situation, as well as the
actor, and it is interesting that I do not remember seeing the
advertisement objected to by grammarians.  Somewhat
similarly, for all speakers except those who have consulted
dictionaries, the archaic expression *methinks* is probably interpreted
as the equivalent of *I think*, instead of the
historically accurate *It seems to me*.  And finally, the editorial
column of January 20th concludes with an ironical apology
&ldquo;Us goofed,&rdquo; which was fully understandable, but only in
terms of positional indication of the actor.

What then emerges from all this complication?  One fact
is that the short phrase from the *Prayer Book* illustrates the
pervasiveness and continuity of language change, change
which the user often does not understand or even realize.  And
it is interesting that even in these days when we continually
hear lamentations over the decay of the old values, readers
still value the old forms and protest when they are carelessly
mutilated.

***

[^a1]: A full history of the &ldquo;periphrastic do&rdquo; is to be found in Part Three of the monumental *An Historical Syntax of the English Language*, by F.Th. Visser (Leiden, Brill. 1969), pp 1503-08.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *CAUGHT IN THE WEB OF WORDS: James A.H. Murray and the Oxford English Dictionary*
K.M. Elisabeth Murray, (Yale University Press, 1977), xii, + 386 pp.

Miss Murray has written an engrossing account of the
life of her grandfather, James A.H. Murray, chief editor of
the 10-volume *Oxford English Dictionary*.  It gives us a picture
of the vicissitudes of a dictionary maker.  While we have
some glimpses of a lexicographer at work in Boswell's *Life of
Johnson*, Johnson's dictionary took up only eight years of his
life; Murray worked at his for 36.

The account begins with James Murray's birth (in 1837)
and his precocious childhood as the eldest son of a tailor in the
Scottish Border village of Denholm.  His formal schooling
ended at age fourteen.  At seventeen he became an assistant
schoolmaster in nearby industrial Hawick and soon blossomed
into a skilled teacher and community leader.  This life he
abandoned after ten years, to move to London for the sake of
his wife's health.  In London, where he worked as a bank
clerk, he met men of like interests and joined the Philological
Society.  His wife died, and he remarried.  After six years,
Murray again became a schoolmaster, in Mill Hill, outside
London.  There he enjoyed halcyon days until his conscription
as editor of the *New English Dictionary* (as it was first called),
begun by the Philological Society.

Miss Murray describes her grandfather's entanglement
&ldquo;in the web of words,&rdquo; his battles with the Delegates of the
Oxford University Press over the plan of the work, his years of
grinding labor, and finally his recognition and honors.  The
*Dictionary* not only made his reputation; it was his life, filling
12- and 15-hour days and six-day weeks, with few vacations,
from 1879 until he died in 1915 at the age of 78.  Men he
had trained completed the work in 1928, 70 years after its inception
by the Philological Society.  Miss Murray concludes
the work with a chapter on James Murray as a husband,
father, citizen, and human being.

To gather and organize material for a history of English
words and to present it instructively in a ten-volume dictionary
was a monumental task, and James Murray was the
man for the job.

A lexicographer needs a bent for systematic and careful
research.  Early in life, Murray took to activities that required
and developed this.  His classification of flowers, ferns, and
stamps by analyzing similarities and differences prepared
him to discriminate and organize the senses of polysemous
words.  His careful examination of Roman antiquities in the
Border country alerted him to the need to make one's own investigations
rather than rely on the reports of others.  As a lexicographer
he would not accept as fact any statement that
could not be proven.  This led him to discover errors and even
non-existent words in earlier dictionaries.  In this respect Murray
was the opposite of his predecessor Frederick Furnivall,
whose standard of scholarship was quantity over quality.  Of
the material collected for the *Dictionary* under Furnivall's
direction, only a tenth could be used.

A dictionary maker also needs staying power.  Murray
had both energy and resolve.  He was endowed with robust
health, and his energy, until drained by years of overwork,
seemed inexhaustible.  In his early career he seemed to accomplish
enough for two or three men, teaching school and
taking part in town politics and cultural activities.  As editor
of the *Dictionary*, he maintained for 36 years an inhumanly
grueling pace that his colleagues and assistants could not match.
Murray produced an average of 224 pages of copy a year;
Bradley, 155; Craigie, 109; and Onions (working only part-time), 1. In the end, half the entries were from Murray'shand.

Murray also had a stubborn will to finish properly
anything he undertook.  His determination showed up early
on the hikes he loved to take through the hills.  Companions
might be ready to turn back short of a summit, but never
Murray.  Once, on a trip to France, he set out to climb a
mountain and was caught in an unseasonable snowstorm.  He
persevered to the top, returning to the village nearly frozen,
his beard a great icicle.  As a lexicographer, he insisted on
careful, thorough work, and battled with budget-conscious
Press men, well-meaning advisors who counseled compromise,
and the mountains of complex and elusive data that
had to be collected, organized, digested, and instructively set
forth.  Murray persevered and the *Oxford English Dictionary*
was finished.

Murray also had a strong sense of duty, even of divine
calling to his task.  He was the descendant of Scottish Covenanters
and throughout his life found his faith in God a supporting
and driving force.

To make a general dictionary, one needs to have a broad
general knowledge.  Murray did.  From childhood, he had an
insatiable curiosity about the world of nature and of man.  He
delved into the sciences, especially geology; languages; and
archaeology — he was a founding member and secretary of
the Hawick Archaeological Society.  As teacher in a one-room
school, he increased his mastery of many subjects and studied
languages on his way to work each day.  A summer course in
phonetics in Edinburgh under Alexander Melville Bell led incidentally
to his giving Alexander Graham Bell, his teacher's
son, his first lesson in electricity.  Murray's spare time as a
bank clerk was spent studying British dialects and Anglo-Saxon.
With this background and his lifelong habit of
reading, Murray wrote the dictionary entries for all subject
fields himself.  He wrote many inquiries to specialists but did
not always learn much.  When he took up the word *aphis*,
first used by Linnaeus, he wrote to the Linnaean Society to
ask its origin.  The query was referred to a specialist in the
species, who consulted a Greek scholar.  The scholar, when
his lexicon failed him, begged a friend who knew Murray to
write for the etymology — a full circle.

I found reading the work a thoroughly enjoyable experience,
perhaps the more for having myself worked on
several dictionaries.  In my notes, there are no criticisms and
only one desideratum: a map showing the places mentioned
in the first chapter, on Murray's growing up in the Border
country.  I can only thank the author for her labors and commend
the book to readers.

*[Edward Gates, Indiana State University]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Remarkable Names of Real People: Or How To Name Your Baby*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Remarkable%20Names%20Of%20Real%20People%3A%20Or%20How%20To%20Name%20Your%20Baby&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20)
Comp. and ann. by John Train, illustr. by Pierre Le-Tau, intr. by S.J. Perelman, (Clarkson N. Potter, 1977), 64 pp.

Name-dropping, like other kinds of droppings, comes in
assorted shape, size, and coloring that defies description.  Incongruous
combinations like *Halloween Buggage*, *Siddhartha
Greenblatt*, *Silence Bellows*, and *Warren Peace* appear, cheek
by jowl, beside naughty connotations like *Supply Clapp
Thwing*, *Miss Pensive Cocke*, and *Ophelia Legg*, and humorous
conglomerations like *Mary Louise Pantzaroff*, *Lettice
Goedebed*, and the *Katz Pajama Company*.  No one would
have had the gall to have concocted these names; indeed, they
are all real, if you can believe the author, who has found an
archbishop in Manila named *Cardinal Sin*.  The collection is
certainly worth at least a *T. Hee* (restaurant employee, New
York City).

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary Buying Guide: A Consumer Guide to General English-Language Wordbooks in Print*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Dictionary%20Buying%20Guide%3A%20A%20Consumer%20Guide%20to%20General%20English-Language%20Wordbooks%20in%20Print&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Kenneth F. Kister, (R.R. Bowker Company, 1977), xx + 358 pp.

Unfortunately for the publisher, the designer of the
cover of this book was carried away — but not far enough — in
a feeble attempt to show *dictionary, buying*, and *guide*
syllabified and pronounced in a style that is clearly an imitation
(though just as clearly an inaccurate imitation) of the
Merriam-Webster system.  Book designers should keep their
tiny fingers away from matters about which they know nothing:
it proves embarrassing for authors, editors, and publishers.

I assume it must be some shortcoming of mine, but I do
not know who Kenneth Kister is or what qualifications he
may have to review dictionaries.  Tactfully he assumes
ultimate responsibility for the opinions and data in the book,
then abruptly lists sources and consultants from whom
&ldquo;critical input derived.&rdquo;  I can only assume, from their paper
qualifications, that the five consultants and three-member
Advisory Board know their fields.  What bothers me greatly is
that none of them is either a linguist or a lexicographer.  Most
are librarians.  Librarians do not, necessarily, know anything
about lexicography, though one could scarcely dispute their
knowing something about dictionaries.

What may be the basic fault with the entire approach is
that dictionaries ought to be reviewed by lexicographers who
have training in all those aspects of linguistics that apply to
lexicography.  Kister's background and qualifications as a
librarian are unassailable, and he does not pretend knowing
very much about etymology, pronunciation, or the quality of
the definitions in the dictionaries under review.  He does,
however, lay himself open to criticism in using a word list (of
his own devising, apparently) by which he measures the adequacy
of certain dictionaries.  Since publishers will look to the
*Guide* for his comments, one may be confident that future
editions of their dictionaries will contain the words on
Kister's list.  He will have to come up with a new one for each
new edition of the *Guide*.

Kister's introduction, &ldquo;A word about Dictionaries,&rdquo; is
generally very good.  He points up the ambiguity in the application
of the epithet *unabridged*, though I know of no &ldquo;lexicographers
[who] are unable to agree on a firm definition of
the term.&rdquo;  The fact is that lexicographers usually have little to
do with the titling and subtitling of the dictionaries they prepare;
such decisions are most often made by the publishers'
sales departments.  I believe that the fact of the matter is that
the general public superficially takes *unabridged* to mean
'containing all of the words in the language,' while publishers,
aware of the weight that the word carries in a title,
rationalize their use of it by resorting to the literal sense, 'not
abridged [from a larger dictionary].'  I contend that people's
acceptance of the first sense as &ldquo;superficial&rdquo; can be easily
demonstrated by a few simple questions, the answers to
which at once reveal that people really are aware of the fact
that there is no dictionary yet published (or, indeed, publishable)
that could contain all of the words of English.  Of classical
Latin or Greek, yes; of English or, for that matter, of
any living language, no.

One of the standard criteria for judging dictionaries, as
given in the *Guide*, is &ldquo;authority.&rdquo;  Kister points out that
&ldquo;People, not machines, make dictionaries,&rdquo; and he writes,
also quite properly, that the staff and consultants who
prepared the book should be listed in the front matter.  But
then he launches a series of comments about the reputability
of editors, publishers, and others which appear to suggest
that unless an editor is listed in *Who's Who in America*,
*American Men of Science*, and the *Directory of American
Scholars*, or, if a publisher, in *Literary Market Place*, then
the quality of the work is likely to be suspect.  This is patent
nonsense: reputable editors and reputable publishers have
turned out rubbish or, at least, works of questionable quality.
Likewise, editors and publishers who have never done a dictionary
before have turned out gems of lexicography.  To
mention two cases, Partridge, who certainly has a good
reputation, compiled *Origins*, which is riddled with errors
and misconceptions; contrariwise, Robyn Supraner, whom
I've never heard of, was the &ldquo;author&rdquo; of the *Troll Talking
Picture Dictionary*, which Kister reviews very favorably.
Kister classifies dictionaries more or less as follows:

>*unabridged*:        250,000 or more entries  
*semi-unabridged*:   130,000-250,000 entries  
*abridged*:          55,000-130,000 entries  
*pocket*:            under 55,000 entries  
*school*:            25,000-95,000 entries  
*children's*:        500-5,000 entries

I believe that if he had discussed these classifications with dictionary
people, Kister would have found general agreement
in the trade that the names are somewhat different, to wit:

>*unabridged*:        250,000 or more entries  
*college or desk*:   130,000-250,000 entries  
*concise*:           60,000-100,000 entries
>
>Depending on the level for which the dictionary was
prepared: up to 90,000 for high school; down to
10,000 for elementary school.
>
>*children's*: as Kister says, this ranges all over the place;
however, his narrow limits preclude the *Macmillan
Dictionary for Children*, which contains 12,000.

I have never heard anyone refer to the classifications &ldquo;semi-unabridged&rdquo;
and &ldquo;abridged&rdquo; in my 25 years in lexicography.
Kister writes &ldquo;Abridged dictionaries are sometimes referred
to as 'concise' or 'desk' dictionaries.&rdquo;  I think that &ldquo;desk&rdquo; refers
usually to what I have called *college* dictionaries.

The next section of the introduction, &ldquo;Inside the Dictionary,&rdquo;
gives a concise, clear description of what one is likely
to find and the customary arrangement of information.

Under &ldquo;Dictionary Trends,&rdquo; Kister traces, ever so succinctly,
the history of dictionaries from Cawdrey (1604) to
modern times.  The description is straightforward, fair, and
interesting to read.  I take exception only to the remarks describing
semantic and word frequency counts as a &ldquo;refinement&rdquo;:
the fact of the matter is that language occurs in such
incredible profusion that there has never been a count that
has proved either statistically accurate or that has included
data of any value about words (or forms) beyond the 20,000
most common.  True, the task would be prodigious, even if
the fastest computers were to be used.  Nonetheless, the corpus
of material to be examined is so vast that it is unlikely that
any researcher will ever find the funds to undertake a systematic
procedure for the enumeration, listing, and analysis of
even a large percentage of the words in English.  Kister's assumption
that the 155,000 entries in *The American Heritage
Dictionary* were drawn from a one-million-word computerized
sample is naive.

Kister correctly states that computers are used during the
preparation of dictionaries to perform &ldquo;such routine mechanical
chores as sorting and alphabetizing.&rdquo;  But he is mistaken
when he writes that &ldquo;*The Random House Dictionary* instructed
one of its computers to organize its word stock into 158 subject
areas.&rdquo;  Disregarding anthropomorphism, such a feat was
impossible in the early 1960s, when the *RHD* was compiled,
because it would have required computers (or programs) capable
of &ldquo;reading&rdquo; definitions or words and of determining
whether they belonged in chemistry, botany, archaeology, or
what-have-you.  Computers almost 20 years later are still incapable
of such evaluative insights, chiefly because of ambiguities
in the language.

Another slip by the author reveals that computers are
&ldquo;beginning to play an active role in the dictionary...printing
process.&rdquo;  I may be fussy, but I consider typesetting (or
composition, if you prefer) to be a function quite separate
from printing, and I am sure Kister meant &ldquo;typesetting.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Beginning&rdquo;
may be a bit modest: for almost eight years, a company
I know in England has been using computers to typeset
dictionaries and other reference books at the rate of almost ten
million words a year.  (Computers have also proved useful, in
the compilation of reference books generally, in such functions
as automatic index extraction, automatic cross-reference
checking, etc.  In addition, once the text of a dictionary is in a
computer's memory, it can be extracted and sorted in many
different ways to reveal useful information about the language
for lexicographers.)

Following the main introductory information is a section
called &ldquo;Choosing the Right Dictionary,&rdquo; which contains
much that is useful.  It also contains some implications that
are distorted.  For example:

>Note also that entry statistics can be calculated in a
variety of ways.  Some publishers may count only
main entries, whereas others include main entries,
inflected forms, run-ons, and variants in the count.
[p. 20]

Had Kister taken the trouble to read the Federal Specification
G-D-331D for Dictionaries, English; June 28, 1974, to which
he alludes on page 18, he would have known that in America
&ldquo;entry counts&rdquo; for dictionaries include not only main entries,
inflected forms, run-ons, and variants, but also part-of-speech
changes, list words (usually found at *re*-, *un*-, *over*-,
*super*-, etc.), and similar data.  (On the other hand, British
publishers usually count only headwords—but they are learning
!)  The result is that a book like *The American College Dictionary*,
which is advertised as containing 132,000 entries,
lists only a little over 74,000 headwords (by actual count).  His
quoting the comments of David Guralnik, editor of *Webster's
New World Dictionary*, to the effect, &ldquo;dictionaries...contain
definitions for only a fraction of the total vocabulary entries
to which they lay claim,&rdquo; displays Kister's naive acceptance
of Guralnik's little piece of propaganda, for, as it turns
out, *WNWD* is almost the only dictionary of its size that
wastes valuable space in treating words like *predetermination*
(normally run-on under *predetermine*), *masculinity* (normally
run-on under *masculine*), and *flavorfully* (normally run-on
under *flavorful*) as headwords, notwithstanding the practice
of other lexicographers to regard them as having self-evident
meanings.  Does anyone who knows English well enough to
use a dictionary need a definition of *flatterer*?

Although Kister's criticism of counting undefined, listed
words with self-evident prefixes like *un*- and *non*- is well
taken, since publishers tend to overdo such lists, the fact remains
that he has omitted from consideration what research
has determined is the main use of dictionaries, namely, to
find out how a word is spelt.

An unfortunate typographical (I hope!) error appears on
page 22: &ldquo;nounce&rdquo; should read &ldquo;nonce.&rdquo;

I am well aware of the opinions held by many that biographical
and geographical entries are considered to be &ldquo;encyclopedic&rdquo;
and therefore carry some sort of stigma that ought to
make them ineligible for inclusion in a dictionary, but I continue
to maintain that if, as linguists have long held, language
is essentially spoken, not written, it is impossible to &ldquo;hear&rdquo; a
capital letter; also, if the criterion of frequency is applied,
there can be no argument confuting the fact that *New York*
and *Lincoln* crop up far more often that *triskaidekaphobia*
and *mitochondrion*.

Turning to the review of *Webster's New Twentieth Century
Dictionary*, my only comment is that the introduction to
the dictionary apparently omits the information that it is based
largely on the Annandale Edition of *Ogilvie's Imperial Dictionary*,
which, in turn, was based on the (much smaller)
1828 edition of Webster's *American Dictionary of the English
Language*.

I must take issue with the oft-expressed criticism of *Webster's
Third New International*, repeated here by Kister, that
&ldquo;W3 strikes a much less prescriptive stance&rdquo; in comparison
with W2 with regard to restrictive usage labels.  In the first
place, the labels in any dictionary are neither &ldquo;restrictive&rdquo;
nor &ldquo;prescriptive&rdquo; nor is a lack of them to be construed as
&ldquo;permissive.&rdquo;  If any criticism is to be leveled at W3 for its
failure to label many senses and words it is that its editors
were *not descriptive enough*.  In his assessment of the *RHD*,
Kister quotes from the preface, &ldquo;Since language is a social institution,
the lexicographer must give the user an adequate indication
of the attitudes of society toward particular words or
expressions.&rdquo;  These words reflect essentially my opinion.  If
one understands them and agrees with them, then he can
hardly call W3 a &ldquo;descriptive&rdquo; or &ldquo;permissive&rdquo; dictionary or
characterize labels in dictionaries &ldquo;restrictive.&rdquo;  If anything,
W3 isn't sufficiently descriptive or, at least, not accurately so
in keeping with the way people feel about the usage levels of
the words and senses the editors chose to leave unlabeled.

Kister refers to W3's spelling of proper names and adjectives
with small letters (*brooklyn*) as an &ldquo;oddity.&rdquo;  I refer to it
as an error, as a distortion of the facts.

Kister's favorable opinion of the &ldquo;clean, compressed look
of the page layout&rdquo; will find many who disagree: I, for one,
find the typography execrable.  Examination of the double-page
spread where *take* is to be found makes the type moir&eacute;
before the eyes.  It did not occur to Kister to notice that all entries
in the *RHD* that exceed half a column in length are
double-leaded to improve legibility.

The review of *The American Heritage Dictionary* I
found to be fair and accurate.  One interesting factor that influenced
the *AHD*'s format (double-column page with a narrower
foredge column devoted to illustrations), which the
reviewer may not know of, was the use of automatic typsetting:
it is extremely difficult (and expensive) to program a
computer to set run-arounds (the insertion of an illustration
into a block of text so that the text is run around it).  *AHD*
solved the problem by running the text in solid columns, with
the illustrations in their own column.  Neat trick.

The author is mistaken — though how he could possibly
have learned the facts, I cannot image—in his description of
*Funk &amp; Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of the English Language
(International Edition)* as &ldquo;an entirely new work.&rdquo;  In
fact, it was a rewritten version of *F&amp;W*'s old &ldquo;Emphatype
Edition,&rdquo; an abortive attempt at lexicography that tried to
present the pronunciation of each headword with stress
marks only—that is, without using phonetic respelling—an
impossible dream for a language like English.  The staff, with
a couple of exceptions, was amateur.  I know a fair bit about
the project because I was the pronunciation editor.  I know,
too, that with rare exceptions, the language experts who lent
their names to the front matter were seldom consulted (except
over an occasional luncheon).

The preceding is supposed to serve as a discussion of
some matters pertaining to specific reference works on which
I have inside information, not as a serious, adverse criticism
of Kenneth Kister's treatment of information he could not
possibly have had at hand.  A few disagreements with his evaluations
are inevitable: to coin a phrase, that's what makes
book publishing.  The rest of the *Dictionary Buying Guide*
concerns itself with a long section (pp. 194-315) on &ldquo;Special-purpose
Dictionaries and Wordbooks,&rdquo; which is broken down
to cover books on Etymology, Usage, Style, Slang and Dialect,
Synonyms, Crossword Puzzles, Rhymes, Spelling, Pronunciation,
Abbreviations, Signs and Symbols, Foreign
Words and Phrases, etc.  The reviews of these books, like those
of the dictionaries in the first 194 pages, are informative,
well-thought-out, and of a length appropriate to their importance.
Appendices list recently discontinued dictionaries, additional
sources for evaluations, general-interest books on
language, and a directory of U.S. publishers and distributors.
A thorough index completes the volume.

In sum, the *Dictionary Buying Guide* is indispensable for
any library that serves people interested in language reference
books, chiefly dictionaries.  It is far superior to any descriptive
bibliography that I know of, both for its completeness and its
frankness.  Kister's criteria are not always mine, and they may
not be yours, either, but they are uniformly and fairly applied,
and the publishers of the books reviewed should look to
their dictionaries if they came under adverse criticism: the
*Dictionary Buying Guide* is bound to be an influential factor
in their future sales.

*— Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {D. Martin Jenni}

I would pick a tiny nit with contributor Revard, who in
his delightful piece on the ciphered hankypanky in Harley
3362 construes *gxddbov (fuccant)* as a participle which forms
(with *sunt*, I gather) a sort of progressive present.  Such a construction
is rather unlikely in a fifteenth-century English text
and is moreover unnecessary in view of the splendidly vigorous 1. p. pl. pres. ind. verb (from '*fucco, fuccare*') encoded
there.  Like its native model, it is a straightforward active
verb, in contrast to the Romans' tendency to cast such activities
as deponents—e.g. *futari*.  (There is a deponent parallel
in English, though: it is, in the Harley cipher, '*vp hfv mbke*'.)

*[D. Martin Jenni, Iowa City, Iowa]*


#### EPISTOLA {H.J. Hamilton}

For the information of William J. Cleere, the All-American
named Wonder Monds is alive and well and playing
in the Canadian Football League as a member of the Ottawa
Rough Riders.  Up here he is known as Wonderful
Monds.

*[H.J. Hamilton, Kingston, Ontario]*

## A Note and a Query
*Bruce B. Olive and Carter Revard, Washington University*

Among words that are likely to be included in dictionaries
before long is *humongous* (pronounced [hjumenges],
with accent on second syllable).  It has been in consistent
popular use in speech since the early 1950s, and it is now
known to nearly every student we have spoken with from all
over the United States, all of whom use it in the same way, as
an adjective meaning larger than life, awesome, overwhelming,
enormous.  It is more vivid and forceful than the conventional
synonyms like *tremendous or huge*.  Students asked to
offer &ldquo;etymologies&rdquo; for it say it probably is composed of *huge*
and *monstrous*—in other words, it is like *chortle or galumph*,
Lewis Carroll &ldquo;portmanteaus.&rdquo;

Perhaps the most interesting question about the word is
how it has spread so far and so fast without appearing, so far
as we know, very often in print.  It seems to be known all over
the country, judging from students in classes at Washington
University, St. Louis, who come from such exotic places as
Philadelphia, California, Oklahoma, New Jersey, Chicago,
and St. Louis.  And the oldest known persons who claim to
have used it in their high school days are in their middle 30s,
suggesting that it originated, perhaps, in the early 1950s.
(These persons, Elbert and Marion Hill, now living in Southeast
Oklahoma, were met by one of the present authors—
Revard—during a trip to Las Vegas.  Discovering that they
knew the word in their youth was some compensation for his
having lost the humongous sum of forty cents in the slot
machines.)

As it happens, however, we have now found *humongous*
in print.  Olive, being a pilot, occasionally reads *Flying*
magazine; he turned up the following sentence in its June
1975 issue, in an article by Richard L. Collins entitled &ldquo;Pilot
Report: 112A&rdquo; (p. 48, col. 2, line 10):

>The metal doors were incorporated on existing
airplanes, at no cost to the customer but at *humongous*
cost to Rockwell.

The italics, of course, are added.  It is clear that Collins meant
his *humongous* to convey just what the students' use of it does;
we may be certain that Rockwell shelled out tremendous
sums to get that door incorporated!

Another sighting of *humongous*, albeit slightly misspelled,
in *People Magazine*, December 5, 1977, on page 118, center
column, next to the last line: &ldquo;...smirking, humunguous
giant clams.&rdquo;  We should at least be able to settle on a spelling.

Can any readers of VERBATIM offer earlier examples of
this word in print or in speech?  Does anyone know whether
the word began in the slang or argot of a particular group, or
in a particular region?  Does anyone have a good idea of how
it has spread and flourished so remarkably?  (We suspect disc
jockeys; perhaps it is on TV now, but no one among those we
have talked to seems to have noticed it there.  Is it abroad yet
in England?

ADDENDUM: In most U.S. cities, there now are policemen
or announcers providing traffic reports on certain radio stations
from helicopters patrolling over the main streets and
throughways.  In St. Louis, one such policeman has invented
(apparently) a term for the traffic-jam caused by drivers
slowing down to gawk at an accident or incident: *gaper-block*.
Is this term in use anywhere else?  If the policeman
(Don Miller) did not get it elsewhere, it will be interesting to
see whether it spreads.  It may well be that the term *trafficjam*
began in a particular city, invented by a particular person.
But most words or idioms, though presumably beginning
with individuals, seem never to be traceable; no one has ever
been able to catch a turn of speech at its source, though
everyone seems to pick up such turns quickly and it is always
appreciated as a humorous way of filling a newly felt need in
the language.


#### EPISTOLA {Alexandra Urdang}

Though I agree with the basic point of Francis Griffith's
article, &ldquo;Humpty Dumpty's World&rdquo; [IV, 4], some of his examples
are contrived.  That *gay* has taken on the connotation
*glum* is not apparent to this reader.  Granted, one thinks of
homosexuality before 'innocent joy' when the word *gay* appears,
but many people do not think of people who are
necessarily 'humorless' or 'tense' when they read about Gay
Liberation, for example.  They think of equal rights for people
who are discriminated against because of sexual preference(s).

Does Mr. Griffith believe that &ldquo;Gay Liberation&rdquo; means
'humorless' or 'liberated from gaiety'?  *Gay* will not mean
'glum' until Anita Bryant becomes a lexicographer.  One of
the things that makes language exciting is that it reflects the
social climate through new words and through the new connotations
and denotations taken on by existing words.  Often,
a new connotation carries with it the opinion of the person
who coined it.

&ldquo;Many of today's reversals are deliberately contrived,&rdquo;
as the article states; but some that appear on the surface to be
opposites may, under scrutiny, reveal a logical progression.
*Bad for good* is understandable if one thinks of the expression,
&ldquo;It's so good it hurts!&rdquo;  Or, perhaps, it is derived from reviews
of modern art where some things are so bad that they are considered
good.

In any case, why should Mr. Griffith assume the *gay* is a
*bad* scene?

*[Alexandra Urdang, Essex, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jack Shreve}

I think it is ludicrous to lament the reversal of meaning
demonstrated by the modern usage of *gay*.  It may be true that
some bar-hopping homosexuals observed by Francis Griffith
are joyless souls, but why should we judge the result of an
organic linguistic process?  We don't bother to lament that *silly*
once meant 'blessed,' that *nice* originally meant 'stupid,' or
that unvillainous *villa* gave rise to *villain*.  Moreover, the
reversal in this case is not modern; gay has been indicative of
sexual looseness since the seventeenth century.

When I was in graduate school, I was indoctrinated that
the task of modern linguistics is to describe and not to prescribe.
So why prescribe for the word a reversion to its pristine
meaning?

But cheer up!  It could be worse.  The Spanish word for
*homosexual* (*marica*) comes from the name of the Virgin
Mary (Maria).

*[Jack Shreve, Cumberland, Maryland]*

## Shocking News from the West
*Vera L. Harding, Oregon State University*

While most of the population of the world today is getting
used to &ldquo;shocks&rdquo; of all kinds— &ldquo;future,&rdquo; therapeutical, and
those resulting from &ldquo;that&rdquo; discovery about your son, mother,
neighbor, president, etc. — as being part of life itself, those of
us who come into contact with foreign cultures experience, in
addition, the so-called &ldquo;cultural shock&rdquo; —and cause it in equal
amounts.  Not only does the spoken language lose in translation—so
does body language.  As many of us have witnessed,
the &ldquo;o.k.&rdquo; sign made famous by American movies causes uncontrolled
laughter in theaters of those countries where it is
an obscene gesture.

The dangerous thing about cultural shock is that
sometimes only the &ldquo;shockee&rdquo; notices it, with the &ldquo;shocker&rdquo;
going happily on his way to the next episode.  Often it takes
many years of adaptation in a foreign country for us to realize
that in the beginning we sometimes left people speechless.  This
realization often occurs when we start experiencing shocks
caused by our own compatriots who are recent arrivals in the
new culture.

I feel entitled to talk about the shock-exchange between
North Americans and South Americans because I have been
part of it.  A native of Brazil, I received a year's study grant in
Oregon during my college days.  Later on I returned to America
and, as a language teacher, was thrown into regular contact
with foreign students here and with Americans returning
from their studies abroad.

Most of the shocks I am aware of having caused have to
do with the unfortunate use of words.  Sometimes I enjoy
thinking back on an incident for which I had no explanation
at the time it happened.  I am still trying to figure out why it
happened.  The culprit is always that same linguistic gap.
Like the day I went to the dentist and described my problems:
&ldquo;I have a sensible tooth.&rdquo;  *Sensible* in Spanish, French
and other languages means 'sensitive,' why not so in English?
The good doctor went straight to examine my wisdom teeth,
those, of course, most inclined to be sensible.  And he announced
proudly that I had not one, but four.

More recently I met a gentleman whose elegant way of
moving his arms when he walks caught my attention.  Meaning
to serve a compliment, I said, &ldquo;You know what I like
about you?  Your gait.&rdquo;  I must have pronounced your more
like *you're*, because his answer at first puzzled me: &ldquo;Some
people think I am because of the way I walk, but I'm not.&rdquo;
And that was the end of that.  Which reminds me of a French
girl, a friend of mine, who many years ago was here under
the auspices of some ladies' church group.  On being interviewed
on the stage by the Christian matrons, she was asked
what she thought of American boys.  &ldquo;Well, they are good and
bad&rdquo; was her answer.  But somehow the ladies' response (they
ended the interview right then) led her to believe years later
that they actually must have understood her to say, &ldquo;Well,
they are good in bed.&rdquo;

I always warn my students to beware of false cognates.
One of them has told me that she had a hard time last year in
Costa Rica when she was visiting friends of the family with
whom she was living.  Just before sitting down for a big meal
she asked to be shown where the *ba&ntilde;o* was, whereupon she
was immediately escorted to a cubicle with only a shower in
it by a puzzled maid who handed her an enormous bath towel.
She never did find out where the more important facilities
were located in that house.

I still laugh with my American friend who tried to get
through customs in San Salvador in a friendly mood although
he was exhausted.  When asked if he was *casado* 'married' he
understood *cansado* 'tired,' and gave the employee a &ldquo;more or
less&rdquo; sign with his hand.

Certain words lose in translation even between sister
languages like Spanish and Portuguese.  My Portuguese classes
have generally attracted students who are fluent in Spanish.
Once during our conversation practice a girl intended to say
to the class that she had eaten for a while in the school
cafeteria but hadn't liked it.  What she actually said was that
she had eaten a mouse there but hadn't liked it.  She had resorted
to her Spanish vocabulary where *rato* means 'a while,'
whereas in Portuguese it means 'mouse.'

On many occasions I have been called to help American
families here who need to have a letter translated from
Spanish or Portuguese.  Their son or daughter is studying
south of the border, or they have Latin students staying with
them and want to communicate with the young person's
parents.  The letters that come always end with lots of hugs
and embraces from total strangers, but I doubt that any good
American would be offended by that.  (I always translate the
hugs as &ldquo;best regards,&rdquo; just in case.) One of the letters, sent by
the Argentine &ldquo;parents&rdquo; of this Oregon boy, complained that
he insisted on making his bed every day.  Likewise, American
families who have welcomed Latin boys to their homes are
often horrified to see that they never make theirs.  If those
Latin boys had been made aware in advance by a kind soul
that here in the U.S. everybody does his share of the housework,
and if Americans understood that a &ldquo;well-bred&rdquo; Latin
*macho* wouldn't dream of making a bed, things wouldn't be
so bed, excuse me, bad.

Another family here was indignant that the Brazilian
&ldquo;parents&rdquo; of their 17-year-old daughter wouldn't allow her to
date without &ldquo;dragging&rdquo; along her 14-year-old &ldquo;sister.&rdquo;  They wanted me to translate a letter explaining to the parents there
that the (real) parents here trusted the girl.  Difficult situation.
Small-town Brazilians would fear that, if they yielded,
their 14-year-old (real) daughter might some day want to
date alone too.  Or the American girl herself might feel indignant
at the lack of respect local boys would show for her if she
became &ldquo;emancipated.&rdquo;  All kinds of extremely disagreeable
incidents could originate from that.

Fortunately, cases like these are exceptions.  The bulk of
cultural shocks are mild, and many are hilarious.  They contribute
to a lively, fun-filled existence, if you have a sense of
humor.  (A temperamental foreigner is anathema in any
language.) But after 16 years of residence I do wish someone
in this country had told me before that the pitted olives required
for a certain meatball recipe are *not* supposed to have
pits in them.  I wouldn't have had that &ldquo;sensible&rdquo; tooth in the
first place.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!
New candidate for most frequently misspelled word (after
*misspelled*): *genealogy*, which often appears as &ldquo;geneology.&rdquo;
Candidate for word often misused: *discomfit*, confused
with *discomfort*.  [Janet W. Salz, Lauderhill, Florida]

## If It Isn't In Writing...
*Geoffrey Bocca, New York, New York*

As a frequent visitor to the United States I am always intrigued
and sometimes bemused by the American compulsion
to put everything in writing.  Take the notice that until
recently decorated the door of all New York Post Offices,
&ldquo;No Dogs Allowed&rdquo;, and underneath, the somewhat apologetic
amendment, &ldquo;Except Seeing-Eye Dogs.&rdquo;  To begin with,
why should dogs be barred from post offices at all?  A post office
offers perhaps less temptation for a pup to blot its copybook
than any other establishment except perhaps an income
tax office.  It is not like a fruit store or a grocery or even an
aromatic pharmacy.  Secondly, neither the seeing-eye dog nor
its master is likely to read the fine print and it is inconceivable
that even the most sadistic postmaster would eject a blind
man and his dog from his fief.

It often seems to me that the first thought of the American
bureaucrat, given any situation whatever, is to rush to the
printer and draw up a miniature constitution.  Every restaurant
displays a prominent notice, &ldquo;Occupancy by more then
X people is dangerous and unlawful.&rdquo;  How long is it, I
wonder, since a law enforcement officer (policeman) came to
count heads?  (&ldquo;Am I on the vice beat today, lootenant?&rdquo; &ldquo;No,
O'Reilly, you are on the restaurant head-check squad.  Shoot
foist and count afterwards.&rdquo;)

In many restaurant toilets I see a sign, &ldquo;Employees must
wash their hands before leaving.&rdquo;  It seems to me that this
slightly unsavory instruction would be more effective as a
word by the restaurateur into the ear of a new employee, or
at least hung in the kitchens.  But in New York at least, it must
not only be done.  It must be read to be done.  (Its double
redundancy lies in the unlikelihood of their washing their
hands after leaving.)

Almost alone among civilized countries, the United
States demands a visitor to make his customs declaration in
writing.  Other countries don't bother.  The United States asks
one's name (with middle initial, something most western
Europeans drop the moment they can hold a pen), flight
number, address in the United States.  After one has filled in
all this, one is told—in writing—&ldquo;The Customs Inspector
may permit you to make an oral declaration.&rdquo;  In other words
you can say it, but you have to write it first.

In the cloakroom of the Yale Club in New York is a sign
saying, &ldquo;Members are not allowed to leave their possessions in
the cloakroom for more than 36 hours.&rdquo;  Why not?  Or why 36
hours?  Why not 24 hours?  Or 48 hours?  After 36 hours does
some dread metamorphosis happen to the Yalie's coonskin
coat?  Why say anything at all?

The sandlot in Washington Square has a sign &ldquo;Sandlot
reserved for children and their guardians.&rdquo;  This presumably
is aimed at Greenwich Village artists, writers, and lawyers
who are notorious for pushing children off any sandlot and
playing in it themselves.

And when the sign is in fact reasonable and necessary, no
American signwriter would dream of leaving the matter as it
is.  Take, &ldquo;No littering, smoking, or spitting.&rdquo;  Until recently,
on New York buses and subways it read:

&ldquo;New York City Health Code PROHIBITS (on all New
York City transportation facilities), LITTERING (or creating a
nuisance or an insanitary condition), SMOKING (or carrying
an open flame, lighted match, cigarette, cigar or pipe), SPITTING
(Penalty, fine, or imprisonment or both).  Order of the
New York Transportation Authority.&rdquo;

Instructions in taxis must be something of a cottage industry
in New York, and they give the rider a good read for
quite long distances.  One sign says &ldquo;Pay Here.&rdquo;  Another says,
&ldquo;The law: Alight on curb side only.&rdquo;  Another says, &ldquo;Dear
Taxi-rider, you will appreciate that for security reasons the
drivers are not obliged to change more than $5.&rdquo;  On the
driver's dashboard one may read his name, the date of expiry
of his license, and occasionally such esoteric items of information
as &ldquo;must wear glasses while driving.&rdquo;  (&ldquo;Excuse me
driver, far be it from me to dent your *machismo*, but I notice
you are driving without your glasses.&rdquo;)  Recently I collected a
new one, —a beauty.  &ldquo;Please keep both feet on the ground.&rdquo;
(&ldquo;Listen; bub, uncross your legs or get the hell out of my
cab!&rdquo;)

This American compulsion for putting everything in
writing clearly stems from the birth of the Republic when the
Founding Fathers, against all British precedent, insisted on a
written constitution.  The British still don't have one.

In fact signs and written instructions tend to invite derision
in Britain.  During the war, the windows of London tube
trains were covered with a cloth mesh as a protection against
splintering from air raids.  A well-remembered Government-sponsored
cartoon drawn by Fougasse and displayed on all
trains showed an irresponsible fellow tearing the mesh away.
The civic-minded citizen—&ldquo;Billy Brown of London
Town&rdquo;—admonishes him: &ldquo;I trust you'll pardon my correction.
That stuff is there for your protection.&rdquo;  Leading to the
famous riposte, &ldquo;I thank you for that information, but I cannot
see the bloody station.&rdquo;

The only English example that comes immediately to
mind is &ldquo;Please adjust your dress before leaving&rdquo; in public
lavatories.  Perhaps because of its elegance it has become part
of England's heritage of scatalogical humor.  Churchill
allegedly quoted it as the only clich&eacute; which a certain Foreign
Secretary left out in one of his speeches, though Churchill
denied having said it.

That Americans do not read signs or are even aware of
them is as interesting as the phenomenon itself.  American
eyes are as immune to signs as Russian ears are immune to
propaganda slogans booming from loudspeakers.  Americans
traveling with sheathed ballpoints throughout Europe never
question the necessity of the customs forms they have to fill on
arrival in the United States.  When I bring the subject up with
American friends, they either look blank or indignantly deny
the entire thesis.  &ldquo;You English are worse&rdquo; one friend foamed.
&ldquo;What about 'Please adjust your dress before leaving'...and
...and...and...Anyway, you are worse.&rdquo;

I returned to London from New York some time ago and
spent a night in the Portobello Hotel in Notting Hill Gate.  A
sign in the elevator said, &ldquo;Please close both gates.&rdquo;  But, signpunchy
from America I did not read that at all.  I read, or
seemed to read, &ldquo;Dear Hotel Guest, For the comfort and convenience
of other guests you are respectfully requested when
entering or leaving the lift, to assure that both gates are fully
closed, as otherwise the lift is rendered inoperative, to the inconvenience
of those guests seeking to avail themselves of it.
We thank you for your courtesy and co-operation.  The Management.&rdquo;
The irony is that an old English room-clerk might
well *say* something like that while his American counterpart
giving the same instructions orally is more likely to say,
&ldquo;Close dem gates, paisan.&rdquo;

Then, returning to New York, I received an unexpected
shock.  The New York City Transit Authority has scrapped its
grandiose warnings.  The subway trains now state merely,
&ldquo;No littering, spitting or smoking.&rdquo; Who is going to take any
notice of *that*!

Happily I was quickly reassured that the post offices at
least have retained respect for the written word, which, of
course, is as it should be.  The post office on West 52nd Street,
in addition to barring dogs (except seeing-eye dogs), now
bars, &ldquo;baby carriages, shopping carts, hand trucks, etc.&rdquo;
Etc.?  *Etc*.?

And the Postmaster on West 83rd Street near Columbus
Avenue has spotted a fatal flaw in the dog warning.  Reader,
have you spotted it?  Reading as it does, it opens the post office
to an invasion of cats, pet rabbits, parrots, budgerigars, hamsters,
and shoulderloads of monkeys.  The loophole has now
been closed.  Since my last visit, a new sign has been added to
the dog sign.  It says: &ldquo;No pets allowed.&rdquo;

Lest the reader think that such rules are confined to New
York and London, he may be consoled by the universality (or
encroachment) of the practice elsewhere: a notice on every
entrance into the Miami Airport reads, &ldquo;No DOGS Or Other
Animals Permitted in this Establishment.  Except 'Dog Guide'
in accordance with Section 413.08 Florida Statutes.&rdquo;  I think
the time has come to sign off.


#### EPISTOLA {Earl Baldwin of Bewdley}

Like Mr. Gumfudgin [IV, 1], our family has been collecting
&ldquo;ormonyms&rdquo; (alias &ldquo;junctures&rdquo;) for quite some time.  May
I offer a few examples from real life?

At a time when our Eastern counties had been ravaged
by floods, we were intrigued to learn from the radio that the
authorities were strengthening the cedar fences all along the
coastline: a measure whose efficacy we could be forgiven for
doubting.  Not long afterwards we had a power blackout in
our area.  It was evidently a case of sheer carelessness, for we
were told when we telephoned the electricity people that a
bird had flown into the inattention wires at the local substation.
Our technical knowledge was only just adequate to
unravel this particular mystery.

Of course we quickly saw through these bland official
statements.  Not so an aunt of mine, who was genuinely enraged
to hear on the radio that a squad of 'seeker-debts' was
abroad in the land.  She had visions of a knock on the door in
the small hours, with the request to present her financial files
for immediate inspection.  Only when it became clear that
this suspicious crew spent most of their time at work on a sailing
ship did the poor lady put two and two together and
regain her composure.

I was once told that we had been asked to dine locally
with a Mrs. Great Sheep, a neighbour of whom I could not
remember ever having heard.  It came as a disappointment to
discover that her name was in fact Gray-Cheape.

In his letters to me over the years my father would often
write: &ldquo;It is a Grade A today,&rdquo; when he meant that there was
a total absence of sunshine.

Nudist coveries were things we always looked forward
to, even if they may not entirely satisfy Mr. Gumfudgin's
definition.  They were almost always made by that gallant
pioneer Major Breakthrough, who may not be quite the
clich&eacute; to you that he is on our side of the Atlantic.  There is no
one to equal him in Britain today for keeping abreast of nuder
velopment.

*[Earl Baldwin of Bewdley, Hemel Hempstead, Herts.]*


#### EPISTOLA {C. R. Cavonius}

I'm amazed that no Scot has taken you to task over the
tedious list of Murphy's Law and its promiscuous derivatives.
Murphy's Law is surely a plagiarism of Macpherson's Principle:
the toast always falls buttered side doon.  (Partridge
might well have glossed this by observing that Murphy's Law
first appeared after WW II, whereas Macpherson's Principle
was known as far south as Cambridge by the mid-30s, as it
forms the basis of Clark-Thrimble's classic experiment in
resistentialism.)

Your Menu Barbarisms [III,3], remind me of a Yugoslavian
restaurant in Passau, where the menu had been translated
into German and English.  Several dishes were served
'mit Beilagen,' which came across as (e.g.): 'Cutlet with
Enclosures.'  I didn't have the heart to try a speciality called
'Lustiger Bosnier,' or 'Gay Bosnian.'

*[C. R. Cavonius, Institut f&uuml;r Arbeitsphysiologie an der Universit&auml;t Dortmund]*

## Off Base
*Barbara R. DuBois, Los Alamos, New Mexico*

&ldquo;Dangling participle&rdquo; usually calls to mind an -*ing*
form like *dangling*, but the dangler that is faddish
now is an -*ed* participle: *based*.  Perhaps it's going the
way of *due to*, which many arbiters have accepted as equal to
*because*, though it once was considered equal to the participle
*owed to or owing to*.

The objectionable *based* is used with on: &ldquo;*Based on* an
annual prediction of one million carburetors, the engineers
state that the valve has solved the problem at no increase in
cost&rdquo; says that the engineers are based on a prediction.
Speakers and writers in the automotive industry like vague
unsubstantiatable claims, of course.  &ldquo;*Based on* the highway
estimates, the new cars will be more efficient&rdquo; has the cars
based on estimates.  Maybe so, but don't you wish they were
based on strong wheel bases instead?  &ldquo;*Based on* the income
we expect, eight cents per gallon is impossible.&rdquo;  Can that be
construed, or does it remind you of Orwell's claim that fuzzy
writing indicates fuzzy thinking?

The business world as a whole has adopted the phrase.
&ldquo;*Based on* your qualifications, there is no vacancy at
present.&rdquo;  Vacancy based on qualifications?  What is based?
Usually a judgment.  But the sentence becomes ugly if *based
on* is forced to behave: &ldquo;*Based on* your qualifications, my
judgment is that there is no vacancy for you.&rdquo;  Let's simply
discard it: &ldquo;There is no vacancy for an applicant with your
qualifications.&rdquo;  Another business example: &ldquo;*Based on* his
record of achievements, we determined whether to hire him.&rdquo;
Here a determination might be safely based, but who knows,
with that *whether* holding fire?  How about &ldquo;His record
helped us decide&rdquo;?  *Based on* complicates constructions unnecessarily.
One personnel executive maintains, &ldquo;We can only
know how people appear, not how they really are, *based on*
the observer's ability to understand.&rdquo;  What is based?  Knowledge?
Our knowledge of people is based on our ability to
read character from appearance?  I tried my version on him,
but *based on* his vague nod, I doubt that he knew whether
that was his meaning—or what was his meaning.  An entire
executive conference thought that they shouldn't promote the
employee *based on* one week's improvement.  Here the correction
is easy: they might *base* promotion *on* improvement.

Outside the quiet office, other business examples appear:
&ldquo;*Based on* the rates we use, we can't afford to discount.&rdquo;  This
would be clearer with the relationship directly expressed:
&ldquo;Our rates are so low that we can't afford to discount.&rdquo;  The
management may &ldquo;reject the bid, *based on* the disadvantages.&rdquo;
This one is a candidate for *because* substitution: &ldquo;reject
the bid *because* of the disadvantages.&rdquo;

Speaking of candidates, they pluck *based on* out of the
air regularly: &ldquo;He thinks we will win, *based on* his progress so
far.&rdquo;  A simple *from* often helps: &ldquo;From his progress so far, he
thinks he will win.&rdquo;  *Because* will work, but even better is a
direct expression of the causal connection: &ldquo;His progress so far
makes him think he will win.&rdquo;  But &ldquo;*Based on* a survey, the
electorate is aging&rdquo; needs more help: *from* doesn't work:
&ldquo;From a survey, the electorate is aging&rdquo; or, worse, &ldquo;The electorate is aging, from a survey.&rdquo;  The safest correction is the
straightforward &ldquo;The survey finds that the electorate is aging.&rdquo;
And &ldquo;The electors are elected *based on* plurality&rdquo; may
be hopeless, or we could try the simplest word, *by*: &ldquo;An elector
wins by plurality&rdquo;?  Sometimes *based on* can be direct if
we change an adjective to a noun: instead of &ldquo;He's a popular
man, *based on* his antiwar days,&rdquo; write &ldquo;His popularity is
*based on* his antiwar activities.&rdquo;  Even groups have trouble:
&ldquo;*Based on* past statistics, the commission knows that the new
program will work.&rdquo;  What is based?  Not the commission.
Again, *from* will do.  *Based on* wide experience, politicians
speak to all our problems, but I wish they would base action
rather than speech on experience.  Maybe our problem is dangling
politicians.  After all the speeches, the networks, *based
on* projections, predict the winner.  I guess a &ldquo;prediction *based
on* projection&rdquo; is too poetic.

A rare thrill was our Secretary of State's exact use: he announced
a policy of openness *based on* full information.  One
other correct—well, almost—example turned up: &ldquo;We want
to change the economic system to one more *based on* merit.&rdquo;
But the *more* needs to be moved: &ldquo;system *based more on*
merit,&rdquo; and what is it *more* than?  You see how contagious
and insidious *based on* is.

Though the sports world usually furnishes more examples
of errors than I can use, I have only one here: &ldquo;They
should be back in the second half, *based on* their record.&rdquo;  But
I'm listening carefully.  If baseball announcers catch the infection...

## A Metalinguistic Inquiry into F
*Bruce D. Price, New York, N.Y.*

One morning in the limbo between sleep and the so
called real world (a time when alpha waves are said
to spark), I had a curious epiphany.  Which was that the letter
F is distinguished by being the first letter of a great and *disproportionate*
number of words for unpleasant objects or attributes.
And, further, that there was something weak, dark
and unmanly about *the letter itself*.  My sleepy brain fumbled
through my vocabulary seeking confirmation: *fail, fickle, feeble,
fop, fag, frail, fetid, famine, fiasco, flimsy*...

Yes, there did seem to be some support for this odd insight.
But now I was coming awake and my logical mind
resisted the whole notion.  Would you not confidently predict
that each letter would have its equal share of appealing and
unappealing words?  What sense could there be in saying: No,
F seems different from the others, it's a weak and dark letter,
somehow tainted, somehow unique...

So there you have my Dionysian vision.  And the Apollonian
response—humbug.  How to resolve the matter?

I raced out of bed (for me, walking in the morning is racing,
indeed) and plunged into my dictionary of synonyms
(Roget's variety) which, unlike a dictionary, lists only everyday
words.  I scanned the entries commencing with F. I assigned
them all with quick justice to one of three categories
—those that were neither good nor bad (*field, farm, fog*);
those that were decisively positive (*fame, favor, fortune,
friend*); and those that were clearly negative (*failure, fatigue,
fascism, fear, fiend, frivolous, flabby, flaw, foible, flighty,
forfeit, fidget, fraud, feces, flatulence, felony, faded*, etc.).
And I tallied.  And, behold, there were *more than twice as
many* negative F-words as positive ones![^b1] 

So there, as far as I was judge of the matter, my somnolent
insight was substantiated.  And yet, now the puzzle
had truly unfolded.  What was there about F which should attract
this constellation of frailties, flops, and foulnesses?
What is F's dark magic?  My research, admittedly of the semi-demi-scientific
sort, took me to odd rooms of the library and
even odder recesses of the thoughts of friends and relations.

I soon learned that F is a fairly rare letter, heading up
less than half of 1% of English words.  Technically, F is an
unvoiced labiodental fricative.  My thoughts often returned to
that first feature—unvoiced—as a crucial factor.  F is not said
in the same complete way that a B or V is.

I recalled that a child's first experience with F is likely to
be F for False and F for Failure.  But which comes first—the
concept or the letter?  I attended a school which used the A-E
system of grades.  And I can still remember my confusion
when F would sneak back into the picture.  I asked a teacher
once: &ldquo;Why do we have two letters—E and F—for failure?&rdquo;
Obviously, F was not supposed to be used at all.  It's just that
F seemed more *appropriate* for a bad grade than E.

And there's *Frankenstein*, *foul balls*, *female*, *the forbidding*
and confusing *f-stops*, and *F-Troop*, a TV series about a
regiment of military *fumblers*.  I tried—without success—to
find the producer of that show to ask him: &ldquo;*Why F?*&rdquo;  Why
does *F Troop* more quickly suggest that the soldiers will be
*foolish* and *feeble-minded* than *C Troop* or *S Troop*?

And there are the eight (or so) notorious Anglo-Saxon
words of four letters.  F initials two (25%!).

And what, I wonder, would Rimbaud, so visionary
about vowels, have to say about F?

Jewish mystics, I read, have no trouble with the notion
that a letter possesses a special character.  Each letter of the
Hebrew alphabet is thought to have a peculiar cosmic significance,
having come into being as an emanation from God.
One scholar writes: &ldquo;Every letter represents a whole world to
the mystic who abandons himself to its contemplation.&rdquo;  Sad
to say, there is no F in the Hebrew alphabet—sometimes the
Hebrew P is our P, sometimes our Ph (or F).  Even with that
schizophrenia, it's worth reporting the alchemical associations
assigned to the Hebrew P: *North*, *Jupiter*, *Thursday*, *the right
nostril*, and *dominion/slavery*.  The last item is especially interesting
as my interviews often elicited comments about F's
aggressiveness or, more often, weakness!

By now thoroughly fettered to F, I began accosting
perfectly uninterested people with the startling assertion that
I was investigating &ldquo;the inner nature&rdquo; of a certain letter of the
alphabet.  I cautioned them *not* to think of words that begin
with this letter but to reflect on the *letter itself*.  Once they
had absorbed this novelty, I asked: &ldquo;What kind of letter is F?&rdquo;
After probing their initial answers, I went on to ask how they
positioned F on spectrums from clean to dirty, strong to
weak, and masculine to feminine?  With remarkable uniformity,
my dozen or so respondents perceived F as weak, dirty
and (sorry) feminine.  A decidedly Yin grouping.  The chief exception
occurred when people were visualizing a capital F,
usually perceived as strong and masculine (but still weak architecturally).
As you might expect, people gave different answers
depending on whether they were imagining the shape of
F or f.  However, it's the sound that's the thing and the answers
were far more uniform once people were asked to forget the
visual and to concentrate wholly on the *fff* sound.

I asked some respondents to go over the alphabet in order
to decide which was the weakest sounding letter?  Sometimes J
and K were mentioned but F always won.

I now have a file full of surprising remarks.  Space being
limited, I'll simply record some of my favorites:

>&ldquo;A small letter.  The sound is small.  And aloof.&rdquo;
(Newspaper Publisher)
>
>&ldquo;It's crazy, It's a ne'er-do-well letter.  It doesn't
look good.  I don't like either of the shapes.  It's like a top-heavy
woman.  It's because my name begins with F that I
don't like it...It's a bad letter, independent of my name.&rdquo;
(Photographer)
>
>&ldquo;It's a juicy letter because there's spit when I make the
sound.&rdquo; (Writer).
>
>&ldquo;Doesn't impress me.  Not a very forceful letter.  Very
mediocre to me.  Very bland.  I just feel it's a very limp letter.
Maybe because it's a soft, obscure sound.  Hidden.  It's a hidden
letter all by its teary little self.&rdquo;  (Secretary)
>
>&ldquo;It starts off strong but it sort of fades out...A sigh at
the end...Sounds like smoke-filled rooms.&rdquo;  (College
Student)
>
>&ldquo;Soft, fuzzy.  Drifts off into a bunch of soft sounds.&rdquo;
(Publishing Assistant)
>
>&ldquo;It's a sexy letter.  Maybe because it's made with lips and
teeth.&rdquo;  (College Teacher)
>
>&ldquo;I think it's a dark letter.  When I think of it, it's black.
Friday starts with F and Friday's black.  All words that start
with F are black...Not one of my most favorite letters...
To the ear it's not a pleasant sound...F is a letter that people
who stutter mispronounce a lot...Maybe it's the only
letter that you have to put your teeth to your lips.  Maybe this
isn't pleasant...The teeth actually leave the mouth.  It's aggressive...When
you are angry, it's sort of pleasurable to
use that mouth work.  It takes more mouth to say it.&rdquo;  (Banker,
clearly thinking toward the end of &ldquo;Fuck you!&rdquo;)

My mother, a painter, finally helped me see F's tragic
flaw.  &ldquo;I don't think it's a particularly pleasing sound,&rdquo; she
said, and I kept asking Why?  &ldquo;It doesn't roll off your tongue,&rdquo;
she said.  &ldquo;Maybe it's harder to say.  You've still got the sound
in your mouth.&rdquo;

Ah, it was that last curious phrase that made me realize
F is distinguished, *at the end* of its pronunciation, by a little
downward hook.  There is this long leaking of breath, *of life*,
as you say the sound, and then, unlike any other letter, a final
little deflation.  And in so far as I have reached any answer at
all from studying this miscellany of postcards from a world
beyond language, it is this: that F's special darkness derives
from its soft expiration and final death.  A little linguistic
funeral, you might say.  It's as though, in saying the letter,
you are faltering, failing and then, with a little gasp, you give
up life altogether.  So that F, more than any other letter, encapsulates
the experience of failing and death and brings
these fatal redolences, like hovering ghosts, to many a shadowed
word.

***

[^b1]: And let us not overlook the closet cases: *phobia, phoney*, and *phlegm*.  Or that inconspicuous group illustrated by *defile, defamation, defect*, or *refuse*.  (It is fascinating to me as a writer that the F-words are often far more powerful than the synonymous words: can *dirty* compete with *filthy*, *changeable* with *fickle*, or run with *flee*?  And, furthermore, F is father of many an odd and peerless word: *fussbudget, flimflam*, and *flibbertigibbet*.)


#### EPISTOLA {Karl F. Heumann}

I raise the ante in the freight train (or boxcar) competition
with this fragment that Fineman says he kept out of *The
Physical Review* (but published in *Science*):

>...the rare-earth local moment-free electron-like
conduction electron exchange integral compling...

He goes on to say that &ldquo;Hyphens are generally avoided in the
freight train construction except where they add significantly
to the confusion.&rdquo;

As long as I have the editor's attention I will ask if
readers know of another word, besides 'mantissa' (or mantisa),
that is believed to derive from both Welsh and Etruscan?

*[Karl F. Heumann, Bethesda, Maryland]*

## You Say &ldquo;Lieutenant,&rdquo; I Say &ldquo;Leftenant&rdquo;: Linguistic Notes on the Canadian Unity Crisis
*Jeff Miller, Toronto, Canada*

There's a difference of opinion up here, north of the border,
that seems to be both symbolic and symptomatic.
No one can agree on the pronunciation of the word *lieutenant*.

Language trouble is common in Canada, which—in its
youth and the dark shadow of the U.S.—frequently experiences
identity pangs that arise from its French and British colonial
childhood and prides itself on its &ldquo;mosaic&rdquo; philosophy of
acculturation (versus the U.S.'s old melting-pot idea).  Much
of the growing obloquy between the French-speaking majority
in the province of Quebec and &ldquo;English&rdquo; Canada—&ldquo;officially,&rdquo;
the rest of the country, or as Mordecai Richler says,
&ldquo;little, unobtrusive us&rdquo;—is based on particularly frequent,
knock-about linguistic skirmishes.  I've taken to seeing the
*lieutenant* tussle as allegory for this confrontation, for what
our journalists call &ldquo;the national unity crisis&rdquo;—the threat that
Quebec, Canada's second most populous province, may opt
out of Anglo-oriented Confederation in favor of independent,
Franco-oriented nationhood.  (That people in the Atlantic
provinces—New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward
Island—have on occasion spoken seriously of joining the U.S.
should Quebec secede in an indication of the emotional state
the &ldquo;crisis&rdquo; sometimes fosters here.)

Here's how the *lieutenant* problem manifests itself.
Gord, a fourth generation Canadian, is at a party in Toronto's
chic Yorkville area—our Greenwich Village.  (A fellow
expatriated Ugly American, a musician from Hawaii, assures
me all so-called Anglophone Canadians are named Gord.  His
name is Sam.) Inevitably, a portly, russet-mustachioed gentleman
in rumpled plaid or tweeds approaches G. and, wafting
Earl Grey or Gilbey's upwind of him, asks something like,
&ldquo;Have you ever read *The French 'Leftenant's' Woman*?&rdquo;  The
important point is, Gord's response will depend upon what
colonial influence predominates his speech and perception
patterns.

If he's a Royalist (usually one of those blood-minded
bassets and a recent immigrant himself, here largely by default
as a &ldquo;citizen of the Commonwealth,&rdquo; who still mourns
the attrition of The British Empire and sends embroidered
pillows to Queen Elizabeth) or one of those folks from Newfoundland
or towns bordering the U.S. who've acquired Oxonian
mannerisms as a reaction formation to their environments,
he will immediately understand the man.  He will thus respond
appropriately, perhaps adding something impressive
about the book's narrative style.

If he has never heard of the word &ldquo;leftenant,&rdquo; he is likely
from one of the prairie provinces or is a recent U.S. immigrant,
and will probably change the subject to Winnebagos
or the humidity.

But if he speaks French, or is sensitive to the politics of
language, or both, he may recognize that this pronunciation
is a form of reverse snobbery, comparable to that of pronouncing
the &ldquo;z&rdquo; (pronounced &ldquo;zee&rdquo; or &ldquo;zed,&rdquo; which is an even
more confounding aspect of the problem) in *rendezvous*.  He
will probably reply, &ldquo;You are speaking of *The French Lieutenant's*
[pronounced &ldquo;lyootenants&rdquo;] *Woman* by John Fowles
[pronounced?].  I found it a very complex and intriguing investigation
of both narrative technique, as with the films of
Godard, and the legacy of Victoriana in contemporary England.&rdquo;

You see, I've done some checking.  The English *lieutenant*
is a direct cognate from the French.  It derives from *tenant*
'taking or holding' and *lieu* 'place or stead' and referred to one
'who took the place of the French king as his representative.

But even the *Oxford English Dictionary*, that curmudgeonly
packrat of the tongue, can't explain the solecistic origins
of the &ldquo;f&rdquo; and &ldquo;v&rdquo; forms of the word (of which there must be
one hundred permutations and combinations) in its native
land.  It can only mumble through its MacBarren's-redolent
beard that they are &ldquo;difficult to explain.&rdquo;  It goes on to surmise,
still somewhat embarrassed but gaining confidence,
that &ldquo;the labial glide at the end of the Old French *lieu*&rdquo; may
have been mistaken at some time or other by some Brit.  or
other.  It does not, however, proffer a guess at the nature of
this person's affliction, that he could hear or see anybody's
labia gliding or otherwise engaging themselves at the pronunciation
of *lieu*.

Whoever this unfortunate soul was, his misaudition
blew through the language like an east wind.  He had half of
medieval England running around saying &ldquo;leaftenand&rdquo; and
&ldquo;leyftenaunt,&rdquo; while the other half muttered bilious compromises
like &ldquo;lutenand&rdquo; and &ldquo;lyeutenaunte.&rdquo;  All through the
14th century, one imagines, people went on pilgrimages to
Canterbury or threw bones on the floor at feasts and things,
tongue-tied and dyspeptic when the discussion turned to military
matters.

The *OED* further explains that by 1480, the dawning of
the Renaissance, Caxton pioneered the printed English malapropism
with &ldquo;lyeutenaunt,&rdquo; a variant close enough to the
pure form that things seemed almost to be looking up.  Indeed,
by some happy accident of recidivism, in 1481 he was
printing &ldquo;lieutenant.&rdquo;  But sadly, by 1489, probably confused
by what he was hearing at ye olde innes and church suppers,
he typeset the unfortunate phrase, &ldquo;Made him seneschall and
leeftenaunt generall of the royalme.&rdquo;  What Ben Jonson had in
mind with &ldquo;lieutenant-Coronell&rdquo; in 1598 is another, perhaps
equally unfortunate matter.

Ultimately, some other Englishman or other brought the
poisonous malapropism over here, contaminating the fragile
Canadian body politic with a rash of colonial &ldquo;loo-,&rdquo; &ldquo;lieu-&rdquo;
and &ldquo;lef-&rdquo;tenants and, partially at least, the schizophrenia
behind it.  Of course, a cure is being sought, in some cases
desperately.  Though, as far as I know, advice from the Usage
Panel at *The American Heritage Dictionary* (slightly higher
in Canada) has not been requested, a TV series called &ldquo;The
Let's Save Canada Hour&rdquo; has been produced.  There's Prime
Minister Trudeau's oblique threat of force to keep Canada
together, made in Vail at Gerald Ford's condominium.  There's
a book apocalyptically titled *Bi-Lingual Today*, *French
Tomorrow*, which disallows the French *any* language rights,
and which private citizens began hawking (at a rate of 1,000
books a day; compare to a recent short-story collection, *The
Butterfly Ward*, which was rated a national bestseller after
having sold 3,000 copies in a year), when some bookstores
refused to stock it.  And then there's the budding U.S. Expansionist
Party.

In the early fall of 1977, *The Toronto Globe and Mail*
carried a front-page story about the Expansionists, with the
headline, also apocalyptic, &ldquo;New U.S. Party Seeking to Annex
Canada.&rdquo;  An Expansionist spokesman told John Picton,
the Globe reporter, that the party had similar designs on
Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand
(somehow, the line-up looks familiar, but it may be too
early to tell).  &ldquo;If Quebec decides that geography and economics
are as important as language,&rdquo; the spokesman said, &ldquo;They
would be welcome.  But it would be their choice.&rdquo;  He added—
quite seriously, apparently—that the new alliance might be
called &ldquo;The United States of Canada&rdquo; since Canada &ldquo;is such
an inoffensive name.&rdquo;  At that date, mail to the party from
Canadians was &ldquo;running four to one&rdquo; in favor of the idea.

Evidently, Expansionist Party members have not heard
of Shell Canada, IBM Canada, GM Canada, Ford Canada,
Bell Canada, Coca-Cola Canada, McDonald's Canada...or
they'd realize that their goal here is pretty much redundant.
They'll have to take a new tack if they are to gain by and with
us.  Perhaps they could show us something in the way of a new
tongue—Cape Dorset Inuit, maybe.  Or how about a nice,
basic Cree?


#### EPISTOLA {Norman Schur}

In Willard Espy's letter [IV, 2], he quotes part of a letter
from Mr. Colin, which in turn quotes part of a letter from a
German friend who was puzzled by the phrase 'bend over
backwards.'  In his letter, Mr. Colin says, &ldquo;I used the phrase
bend (or lean) over backwards (in a letter to his German
friend).  This implies that Mr. Colin thinks that *bending* and
*leaning* mean the same thing in this context.  They would appear
not to.  One *leans* over backward (or backwards) to
establish one's freedom from bias or prejudice, like a judge
who disqualifies himself because he casually knows a distant
relative of one of the parties.  One *bends* over backward (or
backwards) to achieve any type of result (not just freedom
from prejudice), like a business man doing everything possible
to satisfy a customer.  So much for American English.  In
British English, these expressions do appear to be synonymous,
both meaning to 'go to extremes' or 'do one's utmost,'
as, for instance, in an attempt to see the other fellow's point
of view in an argument.  What is more, Britons not only lean
and bend; they also *fall* over backwards, and all three usages
are used the same way, although Britons seem to bend or lean
oftener than they fall.

In the 1973 edition of my Anglo-American dictionary, I
included the following entry:

>*fall over backwards,*  *lean over backwards*
>
>Uncharacteristically, in this case the British overstate.

*[Norman Schur, Weston, Connecticut]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*SYMBOLIC LOGIC*](https://www.amazon.com/Lewis-Carrolls-Symbolic-Logic-Carroll/dp/0517523833) 
Lewis Carroll: Part I-Elementary, 1896-Fifth Edition; Part II-Advanced, never previously published. Edited, with annotations and an introduction, by William Warren Bartley, III.  Illustrated with photographs, charts and diagrams, manuscript pages, and drawings. (Clarkson N. Potter, Inc., New York, 1977).

Here is a volume for gamboling.  Nearly half of its
material is published for the first time.  It will be of particular
interest to Lewis Carroll devotees, fans of his sort of logic
puzzle, and historians of nineteenth-century logic.  It is a
handsomely produced book that will sit well on any reading
table, and it has a striking story behind it.  Bartley is to be
thanked for bringing it to us.

Carroll's flavorful prose and whimsical examples are
delicious, but they are intended more as condiments than as
the book's meat.  For the work is genuinely a symbolic logic
treatise, replete with servings of logic diagrams and algebraic
notation.  While Carroll wanted to entertain and amuse, his
greater purpose was to popularize the subject and teach its
methods.  He systematizes at length — and with admirable
skill — what was seen in his day as the heart of deductive
logic.  By modern lights what is treated is only a minor part of
that subject, so that today's student of logic may regard the
treatment as limited and repetitive.  But for a technical book
of another time it affords an unusual degree of pleasure.

Part I comprises roughly half the volume; this is the first
new edition of it since Carroll's death in 1898.  The editor has
added Carroll's solutions to some of the problems, but other
changes from previous editions are minor.  Part II consists
mainly of material not heretofore published.  Bartley recounts
his search for its parts in his lengthy Introduction to the book.
The search spanned eighteen years.  Using sources in both
England and America, he pieced together scattered portions
of Carroll's manuscript and unearthed galley proofs whose
existence was all but unknown.  Judiciously arranged and
edited, what is assembled provides a reasonable sequel to Part
I. Still, Bartley argues that &ldquo;some material must be missing.&rdquo;

The logic to which Carroll addresses himself lies within
the compass of Aristotelian logic.  It concerns primarily
sentences whose underlying forms are &ldquo;All *a* are *b*,&rdquo; &ldquo;No *a* are *b*,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Some *a* are *b*,&rdquo; though Carroll's English substituends for &ldquo;*a*&rdquo; and &ldquo;*b*&rdquo; are often quite complicated.  Thus Carroll's logic is logic in the tradition of Boole, Jevons, and Venn.  It is aimed at solving problems, not at developing metatheory.  Typically,
Carroll gives a collection of premises and asks what
conclusion, if any, can be derived therefrom — and whether
any of the premises are superfluous.  As Bartley puts it, &ldquo;Logic
as presented by Carroll is no aid towards the foundations of
mathematics but a kind of instructional aid, of obvious pedagogical
utility, for detectives.  It is almost as if Sherlock
Holmes had commissioned Carroll to aid in the education of
poor Dr. Watson.&rdquo; (p. 24)

In Part I Carroll studies syllogisms and relatively simple
soriteses [*sic*].  He gives a diagrammatic method that is much
like Venn's, and brings it to life with a colorful exposition in
terms of a board and counters.  Also he develops a purely
notational technique, his &ldquo;method of subscripts.&rdquo;  With three
straightforward rules (p. 126) this becomes a calculus for
handling syllogisms, and it extends readily to the sorites.  There
are examples and problems by the hundred, with solutions.
They are adorned with such premises as these: &ldquo;No lambs are
animals accustomed to smoke cigars&rdquo;; &ldquo;Inaudible music is not
worth paying for&rdquo;; &ldquo;Some lions do not drink coffee&rdquo;; &ldquo;No ostrich lives on mince-pies&rdquo;; &ldquo;A fish, that cannot dance a minuet,
is contemptible.&rdquo;

Part II extends Part I, though not really radically.  The
arguments studied run to greater complexity.  Premises with
more than two terms appear: e.g., &ldquo;All *ac* not-*1* not-*e* are not-*k*&rdquo;
and &ldquo;All not-*lek* are *d*&rdquo; are renditions of premises of the
&ldquo;Pork-Chop Problem,&rdquo; cast in the abstract form employed by
Carroll.  There are glimpses of truth-functional connections;
still, they do not lead to anything more involved than &ldquo;Whenever
some of the Germans are *not* playing chess, and some of
the Welsh are *not* eating toasted cheese, none of the Irish are
fighting,&rdquo; which Carroll unpacks to &ldquo;If some *n* are not *p*, and
some *j* are not *k*, then no *g* are *h*.&rdquo;  The number of premises escalates;
it reaches as high as fifty in one sorites.  Again there
are examples and problems galore, and solutions for them.
Many are to be savored for their wit.

To deal with these increasingly complex problems Carroll
provides a &ldquo;method of trees,&rdquo; a graphic technique that
establishes conclusions by *reductio ad absurdum*.  This is the
book's most sophisticated method.  In modern terms, it may
be seen as a decision procedure that is adequate for much that
falls within the scope of monadic quantification theory.  Carroll
introduces the method to the reader by painstaking soliloquy;
this is pedagogical genius.  It is Carroll at his happiest,
too: We find him saying &ldquo;Now there is no reason to be so
lavish of accommodation for this pampered Class *b 'c': it
ought to be quite content with one* appearance.&rdquo;  Primes are
signs for complementation in Carroll's notation.

Carroll's adeptness at developing appropriate notation
and computational techniques stands out clearly; he was a
remarkable symbolic logician for his time.  Current methods
have broader scope and greater efficiency, but Carroll's still
pass muster where they apply.  His formal treatment is in no
way vitiated by his persistence in granting statements of the
form &ldquo;All *a* are *b*&rdquo; existential import.  He interprets such a
statement as expressing both &ldquo;No *a* are *b*' &rdquo; and &ldquo;Some a exist&rdquo;;
the construal now favored by logicians takes it to express
the former only.  Carroll argues somewhat lamely for his
view.  His persistence seems to have been prompted, in part,
by notational considerations, even as the modern attitude has
been fostered by systematic ones.

There is rich fare for the philosopher and historian of
logic — alternate versions of Carroll puzzles and paradoxes,
portions of Carroll's correspondence, especially with Cook
Wilson, and Bartley's editorial analyses.  There are eight versions
of the &ldquo;Barber-Shop Paradox,&rdquo; which turns on the issue
of whether &ldquo;If Allen goes out, Brown does not go out&rdquo; is compatible
with &ldquo;If Allen goes out, Brown goes out.&rdquo;  There are
Achilles and the Tortoise, problems about self-reference, and
many others.  Some of this material has appeared before, but
its assemblage in the present volume is more than welcome.

The volume is enormously enhanced by reproductions of
a large number of Carroll's handwritten manuscript pages
and letters.  We see solutions to problems as he set them down,
and we see copies of his letters to Wilson and to his &ldquo;mathematical
sister&rdquo; Louisa Dodgson.  The book also contains various
charts, drawings, and photographs, and it has a helpful
index.  It can be enjoyed in many ways.

*[Joe Ullian, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The prominently displayed name of the &ldquo;half-size&rdquo; or
&ldquo;fat-lady&rdquo; department in Bullock's Department store in
California is called *Lady Bullock*.  [Colleen Arndt, Morgan
Hill, California]

Cheers &amp; *JEERS*

&ldquo;The minister, the overseer, and the churchwarden of a
parish in Kent, after setting forth the misery of a young
man who was afflicted with a rupture, proceed to address the
public in the following terms: 'His friends applied to several
gentlemen for a cure, but all proved ineffectual, and wore a
truss, till we sent him to Mr. Woodward at the King's Arms,
near Half-Moon street, Piccadilly.'  It appears, therefore, that
several gentlemen, in the zeal of their compassion, not only
applied for advice, but actually wore a truss for this unfortunate
youth; who would, notwithstanding, still have continued
to languish in great misery, if they had not at last sent
him to Mr. Woodward.&rdquo;— *The Adventurer*, London, Number
15, Tuesday, December 26, 1752.  [Hugo G. Rodeck, *Northglenn,
Colorado*]

The latest bit of idiocy concocted by the moron fringe is
the captive &ldquo;hold&rdquo; music one is subjected to when
waiting to speak to someone on the telephone.  Several companies
have contracted for this &ldquo;service.&rdquo;  The music, which
sounds very much like the canned rubbish one becomes captive
to in public terminals, while waiting for planes to take
off, and under other, similar circumstances, is atrocious.  One
company we called recently had the &ldquo;hold&rdquo; connected to a
radio station, and we were forced to listen to two minutes of
commercials while waiting.  There ought to be a law.

An editorial warning that shoppers seem to be showing
diminishing loyalty toward advertised brand names
bears the headline, &ldquo;Has branded merchandise Peter-Principled?&rdquo;
(*Chain Store Age/Supermarkets*, January 1978).
Oh, how I would love to Peter-Principle the fellow who verbed
that noun!  [David Stone, *Chicago, Illinois*]

Misnomers perpetuated: *pierced earrings* (supplied with
their own ears?); *drip-dry hangers* (just wet them and
they drip-dry?); *self-storage* (put yourself on the shelf?); traffic lights bearing the legend, *Stop When Flashing* (= all exhibitionists must be stationary?).  [Barbara Ivantcho, *San Francisco, California*]

McGrew's Yukon Inn, Whitehorse, Canada, offers an
8-course &ldquo;Chinese Smorgasbord&rdquo; every Sunday from
5:00 to 10:00 p.m. [Arthur Meggett, *Hamilton, New York*]


#### EPISTOLA {Leon E. Boodey}

...I see now that my own Leon's Law is only a small
fragment of this great conspiracy.  Leon's Law merely states
what everyone has noticed with regard to restaurants, automobiles,
lovers, mechanics and periodicals: If you should ever
happen to find something that is really good, it will soon disappear.
No exceptions have ever come to my attention.  Perhaps
this is why I'm only subscribing for one year.

*[Leon E. Boodey, Broomall, Pennsylvania]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jim Robinson}

&ldquo;Regional Report # 1-The Bay Area&rdquo; [IV, 4], while offering
some insights into trends in American usage (not strictly
peculiar to the Bay area), is guilty of what I shall refer to as
'The Edwin Newman Syndrome' and moves me to jot this note
of mild protest.  In it we see offered pell-mell ostensibly under
a single rubric what are by any standards outrageous abuses
of proper usage (e.g. &ldquo;arms and legs akimbo&rdquo;) juxtaposed
with nonce and portmanteau words that should not be condemned
a priori simply because they are unfamiliar and
hence at first blush barbaric.  The neologism &ldquo;critiqueing&rdquo; is a
case in point.  It is difficult to see what objection the author
raises to this happy verbal, since it fills a lacuna: it is at once
shorter than &ldquo;making a critique&rdquo; and more specific than &ldquo;criticizing,&rdquo;
which has negative connotations (the Darbelnet
Theorem, after the French linguist Jean Darbelnet, states that
any word which acquires pejorative connotations gradually
loses its positive or neutral meanings in favor of the negative).
The other gerunds in this series seem to me similarly justifiable
in that they answer a need for brevity, with emphasis on
the activity.  American English has always tended toward a
racy, streamlined verb rather than the stodgy, pompous equivalent
verbal phrases; this is why French, which is unable, for
morphological reasons, to accommodate itself to this inflectional
cloning, seems to us so stiff and formal.  If we can have
&ldquo;babysitting&rdquo; and &ldquo;weightlifting,&rdquo; why not &ldquo;pickpocketing&rdquo;?

In summary, when &ldquo;critiqueing&rdquo; directions in the living
language, one should take care to isolate the truly abusive
from the merely curious and perhaps legitimate, and, secondly,
avoid confusing the descriptive and the normative (or *pre*scriptive).

*[Jim Robinson, Bluffton, South Carolina]*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald E. Schmiedel}

Our comprehension of the etymology of the word *gringo*
seems to be going from bad to worse and your inclusion of my
name along with Dr. Kaminer's letter [IV, 3] associates me
with a totally unacceptable explanation.

As John Ciardi pointed out a few months ago in *Saturday
Review, gringo* can be traced to the early 17th century in
Spain.  (See Juan Corominas, *Diccionario etimol&oacute;gico de la
lengua castellana*.)  It is an alteration of the word *griego*,
Greek, but has no more to do with an Anglo mispronunciation
than it does with those cursed green growing rushes (or
lilacs) which I hope have now withered for good.

*Gringo* is used in some South American countries to refer
to any foreigner, not just to a *yanqui*.  In the famous gaucho
epic *Mart&iacute;n Fierro* by Argentine poet Jos&eacute; Hern&aacute;ndez, the
gringo is an Italian!

*[Donald E. Schmiedel, Las Vegas, Nevada]*

*I'm Sorry!  -Ed.*


#### EPISTOLA {Giles Zimmer}

Robert J. L. Waugh's little article [IV, 3] on passing
flatus amused me no end as any discussion of euphemisms and
their plain counterparts usually does.  The cuphemisms for
bodily functions (function words?) are particularly intriguing.
I have always found it preposterously hilarious the
way the Wife of Bath's *quoniam* and Alison's *queynte* in the
*Miller's Tale* are both glossed as &ldquo;pudendum.&rdquo;  The first time I
read this word, I had to look it up although I had a pretty
good idea from context just what Chaucer's plain words
meant.

But back to flatus.  One euphemism for it that always
breaks me up is &ldquo;to break wind.&rdquo;  This was never part of my
vocabulary until I looked it up one day.  I was reading that
delightful medieval poem, &ldquo;The Cuckoo Song,&rdquo; and came to
the verse, &ldquo;Bulloc sterteth, bucke verteth.&rdquo;  The first three
words didn't bother me, but the fourth one did.  The gloss
promptly informed me that it meant &ldquo;to break wind.&rdquo;  My
dictionary very guardedly defined the euphemism so that I
had to read it twice to get the picture.  Since then I have
taught the poem numerous times and always break up my
class with my own translation of &ldquo;Bull starts, buck farts&rdquo; and
an accompanying explanation about fresh green pastures in
springtime.  I really think that beats &ldquo;breaking wind.&rdquo;

Another one of those hushed up words is &ldquo;piss.&rdquo;  People
actually are embarrassed hearing the word—such is its
stigma.  What they don't know is that once upon a time it was
as respectable as any old euphemism.  Teaching in the Bible
Belt as I do, I find it interesting to watch the reactions of some
students to Old Testament passages that actually use the
word.  2 Kings 18, 27 and 1 Sam. 25, 22 (King James version)
work well as illustrations of the pejoration of that word.  The
students are simply dumbfounded to hear that the Good Book
has dirty words.

*[Giles Zimmer, Batesville, Ark.]*


#### EPISTOLA {Don Pardee Brown}

The piece by Walburga von Raffler-Engel &ldquo;We Do Not
Talk Only With Our Mouths&rdquo; [IV, 4] is a valuably informative
article.  Unfortunately it is wormy with thoughtless statements
and concepts, and obstructs rather than advances clear
thinking about communication, particularly about language.

Her opening falsehood almost blocked my further read.
ing.  The initial phrase, &ldquo;In the past,&rdquo; followed by &ldquo;linguists
have analyzed...&rdquo; arrested me.  When, for God's sake, other
than in the past could linguists have done anything?  If this be
nit-picking, the article calls for it.  To say that linguists have
analyzed language as if words were the only means of conveying
a message is wild writing.  I'd be impressed if she could
name, out of the thousands of language analysts, even five or
six who are guilty of her first charge.  Her second — &ldquo;They&rdquo;
have ignored the fact that human communication is a combination
of words and gestures — is also egregiously irresponsible.

Language — by etymology, by scholarly tradition, and
by common sense — is man's communicative use of the
tongue.  Its powerful advantage over other communicative
media — including smoke signals, sky writing, grimaces and
other gestures — is that it works in the dark, goes over hills
and down dales, penetrates tent fabrics, goes around corners,
makes talk shows and other radio programs possible, and accounts
for Bell Tel's massive profits.

Communication is a big area.  It includes tom-tom,
smoke, wire, and wireless telegraph.  It includes the signals of
crickets, birds, and dolphins.  It includes cinema, fresco, and
every other form of art that isn't merely self-expression.  It includes
smirks, caresses, winks, sneers, and leers.  The highest
form known to man is the oral-aural system.  It cannot wisely
be confused with any other.  Strictly — which is to say
thoughtfully — speaking, it is called language.  To call any
other signal system language *except metaphorically* is to welcome
chaos into a complex preserve that is already sadly confused.
To refer to a set of body signals, for example, as a tongue
except with tongue well in cheek is expensive nonsense.

Every prominent linguist with whom I have worked or
conversed — and I can name fifteen in thirty seconds — was
more sensitive to the relations among verbal and non-verbal
signal systems than Walburga von Raffler-Engel seems to be.
She needs, fortunately, only to clean up her act.  Then her attack
on linguists won't be just another flea scaling an elephant's
aft with rape in his eyes.

*[Don Pardee Brown, Redwood City, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Walburga von Raffler-Engel}

*Professor von Raffler-Engel replies:*

I was rather pleased when reading Mr. Brown's comment
on my article.  Essentially, he agrees with my position
on the impossibility of fully understanding verbal language
when it is analyzed in total isolation from the other communicative
modalities that are consistently associated with it
in the natural setting.  I am glad that he could easily identify
fifteen of my fellow linguists who share our concern.  Not being
a professional linguist himself (I could not find his name
in the membership directory of the Linguistic Society of
America nor in the Directory of American Scholars), Mr.
Brown may not be familiar with the history of linguistics.

During the forties and the early fifties, the importance of
gestures, which had been pointed out by Trager and Pike,
was an accepted fact.  Then there came a period when language
was analyzed &ldquo;scientifically,&rdquo; and this term was not
understood to mean systematic, exact, exhaustive, non-contradictory,
and non-falsifiable but referred mainly to the methodological
rigor inherent in one particular analytical procedure.
That particular methodology called generative-transformational
did not include paralanguage, kinesics, or
cultural influences.  In 1971, the theory of language acquisition
(which I had proposed in a book published in 1964 — and
which was based on an interactionalist model and traced language
development to the cry of the infant and to his pointing
gestures) was termed a non-theory because it was not in
agreement with the then prevailing theory of language acquisition.
Language was supposed to begin with grammar, and
prelanguage was in no way relevant to the development of
speech.  In 1972, at a meeting on the methodology for dialect
research, I presented a paper on the relation of verbal and
non-verbal behavior in inter-ethnic code switching, only to
be told by Raven McDavid, who is one of the most outstanding
dialectologists in this country, that research in non-verbal
behavior warranted as little serious attention as do the irrelevant
sociolinguistic observations of William Labov.  (At least
I was in good company.)  In 1973, Gordon Hewes, in an excellent
article in *Current Anthropology*, felt it necessary to
remark on &ldquo;the long obsession of linguists with speech as the
only 'true form' of language.&rdquo;

Even as recently as last year, when I suggested a special
session on kinesics to the organizing committee of the International
Congress of Linguists, I was informed that this subject
matter was &ldquo;marginal&rdquo; and that papers on non-verbal behavior
would be scheduled in the section on Semiotics, as if
the spoken language were not as much a semiotic system as
the non-verbal forms of communication and as if the latter
were not more closely linked to verbal language than animal
communication.  As it turned out, the section on Semiotics at
that congress had some very interesting papers on non-verbal
behavior.

I do not wish to imply that linguists do not recognize
kinesics as a legitimate field of scholarly inquiry.  Most
linguists nowadays would include it alongside verbal language
within the study of communication.  Where, in my opinion,
linguists by and large are still behind psychologists and
anthropologists is in their attempt to study language acquisition
and speech programming as a self-contained process
without reference to the accompanying body motions and the
social factors which influence communicative behavior.  The
climate is changing, and more and more psycholinguists are
now working from a broader base.  Recent textbooks in introductory
linguistics are starting to include full chapters on
kinesics.

If my article implies that spoken language is not a superb
human accomplishment, I must not have expressed myself
clearly.  My point is that the oral-aural mode is intricately
combined with the tactile-visual mode.  Some very important
research by Peyton Todd has documented this in his case
study on the structural interference across sensory modalities
in second language learning.  We cannot disregard the fact
that human communication is multi-channel, as Birdwhistell
put it many years ago.

*[Walburga von Raffler-Engel, Vanderbilt University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Kay McKemy}

A little knowledge of prefixes can be a dangerous thing,
as illustrated by the following: Two very whispery ladies sat
next to me at a Wednesday matinee recently, the Broadway
production of *Otherwise Engaged*.  When one actor accused
another of being a &ldquo;latent pederast,&rdquo; the two talkative friends
held a buzzy discussion.  At intermission one turned to me and
asked, &ldquo;Do you understand all those things they said?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Uh, yes,&rdquo; I admitted.

&ldquo;Well, what is that 'pederast' thing?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It's a form of sexual perversion,&rdquo; I explained quietly.

&ldquo;Oh.  OH!&rdquo;  my neighbor exclaimed.  &ldquo;I see!  PEDerast, p-e-d.

It must be something they do with their feet.&rdquo;

I headed for the bar.

*[Kay McKemy, Armonk, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Clair A. Schulz}

The February VERBATIM contains several letters that
comment on my essay on rock.  I believe all of the correspondents
were sincere in their desire to be helpful, and it is
in the same spirit of sincerity that I respond to some of their
statements.

I realize that *Taj Mahal* is a person, but *Taj Mahal* is
also the name of the group identified with the man just as
Eumir Deodato and the musicians who accompany him are
considered collectively as *Deodato*.

I was aware of the Latin derivations of *Ars Nova* and
*Procol Harum*, but I forced them into categories where I
thought they would be more easily recognized.  It was a case
of round pegs and square holes.

The placement of *Sopwith Camel* and the *Beatles* is a
matter of personal opinion; I considered shifting the former
to transportation and the latter to music, but ultimately
decided to leave them with the animals.  There were other difficult
decisions: Should the *Flying Burrito Brothers* be
classified with food or relatives?  Does *Blue Oyster Cult*
belong with food or colors?  Does *Buffalo Springfield* belong
with animals or guns and, if the latter, should it be dropped
because it is the only group related to weaponry?  Choices,
sometimes arbitrary ones, had to be made.

I thank the gentleman for explaining how *Booker T. and
the M.G.'s* and *Fleetwood Mac* were created.  The major difficulty
in attempting to uncover the roots of groups is that,
prior to publication of my essay, practically nothing was
written about the origins of their names.  Finding *any* information
about some groups was an exercise in frustration
because none of the sources are definitive.  Rock magazines
like *Creem* and *Crawdaddy* are not very helpful.  Lillian Roxon's
*Rock Encyclopedia*, published in 1969, concentrates on
groups popular in the sixties.  Dick Clark's *Rock, Roll, and
Remember* is superficial.  Even *The Rolling Stone Illustrated
History of Rock and Roll* is selective.  I searched through back
issues of *Billboard* and combed through racks of records in
stores to fill in the gaps.  After weeks of preparation, all I had
were lists of groups that said nothing about what inspired the
artists to choose their names.  Therefore, I was forced to
engage in &ldquo;prudent speculation.&rdquo;  For example, I thought it
reasonable to assume that the *M.G.'s* were related to
automobiles; I was wrong.  I was more fortunate in assuming
that the group *L.T.D.* borrowed their name from the car.
Once, however, even my eyes failed me.  I had stated in the
essay that the *Runaways* were all females.  I had taken their
names right off a record album: Sandy West, Cherrie Currie,
Jackie Fox, Lita Ford, Joan Jett.  I even looked at an album
cover that featured a photo of the group wearing matching
outfits.  All five had long hair and stared into the camera with
similar sultry expressions.  Based upon this information, I
made one of my prudent speculations.  Wrong.  Sandy is a
male.  This would never have happened if they hadn't allowed
women to wear pants!

Even after I submitted the manuscript the second time I
had the distinct feeling that, although I was done with the
project, it would never be finished with me.  At night the Ghosts
of Rock Past rock past: &ldquo;There were *Four Tunes, Aces, Preps,
Freshmen, Tops, Fellows*, and *Lads*, but weren't there *Four
Coins*, too?&rdquo;  &ldquo;What about the *Sir Douglas Quintet*?  Would
they go with numerical or monarchical groups?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Couldn't
you find a place for *Aerosmith*?  How about *Herman's Hermits*?
And *Blood, Sweat, and Tears*?&rdquo;  *Ad infinitum*, add insomnia.

And yet, despite the &ldquo;blood, sweat, and tears&rdquo; and
second-guessing, I don't believe the article was more trouble
than it was worth.  I enjoyed the searching and the organizing.
I was as thorough in my research as my sources allowed
me to be, and I did not intend to mislead readers with incorrect
information.  Certainly &ldquo;We Shall Know Them By Their
Roots&rdquo; will not be the last word on the subject; the letters in
the February issue prove that.

*[Clair A. Schulz, Clinton, Wisconsin]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Figaro's dance, to the tune of an old quartet. (10)  
6\. Jet-set enthusiasm? (4)  
8\. Strung up and along.  (2, 6)  
9\. Reward as the fruit of one's labors.  (5)  
10\. A significant number sit back and join in the CB squawking.  (9)  
12\. Article and lecture the fighter followed were really acid.  (9)  
14\. Religious folk gathered at the river.  (5)  
17\. Early Rimsky-Korsakov opus was a heavy knockout.  (5)  
19\. There's no grace in the law for such a blind spot.  (9)  
20\. Shut up and don't divorce her!(2, 4, 3)  
23\. Stop, even though it switches to amber.  (5)  
24\. The proper relations for flying right? (6, 8)  
25\. Student of adult psychology. (4)  
26\. They have the sexiest lines in Hollywood. (10)

**Down**

1\. He went down, missing in action, but snob turns up around the Villagers. (9)  
2\. Curly was allowed in when the gang formed. (9)  
3\. If it's that triangle it will never die. (7, 4)  
4\. Do-it-yourself set on board, according to the sketches. (5)  
5\. Freedom of choice about time of performance.  (9)  
6\. Different ways of getting along with horses.  (5)  
7\. Staying where it's darkest.  (7)  
11\. Fighter plane to send haywire chopper into the ground. (11)  
13\. Where to keep old saws? (9)  
15\. Inferior elevators.  (9)  
16\. Dogmatic one among various others of that ilk...(9)  
18\. ...who, in angry dispute, throw ack-ack around. (1, 3, 3)  
21\. Put out, with no thanks! (5)  
22\. The oxy kind is a grim jest of a limited mind. (5)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Barber's-hop  
6\. Gush  
8\. Hanged in effigy  
9\. Melon  
10\. STA-tis-TIC  
12\. An-TALK-Ali  
14\. Trent  
17\. Sad-KO  
19\. I-g-NO-ra-N-ce  
20\. To keep mum  
23\. EMBAR  
24\. Wright brothers  
25\. Brat  
26\. Scenarists  

**Down**

1\. BO-he-MIA-NS  
2\. RING-let-ED  
3\. Eternal love  
4\. S-kit-S  
5\. OP-era-TION  
6\. Gaits  
7\. STYGIAN  
11\. Inter-CEPTOR  
13\. Axiom-AT(T)IC  
15\. Ennoblers  
16\. THEOR-ist-S  
18\. A hot w-A-r  
21\. Evict  
22\. Moron  



[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v5n1_1978-05)