--- 
title: "VOL V, No 2 [September, 1978]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## &ldquo;You know what I mean...&rdquo;
*Laurence Urdang, Editor, VERBATIM.*

Unlike die-making, language-making is a relatively imprecise
art.  But we must recognize it as an art, not a
science, with a little technique thrown in.  (Criticasters of current
English usage are more likely to complain that what little
technique there might be appears to have been thrown out.)

The less sophisticated speakers of English adopted the
preposition *like* first as a conjunctive adverb but ultimately as
an interjection.  I believe that the *likes, y'knows*, and other interpolations
in speech are not so much attention-getting devices
borrowed, as some maintain, from Black English, as
they are genuine comments made by the speaker about what
he is saying.  Undereducated, unsure of his facts, apprehensive
of how his comments may be received, sensitive to the slightest
nuance of disapproval among his listeners, the speaker
mitigates every statement by a qualifier (*like*), providing
himself with an escape through which he can avoid responsibility
for having made a false or (worse!) socially unacceptable
statement.  Thus, rather than coming right out and saying
something straightforward like, &ldquo;It's snowing,&rdquo; he will
say something like, &ldquo;Hey, man, it's like snowing, y'know?&rdquo;
Originally, this technique of calling a spade a shovel was
restricted to matters involving opinion, where the commitment
was made yet more tentative by the insertion of the disclaimer
*like*: &ldquo;That was a great movie&rdquo; became &ldquo;I think that
was a great movie&rdquo; which became &ldquo;I may not know anything
about movies, but I think that was a great movie,&rdquo; which became
&ldquo;That was like a real great movie, y'know?&rdquo;

Another reflex of the same syndrome of insecurity may be
in the use of a rising inflection (normally reserved for questions)
when making a bare statement of irrefutable fact.  That
is difficult to show in writing, but it is often heard, especially
in reply to questions: Q: &ldquo;Where were you born?&rdquo;  A: &ldquo;In New
York City?&rdquo;; Q: &ldquo;May I help you?&rdquo; A: &ldquo;I am calling to find
out if you are open till 6 tonight?&rdquo;

I am given to suspect, though, that the entire trend may
be attributable simply to a panlingual weakness for the
clich&eacute;.  Witness, for example, the silly expression *as we know
it*, frequently tossed in, with meaningless reference, after
words like *life* or phrases like *life on earth*.  Even some of the
(presumed) better writers of our day are prone to it as can be
seen from the following, which, quoted out of context, may
appear to be rather amusing.  [It is from a review by Auberon
Waugh of *The Public School Phenomenon in Books and
Bookmen*, June 1978.]

>By comparsion with the end of civilization as we know
it, the price of a taste for flagellation, or buggery, or a
certain awkwardness in relations with the opposite sex,
seems absurdly small.

In certain circles, it has become popular to the point of
irritation to characterize every eremitical, dyspeptic, closemouthed
selfish crank as a *private person*.  Again: the fear of
offending, combined with the pseudoclinical, &ldquo;psychological&rdquo;
approach invoked to conceal the genuine opinion or emotion.

There are others, of course, too numerous to catalogue
here.  Many have their origins in the jargon of psychiatry and
psychology, affording the speaker of a certain social level and
of unimaginative intellectual incapacity the opportunity to
affect the patina of the class to which he aspires.  Overhearing
a conversation between two practitioners of such jargon gives
one the impression that neither understands the other any
more than he understands himself, which is just as well, since
neither is saying anything anyway: most such &ldquo;conversations&rdquo;
are mere attempts by the some ninnyhammer to impress his
counterpart that he is familiar with the trendy shibboleths of
the current scene.  I suppose that this is what we must come to
expect in The Age of the Decline of the Subjunctive.

Partly responsible is the aphoristic clich&eacute; &ldquo;Everyone is
entitled to his (*or, more often their*) own opinion.&rdquo; That is as
much of a truism as any clich&eacute;.  It omits two important corollaries,
though, that are not implicit in it:

>1\.  Everyone doesn't, necessarily, have the right to
express his opinion;
>
>2\.  Everyone's opinion isn't, necessarily, of any value.

That is about as undemocratic a statement as anyone is likely
to associate with me, but there comes a time when one must
put his foot down.  Jacqueline Susann's novels are not good
just because they sell a lot of copies and because publishers
were willing to pay a $1 million advance for the last one.  Andy
Warhol's paintings are not good just because they are original
and cost a lot of money.  And, as we have learned from bitter
experience, our elected officials are not good just because they
run the country or because we were foolish enough to have
elected them.

What I find a disturbing trend in language is reflected in
aberrant discourse.  Taken to extremes, this total lack of simple
communication manifests itself in an exchange like this:

>&ldquo;How much does the lettuce cost?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Today is Tuesday.&rdquo;

That may be a little extreme, but here is an actual example
from *The N.Y. Times*, 29 January 1978, p. 17:

[...A reporter asked if the President was in better health.]
&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; Mr. Carter said, &ldquo;much better; better than campaigning.&rdquo;
Maybe I am becoming senile, but I cannot see any way
in which the reply fits the question.  This is not an example of
a grammatical lapse of the kind Edwin Newman loses sleep
over.  It is something far more serious.  It has many common
reflexes.  The rest of you may have become used to it by now,
but I am made nervous by an exchange like this:

>I: Would you like to have another drink?
>
>GUEST: I'm fine, thanks.

I suppress a rude impulse to say something like, &ldquo;I didn't ask
you how you felt; I asked you if you wanted another drink.&rdquo;
Maybe that is a manifestation of language change that this
poor, tired brain is just too conservative to assimilate, but I
must confess it makes me nervous.

Examples of this sort abound.  It seems that every waiter,
waitress, bartender, salesperson, and all others in comparable
jobs deliver a plate, glass, or what-have-you accompanied
by a &ldquo;There you go.&rdquo; What in heaven's name does it mean?
There once was a clich&eacute;, seldom heard today, that was uttered
under similar circumstances.  It was, &ldquo;There [or Here]
you are.&rdquo; It was often followed by a &ldquo;Sir,&rdquo; &ldquo;Miss,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Madam,&rdquo;
but today, when someone calls me Sir—in America—I
seem to detect an undertone of derision: this purely polite
word has assumed the connotation of sardonic servility and
has made me suspicious of the sincerity of whoever utters it.

While I am on prejudices, I must mention the word
*meal*, which has always carried with it the association of
gruel, haggis, cold oatmeal, and other delectables.  Yet it is
persistently on the lips of every waiter, waitress, and stewardess
(but you're not allowed to use that term any longer—everyone
is now a *flight attendant*) as your breakfast, lunch, or
dinner is placed before you: &ldquo;Hope you enjoy your meal.&rdquo; As
soon as I hear the word *meal*, any enjoyment I might have derived
from it has been effectively squelched.  In the same category
is &ldquo;Have a nice day.&rdquo;  Mercifully, this is no longer accompanied
by a smiling moonface on packets of sugar, matchboxes,
and stickers clinging to windows and walls.  In fact,
my early revulsion at the expression seems to be diminishing,
for I have reconciled myself to the meaninglessness of it, just
as my forebears must have done when &ldquo;God be with you&rdquo; became
*Goodby*.

The inability to describe a simple fact abounds in the
press, probably brought about by some legalistic rubbish having
to do with protecting &ldquo;rights.&rdquo; The typical example is the
situation in which a reporter, present at an attack on a person
that takes place in full view of dozens of other people, describes
the capture, 50 yards away, of the attacker by a
crowd.  The criminal immediately becomes the &ldquo;alleged assailant,&rdquo;
notwithstanding his having committed the assault
before several witnesses.  This cautionary legalism, which
prevails when describing naughty behavior, is never extended
to the reportage of good behavior: one never reads of the
&ldquo;alleged hero.&rdquo;

As often as they are guilty of interpolating meaningless
interjections into their speech, thus giving their hearers the
impression that they are saying a great deal more because
they are talking a great deal more (or, perhaps by talking
more, albeit saying less, they create the illusion that their
limited vocabularies are capable of more expression, if not
more expressiveness), speakers also tend to apocopate the
language.  One hears &ldquo;As far as [the weather, it will be cloudy
and...]&rdquo; more often than &ldquo;As far as [the weather] is concerned...&rdquo;

I find myself consciously trying to avoid clich&eacute;s.  Some,
of course, are unavoidable, like *Hello, How are you, See you
soon, Goodby*, etc., and it would be foolish to try to create
substitutes.  Besides, they don't jangle my nerves the way the
new crop of stereotypes does.  It can probably be demonstrated
through information theory that content is virtually
unassimilable when delivered in concentrated doses.  That is,
we may be unable to understand &ldquo;pure&rdquo; information: it must
be couched in sufficient white noise to allow it to sink in;
perhaps our brains need a rest in between bouts of concentration
that last longer than a millisecond or two.

As a parallel, I cite the difference between conversation
in which information is exchanged (in small doses) and the
reading aloud of a scholarly paper that was meant for publication.
Too often have I attended academic meetings where
inept participants, bent on preparing articles to be published
in a journal or in the proceedings, have seen fit to read it to
the audience.  It is one thing to read such a paper to oneself,
and, if one encounters a difficult or recondite passage, to be
able to reread it as many times as necessary for full comprehension;
it is another to listen to the same paper read aloud: it
is usually incomprehensible.  At a recent meeting I attended,
the audience was regaled with about five minutes of statistics!
And the speaker was a university teacher.  Small wonder that
no one can learn anything any more.

What separates good speakers and writers from bad
speakers and writers is the ability of the former to make a
conscious choice.  I am, for instance, able to speak and write
in a variety of styles, from very informal to very formal.  I can
affect an illiterate style if I wish.  The illiterate speaker is incapable
of saying what's on his mind in more than one way.  Indeed,
the good stylist can probably think of a dozen different
ways in which he can say the same thing, while the poor
stylist has few such resources at his disposal.  Unfortunately,
that doesn't mean that I can express myself with great artistry,
merely that my technique is reasonably versatile.  Also,
because of the reams of text I generate regularly in articles,
books, and correspondence, I am prone to an occasional solecism,
though I do try to avoid them.  I strive for clarity first,
expressiveness second.  Long ago I gave up any notion of becoming
a creative writer: as a lexicographer, primarily, I am
compelled to eschew fiction in my writing.

Recently, I was told by an editor that, as far as he knew,
I was the only person who writes the way I speak.  I am still
unsure whether that is complimentary or not, but I take it, at
least, as not intended as a slur.  Upon taking up the question
with another editor, I was told that the first editor was mistaken:
in fact, said Editor Two, I speak the way I write.  That
seemed flattering enough, so I left it alone (except to bring it
up here).

I know from bitter experience that however people may
speak, there are damned few who can write even a few simple,
well-organized, grammatical sentences.  Still fewer can
write without spelling errors.  And there are even fewer who
can write interestingly.  That subject had best be abandoned
for now, for it leads to comments on modern education, which
lead to apoplexy.

Speech must differ from writing in several important
ways.  Sound is fleeting: the message must get through the first
time or it must be repeated.  In order to get through the first
time, it must be presented in a palatable form, not riddled
with arcane sesquipedalianisms or convoluted by recondite
syntax.  It cannot be too concentrated or condensed.  Speech
must be punctuated by redundancy.  Eye contact with an audience
provides the feedback required to keep the speaker informed
about his success in communicating his ideas: a knitted
brow here, a dreamy expression there should alert him
that all is not well, and the idea might merit rephrasing.  That
is not always the case, however.

I recall my father's story about a classroom incident that
took place many years ago.  He was lecturing about *Hamlet*,
and, as most speakers do, had established eye contact with
one student, in particular, seated at the front of the class.  The
eager, interested, curious expression on the student's face
reflected an intelligent response to the lecture that my father
too rarely encountered.  After a bit, he paused, asking if there
were any questions or comments.  The bright student's hand
shot up, and he was acknowledged.  &ldquo;Mr. Urdang,&rdquo; he asked,
&ldquo;What is that pin for that you wear in your lapel?&rdquo;  My father
lapsed back into his habitual state of disillusionment from
which he seldom recovered thereafter.

Current educational theories of testing seem to be changing
under pressure from groups who maintain that the old-fashioned
tests didn't take into account their culture and the
things they know as a result of having been brought up in a
different way.  The idea sounds noble enough in principle,
and it even sounds eminently democratic.  However, the entire
thrust of the argument is nonsensical, as I shall attempt to
show.  First, it should be pointed out that the older tests were
conducted under a propagandistic approach that was unfortunate
in its selection of terms like *intelligence, intelligence
quotient*, and so on.  In most cases, the tests were to determine
either what someone had learned in school or what skills he
had—developed or innate—that would equip him better to
cope with what he was likely to encounter in the world.  It is
perfectly true that someone who was ignorant of history
could cope quite well in an assembly line, where he might
need skill as a mechanic, or as a salesman or retailer, where
he might require skill as a judge of personality.  Such skills are
hard or impossible to evaluate by a written test.  The imputation
that those who possess a certain kind of intelligence will
make better citizens or businessmen or workers has not been
demonstrated.  Whatever their morality may be, pimps and
prostitutes, confidence men and thimblerig artists are probably
among the best practical psychologists in our society in
that they are almost infallible judges of human character and
personality: they really have a basic understanding of what
motivates many people, and they didn't learn it from textbooks.
For another thing, there is no trick in being honest,
however moral it may be and no matter how important it
may be to stay on the side of the law for societal reasons.  The
fact is that the criminal who is not caught, despite the enormous
odds against him, must have some attributes that most
of us do not possess.  Certainly, those attributes do not emerge
from the results of the Stanford-Binet tests—at least not in
those terms.

I am not condoning prostitution, pandering, or crime: I
am merely pointing out that success in those—and many
other—callings demonstrates a measure of ingenuity, skill,
and proficiency that is not tested by present-day methods.
Only a few of the skills required to succeed in our society are
equated with testable &ldquo;intelligence.&rdquo;

Second, the fallacy of the pressure groups that would
change the testing base lies in the assumption that their intelligence
is being insulted.  In the current spate of action moving
toward bilingual education in the United States, the
forces seem to believe that their cultural heritages are being
insulted.  What rubbish!  This is America, and America has its
own cultural heritage.  It is probably the most adaptive, adoptive,
and adaptable cultural heritage that has ever existed on
the face of the earth.  Yet, the Italian-Americans, Spanish-Americans,
Afro-Americans, Greek-Americans, and all other
kinds of Americans seem bent on destroying the American
culture by insisting that their children be taught in Spanish,
Black English, and myriad other languages so that they can
maintain their &ldquo;culture.&rdquo;  If these pressure groups are successful,
America, once a unique &ldquo;melting pot,&rdquo; will become a collection
of competing enclaves of foreigners.  The irony of the
entire movement is that the immigrants who populated the
United States left their homelands because they wanted to
escape from the very cultures that allowed—even fostered—
poverty, lack of freedom, and indignity of the individual.  To
be sure, these immigrants brought with them certain vestiges
of their heritage and continued to pursue some of the cultural
and religious rituals of the Old Country.  Seldom were they
fanatical about it.  We all appreciate the traces of other cultures
found in America: the foods, the costumes, the other
relics.  Everybody is Irish on St. Patrick's Day.  Every one
dances the hora at a Jewish wedding.  Everyone celebrates
Christmas, whether he wants to or not.  The Jews eat subgum,
the Chinese eat bagels, the Russians eat spaghetti, and the
Italians drink vodka.  That's what America is all about.

But the divisiveness that comes from a factional pursuit
of these and other cultural (or religious) rituals can be
dangerous to what, for lack of a better way of describing it, I
must call the &ldquo;American way of life.&rdquo;  Americans of Lebanese
origin should not be concerned as much that the American
government do what is right for the people of Lebanon as
they should worry about its doing what is right for them as
American citizens.  The same is true for Jewish, Catholic,
Mexican, and any other kinds of Americans.  The United
States is a nation with its own citizens; it cannot survive as a
haven for private political lobbies from around the world.

Lest that make me sound like an America-Firster, let me
hasten to add that, with all due sympathy for all peoples
everywhere, I still believe firmly that America must do what
is expedient for its own citizens in the short and long runs.
Thus, we may be faced with trying to determine, as successfully
as we can and within the constraints of what is
morally proper, what course must be followed to accord the
greatest good to the greatest number of American citizens—
not Bolivian, Panamanian, Israeli, or Lebanese citizens, but
American citizens.

The same applies to the teaching of English and of every
other subject at every level in our educational system.

If this be utilitarianism, make the most of it.

## Names in Fiction
*Donald Hawes, The Polytechnic of Central London*

THE SIMPLEST AND CRUDEST method of naming fictional
characters was to use epithets denoting their predominant
traits: *Volpone* (in Ben Jonson's play of that name), *Mr.
Worldly Wiseman* (in Bunyan's *Pilgrim's Progress*), *Allworthy*
(in Fielding's *Tom Jones*), *Verisopht* (in Dickens's *Nicholas
Nickleby*).  Some writers refined the system and more subtly
contrived nomenclature that sounded reasonably authentic
and yet suggested temperament and behavior: *Becky Sharp*
(in Thackeray's *Vanity Fair*), *Lucy Snowe* (in Charlotte
Bront&euml;s *Villette*), *Slope* (in Trollope's *Barchester Towers*),
*Gabriel Oak* (in Hardy's *Far from the Madding Crowd*).  Such
conventions, though not completely dead, have little life left
in them today, since on the whole modern writers of fiction
try to name their personages in what they hope is a realistic
fashion.  They attempt, however, to avoid names that might
be considered inappropriate or unconvincing when attached
to particular people.  A fictional character who is supposed to
be heroic or who is meant to move the reader to sympathize
with his tragic predicament cannot be given a name that may
sound ludicrous or vulgar.  A pretty young girl cannot be called
by a name that evokes an image of an ugly harridan.  A factory
worker should not have a name associated with an ancient
aristocratic family.  Social class, occupation, age, nationality,
and the law of libel are all relevant factors.  (I forbear
to quote examples, because subjective opinion would obviously
be involved in my choice and because certain people
might well be offended if they saw that I had placed their
own names in derogatory categories).  Nevertheless, despite
the care that authors may take nowadays to be realistic and
convincing, the names of some personages in novels, short
stories, plays, and films occasionally strike me as typically fictional
in a way that I can exemplify but cannot easily define
(though I shall make an attempt).

Looking through a recent copy of the weekly, the *Radio
Times*, which gives details of BBC television and radio broadcasts,
I found the following names amongst the dramatis personae
of films and plays: *Helen Carobleat, Jonas Bradlaw,
Rodney Gloss, Rupert Hillyard, Marcus Gwill, Detective-Inspector
Purbright, Juliette Baldock, Yvette Marson, Gladys*
*Trimble, Bridget Madderley, Steptoe, Wilfred Hargreaves,
Miss Billinge, Rupert Lovell, George Underdown, Derek
Paynton, George Barford, Agnes Remnant, Mr. Posling, Joanna
Finch*, and *James Fenner-Baxter*.  I then turned to the
Everyman *Dictionary of Fictional Characters* (edited by William
Freeman, revised by F. Urquhart, 1973), and chose
these surnames in alphabetical order: *Armitage, Beverley,
Carruthers, Drewitt, Effingham, Frensham, Golightly, Harrington,
Inglewood, Joliffe, Kershaw, Longstaff, Manderson,
Norrington, Osgood, Pargiter, Rumbold, Singleton, Turnbull,
Updike, Verrinder, Wyvern*, and *Yolland*.  Now I think
that anyone who saw all those names listed in isolation and
without explanatory comment would instantly guess that
they could belong only to fictional people.

After considering these names, I think it is possible tentatively
to define some common characteristics.  The points I
am going to make apply to the surnames, since generally
there is, I think, less that is notable in fictional personages'
Christian names, although some combinations have a typical
ring about them (for example, *Joanna Finch*).  First, the
names are all, I suppose, slightly unusual, but not of course
fantastic in the way that Dickens's names can be.  In fact, a
consultation of the 1977 London telephone directory shows
that most of them are in actual everyday use, although some
have only one or two entries.  Secondly, almost all of them
have at least two syllables, thereby giving a hint of rhythm,
and are also euphonious, with a noticeable predominance of
&ldquo;I&rdquo; and &ldquo;r&rdquo; sounds.  Thirdly, some suggest (or really are) place names, with such endings as -*dike, -down, -ford, -ham, -ton,
-wood*, and -*yard*.  These three features lead me to conclude
that the majority of the names tend to convey to the reader a
pleasant English ordinariness, just tinged with eccentricity
and humor, although I realize that this description may not
be applicable to all the holders of the names.  This diffident
conclusion of mine shows that in this note I am referring
mainly to English fiction, which in this respect has more limited
resources than American fiction, since it has not at its disposal
the enormous range and variety of names that are
naturally available in the United States.  On the other hand,
English names can perhaps more clearly suggest such things
as social status and regionalism.

Readers of VERBATIM may like to explore this topic further
in future issues.  It would be especially illuminating to
hear from writers of fiction who could give us particulars
about the factors responsible for the names they themselves
have chosen for their fictional personages.

## Useful Usage

In case readers have been wondering about what happened
to English in our newspapers, it will provide little consolation
to learn that at least one promulgator of felicitous
usage is now in retirement: Perry C. Hill, former managing
editor of *The Milwaukee Journal*.  Mr. Hill, a VERBATIM
reader and faithful correspondent, was the principal author
of a *Stylebook* which is replete with admonitions like &ldquo;disregard
Web.&rdquo;  he explains that &ldquo;*Webster's Third* expectably
fuzzes over many ... distinctions or even lists some pairs [of
words often confused and erroneously interchanged by careless
or ignorant or imprecise writers (and speakers in some
cases)] as synonyms.&rdquo;  He goes on, &ldquo;We gave up the struggle to
distinguish meanings of *stanch* and *staunch*, *gantlet* and
*gauntlet*, and opted for the -*au*- spellings in all senses.&rdquo;

We reproduce the list here for the convenience of our
readers who probably don't need it but who undoubtedly
know someone who does.  Thus we spread the Gospel according
to Sane Thomas the Grammarian.  The discriminations
can be found by checking in a good dictionary [&ldquo;disregard
Web.&rdquo;], and for those who need it, the effort is good exercise—
like mental jogging, which is the only kind we indulge.

>*adapt, adopt*  
*a while, awhile*  
*adverse, averse*   
*affect, effect*  
*anxious, eager*  
*appraise, apprise*  
*attorney, lawyer*  
*auger, augur*  
*bail, bale*  
*bait, bate*  
*beside, besides*  
*between, among*  
*bogey, bogy*  
*breach, breech*  
*burglary, robbery*  
*can, may*  
*cannon, canon*  
*canvas, canvass*  
*capital, capitol*  
*carat, karat*  
*caster, castor*  
*cement, concrete*  
*chords, vocal cords*  
*cinch, clinch*  
*climactic, climatic*  
*co-respondent, correspondent*  
*complement, compliment*  
*comprise, consist of*  
*confidant, confident*  
*continual, continuous*  
*council, counsel*  
*credible, credulous*  
*decimate, deplete*  
*desirable, desirous*  
*device, devise*  
*disburse, disperse*  
*discreet, discrete*  
*due to, because of*  
*ecology, environment*  
*electricity, electronics*  
*Episcopal, Episcopalian*  
*equable, equitable*  
*far away, faraway*  
*farther, further*  
*fearful, fearsome*  
*fewer, less*  
*flack, flak*  
*flair, flare*  
*flaunt, flout*  
*flier, flyer*  
*flounder, founder (verbs)*  
*forbid (to), prohibit (from)*  
*forceful, forcible*   
*forego, forgo*  
*foreword, forward*  
*fulsome, lavish*  
*furor, furore*  
*gage, gauge*  
*gibe jibe*   
*grisly, gristly, grizzly*  
*hail, hale*  
*hangar, hanger*  
*hanged, hung*  
*historic, historical*  
*hoard, horde*  
*hopefully, one hopes*  
*human, human being*  
*hurdle, hurtle*  
*impassable, impassible*  
*imply, infer*  
*impugn, impute*  
*incredible, incredulous*  
*inter-, intra-*  
*judge, jurist*  
*lay, laid*  
*liable, likely*  
*lightening, lightning*  
*like, as*   
*linage, lineage*   
*loath, loathe*   
*manifold, manyfold*   
*mantel, mantle*  
*masterful, masterly*  
*milk shed, milkshed*  
*noisome, noisy*  
*occur, take place*  
*oral, verbal*  
*ordinance, ordnance*  
*palate, palette, pallet*  
*parlay, parley*  
*perquisite, prerequisite*  
*plat, plot*  
*precedence, precedents*  
*premier, premiere*  
*principal, principle*  
*prone, supine*  
*prophecy, prophesy*  
*proved, proven*  
*rack, wrack*  
*rebut, refute*  
*reign, rein*  
*repellant, repellent*  
*resin, rosin*  
*role, roll*  
*sewage, sewerage*  
*straight, strait*  
*swath, swathe*  
*textual, textural*  
*thrash, thresh*  
*tort, torte*  
*tortuous, tortwous*  
*unique, unusual*  
*waive, waver*  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

From *San Diego Magazine:* &ldquo;She juggles a load of volunteer
activities with the poise of an octopus ... [and she is]
shepherding the development... around the rapids of task
forces, commissions, government agencies, through the Scylla
and Charybdis of financial packaging.&rdquo;  [Barbara Marsh, San
Diego]

## Don't Call Me an &ldquo;Adult!&rdquo; — I'm a Mature Human Being
*Kay Haugaard, Pasadena, California*

THE FLAGRANT DECLINE in the meaning of the word *adult*
in the past few years has reached a point where I am
not certain I want to admit to being one.  As one child speaking
to another in a *New Yorker* cartoon succinctly puts it,
&ldquo;Adult means 'dirty.' &rdquo;  I guess this is one example to support
the theory that words have a tendency to decline from good to
bad, or so one of my English professors once said.  He said that
the word *stink*, for instance, used to have a sense for which
we would now use the word *fragrant*.

Because of this creeping change of meaning in *adult*, I
have noticed that writers frequently alert us to this secondary
meaning by putting it in quotation marks.  Thus we have
&ldquo;adult&rdquo; movies, books, and magazines.  Perhaps this is one
step along the route of its decline by using the word as a euphemism
for a vulgar or negative word—in this case as the
little girl said, &ldquo;dirty.&rdquo;

Once this insight occurred to me I started thinking of
other words that might be examples of similar declines.  If you
read many Victorian novels you find a number of words that
strike you as being quaint because they have been completely
taken over by their secondary meaning.

But to go back even farther in time, I found that *heathen*
was once simply a descriptive term that meant 'a person who
dwelt on the heath,' just as a *pagan* was 'a person who dwelt in
the village.'  *Barbarians* were 'outsiders' at first and the word
carried no pejorative connotations, just as *philistines* were just
'inhabitants of the country of Philistia.'  These words have gradually
been completely absorbed by their secondary meanings.

That's not all.  A *toilet* was originally a simple little piece
of cloth (French *toile* 'cloth' + -*ette* diminutive suffix) or
*towel* as we have adopted it.  These little towels, used for personal
grooming, were frequently found in a small room or
booth that also contained a water closet.  Gradually the room
where one attended to personal grooming or &ldquo;made one's toilette&rdquo;
came to be called just the *toilet*.  It has since lost all its
grooming connotations and has become a term with uncertain
connotations for water closet; so much so that we feel obliged
to cast about for new euphemisms to take its place—*rest room*,
*powder room*, etc.

Pressing onward, we find that the word *slop* originally
was *slip*, a kind of goopy, wet, clay mixture, a term still used
in ceramics.  A more circuitous route was taken by the word
*slut* which derives from *sleet* 'something soft, formless, and
yielding.'  It was used to describe a rather sloppy, disheveled
woman and gradually, by extension, one who was loose and
easy in a moral sense.

A *dunce* or *dunceman* used to be merely a follower of
15th century John Duns Scotus.  He was regarded as a foe of
humanistic education and gradually the word came to mean
any dull, stupid person.

*Propaganda* had a similarly respectable origin from *congregatio
propaganda fide*, 'the congregation for propagating
the faith.'  But the methods it used apparently gave it a bad
name, hence the negative implication of the word as we now
use it.

The word *cheap* once meant merely 'a purchase price.'
*Fart* (akin to German *fahren* 'to go') was formerly a polite
euphemism.  There was a time when it was a compliment to a
girl to be called *homely*.  It meant 'a home-loving person filled
with all the domestic virtues.'

A lot of the debasement of the status of a word's meaning
from positive to negative seems to be assisted by quotation
marks, because in written language we use them to give words
a suggestion of special intonation indicating they are euphemistic
or ironic.  For instance,

>*They 'liberated' the Volkswagen*.
>
>*Wouldn't you just &ldquo;love&rdquo; that*?
>
>*She's a real &ldquo;jewel&rdquo; isn't she*?

Are these uses of these words the first step toward destroying
the original meaning of the word?  Perhaps.  It probably
depends on how popular the substitute word becomes.  I saw a
case of this in miniature when my eldest son, about seven at
the time, expressed surprise at finding out the meaning of the
word *treasure*.  Whenever he had come into the house with
some oddment of childish discovery—a bottle, can, rock,
stick, or weed—I would say, &ldquo;Oh, is that your treasure?&rdquo;  So
when I read him a story about buried treasure he asked what
it was.  When told that it was gold and jewels and valuable
things, his wondering response was, &ldquo;Gee, I thought it was
any old junk you found lying around.&rdquo;

Who knows what strange, irrational, metaphoric twists
and turns our words, at present respectable, will take in the
future?  For those interested in language it is irritating to lose
old meanings but equally exciting to meet new ones.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Ironic Misnomer: Mohawk Tire Company—considering
the fact that the American Indian never invented the
wheel!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

*Jim Lehrer*, Channel 13, N.Y.: &ldquo;Doctor, what is your
opinion of mid-wiffery?&rdquo;  Asst. HEW Secy. *Henry Aaron*,
explaining that the proposed welfare reform bill will cost
closer to $2 billion than to $9 billion: &ldquo;There's a lot less here
than meets the eye.&rdquo;  *Channel 5,* N.Y.: &ldquo;... an elderly
geriatric patient.&rdquo;  *WBAI* news: &ldquo;The Scottsboro boy who was
sentenced to die three times.&rdquo;  *National Council of Churches:*
&ldquo;We have concluded a pre-feasibility study.&rdquo;  *TWA captain,*
to passengers about to land at *JFK*: &ldquo;Remain in your seats until
we deplane the aircraft at Kennedy Airport.&rdquo;  [all submitted
by Austin H. Perlow, Hempstead, New York]



### SIC! SIC! SIC!
There is a place in Scotland in what used to be called Invernesshire
with the name *Glenelg*, which doesn't look
like a palindrome but is.  Hardly a city, however, as the population
of the village and parish was, in 1937, under two thousand.
[Robert Martin, Glasgow]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Make certain that frozen meat, fish, poultry, or other
food is thoroughly thawed before cutting it with a knife
that is not intended for that purpose.&rdquo; —*Safety Rules*, Section
4012 Rule 6, pub. by the National Railroad Passenger Corporation
(Amtrak).  [Rich Webber, Boulder Creek, California]

## Porcine Semantics
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

William Shakespeare wrote (in *Romeo and Juliet*) that
&ldquo;... a rose by any other name would smell as sweet.&rdquo;  It is
difficult to take issue with that statement but equally difficult
to imagine what other name one might use since, as Gertrude
Stein observed, &ldquo;a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose.&rdquo;  Stein's
epigram, if one might so dignify it, has become a well-worn
clich&eacute;, a phrase frequently employed by those wishing to emphasize
the finality of a particular matter.  But while the
phrase can no doubt be meaningfully applied in many different
circumstances, the present writer wishes to note that it
is not necessarily applicable where certain common farm animals
are concerned.

An American farmer is unlikely ever to consider the semantic
aspect of his calling or even to be aware that such an
aspect exists.  The English language, however, has such a rich
and variegated vocabulary that a farmer may, if he so chooses,
apply any one of a number of terms to refer to one of his animals.
Admittedly, these terms are not all applicable in all
cases, since some are generic terms, while others denote an
animal of a certain character as regards sex, age, breed, etc.
With the indulgence of VERBATIM's readers, the writer will illustrate
his point by expounding on swine (but horses, cows,
or sheep, for example, would serve him equally well).

The word *swine* can be defined as a general term for any
or all of the various suoid mammals and can be used as either
a singular or plural noun.  As a singular, it can be replaced by
either of two very common words, *hog* and *pig*, as well as by
the less well known, but equally proper, *baconer* (chiefly
British usage), and *porker*.  As a plural, *swine* can be replaced
not only by *hogs* and *pigs* but also by the seldom used
*hoggery, piggery*, and *porkery*.

Every farmer is familiar with *boar* as the proper word
for an uncastrated male swine, but probably not all know
that *barrow* is the term for a male swine castrated before
reaching sexual maturity and *stag* for one castrated after the
secondary sex characteristics have developed.  Also infrequently
heard are *hogget* (a boar in his second year) and *hogsteer* or
*hoggaster* (a boar in his third year).  For the female swine
English has *gilt* for the immature female and *sow* for one that
has borne young.

A sow's offspring at a single birthing are most commonly
known as a *litter* but an equally good word is *farrow*; the latter,
in fact, might be called a better word since it refers specifically
to a sow's offspring, whereas *litter* can be applied
also to a number of different animals.  *Piglet* is perhaps the
most common word for a baby pig, but the dictionary provides
a number of others: *hogling, piggy* (or *piggie*), *pigling,
porket*, and *porkling*.  The young pig of either sex, especially
when less than a year old, is a *shoat; shote* and *shott* are both
recognized variant spellings.  The unweaned piglet can also be
called a *sucker* or *suckling* and a newly weaned piglet a
*weaner* or *weanling;* these four words, it must be noted, are
applicable to many different animals, not just to swine.

A swine can also be called by its breed name, which is
usually but not always capitalized but which, in either case,
can be used to designate an individual swine of that breed.
Thus, we have *Berkshire, Hereford, Landrace, Poland* (or
*Poland China*), *Suffolk, Cheshire, Chester white, Duroc* (or
*Duroc-Jersey*), *Essex, Tamworth* (or *Irish grazier*), *Victoria,
Yorkshire*, etc.  Although not a recognized breed name, *razor-back*
is used in similar fashion.

Although the term *swine* is usually applied only to the
domesticated animal, it actually covers all members of the
family *Suidae*.  A good English dictionary includes, for example,
such exotic words as *babirussa* (or *babiroussa*), a wild
hog of the East Indies also known as *staghog; peccary* (or
*pecari*), a nocturnal gregarious wild swine of the genus
*Tayyassu* which is native to the western hemisphere; *wart-hog*,
an African wild hog of the genus *Phacochoerus; boshvark*
(or *boschvark*), also called *bushpig*, a wild pig of South
Africa, etc.  Closely related to the *wild boar (Sus scrofa*), also
sometimes called a *tusker*, are the *bearded pig (Sus barbatus*)
of Borneo and Malaya, the *crested pig (Sus cristata*) of East
Asia, etc.

The American humorist, Ellis Parker Butler (1869-1937),
scored his first great success (in 1906) with a book entitled
*Pigs is Pigs*.  Had he been better versed in the field of porcine
semantics, he would not have chosen such a categoric title for
he would have known (and here my apologies to Gertrude)
that &ldquo;pigs is hogs is porkers is baconers.&rdquo;

## Verbifying in America
*Noel Perrin, Dartmouth College*

WHEN IS A VERB LEGITIMATE?  As far as I can tell, any
word in our language becomes a true verb the minute
someone decides to use it as one.  Putting it in a verb situation
is all that's required.  In fact, it doesn't really have to be
either a word or in our language.  A set of French initials can
achieve American verbhood, as in &ldquo;Honey, do we need to
R.S.V.P. the Pratts?&rdquo;  Even breathing noises can do it.  &ldquo;The
audience ooh'd and aah'd as Baryshnikov made his second
leap; one old man in the front row was zzzing, and missed it.&rdquo;

But though everything is eligible for verb status, by no
means everything achieves it.  It's interesting to look for the
reasons why some words do and others don't.

Take a simple case: the four names of the four seasons.
Two have been verbed, and two have not.  One summers, in
Maine, and winters, perhaps, in Florida.  But no one springs
in Arizona, however crisp the April days, or falls in New
Hampshire, however dazzling the foliage.  The reason is easy
to see, though ponderous to state.  If a verb already exists
which is a homonym for the new-verb-to-be, creation does
not occur.  To ignore the other verb would simply be a confusion
and lead to unintended puns.  (&ldquo;Did you fall in New
Hampshire?&rdquo;  &ldquo;No, I tripped over an ashcan in the Bronx.&rdquo;)

What about autumning, which people also don't do?
There is no homonym problem here.  Answer: Only words
easy to pronounce get made into verbs, unless there's pressing
need.

House-and-furniture words provide a much more complex
case.  Over the years a huge number of them have been
verbed.  You can floor someone metaphorically with a question
or literally with a blow.  You can table a motion, not to
mention chair a meeting.  If you are a football coach, you can
and do bench players.  You can also carpet a room, roof a
building, bed a wife, and shelve a problem.  If you're the Sits-in-Front,
you can closet yourself with your key advisers, or
perhaps the Russian Servant.

All this being the case, how come no one ever sofas anything,
much less davenports it?  It's not because we won't need
such a verb.  On the contrary, the sofa plays a major role in
American courtship and napping habits both.  A new verb
would be a great convenience.

It's because sofa ends in *a*.  Very few American words do
that, and those few are chiefly exotic imports like *aria, banana,
sultana*—and like sofa itself.  (From Arabic *suffah* 'a carpeted
and cushioned place to recline.')

No American verb ends in *a*.  Not one in our language.
The participle problem makes it impossible.  One could sofa,
or have sofa'd yesterday.  But sofaing?  &ldquo;Who were you sofaing
with last night, Albert?&rdquo;  The American tongue cleaves to the
roof of the mouth at the mere thought.  As for &ldquo;davenport,&rdquo;
it's a regionalism, and a dying one at that.  And since there is
already a homonymous verb &ldquo;to couch,&rdquo; no term is available.

There is a similar explanation for the non-existence of
the verb &ldquo;to ceiling.&rdquo;  No American verb ends in -*ing*, unless
the -*ing* is a stressed syllable, because no American tongue
could be comfortable with the participial echo.  A pilot could,
with some trouble, say that he ceilinged at 31,000 feet.  But
ceilinging?  It would be easier to keep going up.

&ldquo;Drawer&rdquo; (intensive of &ldquo;to shelve&rdquo;) is missing for quite a
different reason.  &ldquo;Drawer&rdquo; doesn't exist because at least two
American dialects have a tendency to put an *r* sound after an
*a* (which then ceases to be pronounced a), as in Americer, or
George Worshington.  In these dialects one would thus dror—
or drawer—a picture, and the creation of a new verb is ruled
out for their speakers on the homonym principle, and for other
Americans on the snob principle.

Another puzzle.  Our language has a special ability to
make verbs out of what were previously two-word phrases—
most commonly, a noun and its modifier.  A recent Sits-in-Front,
for example, verbed the noun &ldquo;wall&rdquo; and its modifier
&ldquo;stone.&rdquo;

Such creations seem to be particularly common when
the modifier is a color word.  You can blackball a candidate,
blueprint a set of plans, whitewash a fence, brownbag your
lunch.  You can bluepencil an article.  Red-baiting was a popular
sport in the fifties, and blacktopping driveways is a common
activity right now.  But there is no verb &ldquo;to green-light&rdquo;—
or &ldquo;to redlight,&rdquo; either.

Considering the tremendous role that traffic signals play
in our national consciousness (it can be argued that the entire
Interstate system was built in order to get around—and under
and over—stoplights), this may seem a curious omission.

There is a simple linguistic reason.  All verbs created in
the twentieth century, without exception, conjugate regularly.
I stonewall today, he stonewalled yesterday, the Sits-in-Front
has stonewalled for years.  But a few of our older verbs
still conjugate in their original Anglo-Saxon forms.  Light is
one of this group.  Subconsciously we know that if we make
&ldquo;greenlight&rdquo; a verb, we are going to wind up with a past tense
of either greenlighted or greenlit, and both sound wrong.

There is some comfort in reflecting that however persistent
our politicians or our TV advertisers may be in giving us
the hard sell.  Americans are quite safe from ever being hard-sold
anything.

### READERS' QUERIES

>*Readers are invited to respond directly to those who
have sent in questions*.

Some years ago, perhaps as many as twenty, one of the
popular medical throwaway journals had a most interesting
article that I have been trying in vain to obtain.  I am hoping
that one of your readers may have seen it and might be able to
point me to a source or secure a copy for me.

In brief, the article was a scholarly abstract of a large
number of medical articles comparing quantitation words
with statistical incidences.  The words, from *always* through
*invariably, often, usually, frequently, infrequently, not frequently,
not infrequently, not often*, etc. down to *never*,
were all used to represent percentages of incidence or occurrence.
In medicine *always* was ninety-five to ninety-nine per
cent while *never* indicated an incidence of five per cent.  [Marvin
Schuster, M.D./586 New Brunswick Avenue/Perth Amboy,
NJ 08861]

About ten years ago, when my chief job here was plowing
through unsolicited manuscripts, I ran across a submission by (I
think) two black sociologists.  They had made a collection of toasts
and other poetic items in black oral tradition.

Well, Abingdon (book publishing arm of United Methodist
Publishing House) is not now and was not then the sort of
house that could publish &ldquo;The Signifying Monkey&rdquo; or &ldquo;The
Titanic,&rdquo; much less some of the riper toasts: too many short
words of dubious social acceptability.

In any case, I want to know who published the book.  It
was only later, of course, that I realized what a treasure it was.
[Richard Loller, Editor/Abingdon/201 Eighth Avenue, South/
Nashville, TN 37202]

## Nonplussed by Plus
*Caldwell Titcomb, Brandeis University*

THERE ARE THOSE who are offended by certain four-letter
words when they crop up in print or in talk.  I
have my own candidate, which of late has been annoying the
four-letter hell out of me.  To be specific: I am nonplussed by
*plus*.

Now *plus* is a word with many legitimate uses.  It's helpful
to be able to figure out three *plus* five, and to know the
difference between a *plus* and a *minus* charge on a battery.
It's pleasant to earn $15,000 *plus*, or to get a B *plus* from one's
teacher.  And sunny weather will be a *plus* for the next outdoor
tournament.

What riles me, however, is the increasing number of
people who mistakenly think that *plus* is also a conjunctive
adverb.  From a U.S. Senator I received a fund-raising letter
with this sentence: &ldquo;Plus they tell us we should increase the
defence budget.&rdquo;  And the director of one of our most eminent
university presses offered me &ldquo;a 20 per cent discount—plus
we will pay all postage and handling costs.&rdquo;

Almost daily on radio and television I hear this usage coming
from program hosts, reporters, and anchormen.  Boston's
highest-rated news channel tells me: &ldquo;Those are tonight's
headlines, plus we'll have a report on....&rdquo;  One commentator
even declared, &ldquo;I'd vote her an Academy Award.  Plus she's
also....&rdquo;  Note not only the *plus* but also the tautological
*also*.

William and Mary Morris, in their *Harper Dictionary of
Contemporary Usage*, felt it necessary to call attention (p.
476) to this solecism: &ldquo;*Plus* cannot be used as a substitute for
*also* as the first word of a sentence when the intent is to link
the sentence with the one which precedes it.&rdquo;  And they rightly
proclaimed this use &ldquo;illiterate.&rdquo;  Yet the bombardment
from linguistic barbarians continues to grow.

Let me make clear that I have no objection to new words
or to new uses of old words when they fill a real need in our
language.  But there is no excuse for misusing *plus* to duplicate
what can properly be expressed by *also, too, moreover, besides,
furthermore, as well, to boot*, and *in addition*—not to
mention *and*.

So surfeited am I that I can't bring myself to peek inside
Joseph McElroy's recently published novel entitled, simply,
*Plus*.  The word has become a p(l)ustule.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: *on again, off again, Finnigin*
*J. Walter Wilson, M.D., Los Alamitos, California*

I have before me a small tan-colored book of poems published
by Strickland Gillilan in 1917 entitled *Including Finnegan*.
The fly leaf is inscribed &ldquo;To J. Walter Wilson with the
undying regard of a regular feller who knows another regular
feller thoroughly but loves him still; also when he isn't still.&rdquo;
This was inscribed to my father who was his companion on
several vaudeville circuits.

Gillilan's name is virtually unknown, but he should be
forever remembered because the Finnegan poem added to the
English language the phrase *off again, on again*, which most
of us hear and use frequently in the mistaken belief that it refers
to something or someone who changes direction rapidly
and often.  In fact, it refers to the thousands of persons who fled
from Ireland's potato famine in the 1840s, whose men almost
always became policemen or railroad workers.  Thus it is an
old railroad story.  It is written in one of the more difficult
rhyming styles and contains the longest succession of trisyllabic
rhymes I have ever encountered.

>Finnigin to Flannigan
>
>Superintindint wuz Flannigan;  
Boss av th' siction wuz Finnigin.  
Whiniver th' cyars got off th' thrack  
An' muddled up things t' th' divvle an' back,  
Finnigin writ it t' Flannigan,  
Afther th' wrick wuz all on agin;  
That is, this Finnigin  
Repoorted t' Flannigan.  
>
>Whin Finnigin furrst writ t' Flannigan,  
He writed tin pa-ages, did Finnigin;  
An' he towld just how th' wrick occurred—  
Yis, minny a tajus, blundherin' wurrd  
Did Finnigin write t' Flannigan  
Afther the' cyars had gone on agin—  
That's th' way Finnigin  
Repoorted t' Flannigan.  
>
>Now Flannigan knowed more than Finnigin—  
He'd more idjucation, had Flannigan.  
An' ut wore 'm clane an' complately out  
>
>T&rdquo; tell what Finnigin writ about  
In 's writin' t' Musther Flannigan.  
So he writed this back.  &ldquo;Musther Finnigin:—  
Don't do sich a sin agin;  
Make 'em brief, Finnigin!&rdquo;  
>
>Whin Finnigin got that frum Flannigan  
He blushed rosy-rid, did Finnigin.  
An' he said: &ldquo;I'll gamble a whole month's pay  
That ut'll be minny an' minny a day  
Befure sup'rintindint—that's Flannigan—  
Gits a whack at that very same sin agin.  
Frum Finnigin to Flannigan  
Repoorts won't be long agin.&rdquo;  
>
>Wan day on th' siction av Finnigin,  
On th' road sup'rintinded be Flannigan,  
A ra-ail give way on a bit av a currve  
An' some cyars wint off as they made th' shwarrve.  
&ldquo;They's nobody hurrted,&rdquo; says Finnigin,  
&ldquo;But repoorts must be made t' Flannigan.&rdquo;  
An' he winked at McGorrigan  
As married a Finnigin.  
>
>He wuz shantyin' thin, wuz Finnigin,  
As minny a railroader's been agin,  
An' 'is shmoky ol' lamp wuz burrnin' bright  
In Finnigin' shanty all that night—  
Bilin' down 's repoort, wuz Finnigin.  
An' he writed this here: &ldquo;Musther Flannigan:—  
Off agin, on agin,  
Gone agin.—Finnigin.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Richard B. Anderson [*Arlington, Massachusetts*] admits
to having concocted, with the help of Joseph Zelan, a
new cocktail made from Manischewitz wine and tomato juice.
Its name, of course, is the *Oyvay Maria*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Which two words, one English and one French, each of
6 letters, both with the same meaning and derivation, have
not a single letter in common?  [from Denis Brearly, Leamington
Spa, Warwickshire] Answer on page 684.

## A Missile-any of Shots by a Poor Marksman
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

Vaguely related to spoonerisms are a number of instances of
utterances connected by an unthemely common theme with
some juncture, some assonance, a few malapropistic and
apropostic features, foul wordplay, and untenable juxtapositions.
For half of them I could give the names of perpetrators.
For the rest, I am the culprit.  But which are which and who
is who I'll surely never tell.  They are:

>*There's more than one way to skim a cat*.
>
>*In Japan we have terrorvision too*.
>
>*Regards to Mr. Sippi*.
>
>*Did your hendiadys*?  (*Zeugma epes*!)
>
>*Merci Bo-peep*!
>
>*a khaki dude'll do*
>
>*apocryphal awry*
>
>*watch the Antietam*
>
>*She picks no bones about it*.
>
>*A falling timber hit him in the lumbar region*.
>
>*the bronicle tubes* (perhaps subway to the Bronx?)
>
>*the Baltimore Aureoles*
>
>*the Auricle of Delphi*
>
>*It warmed the cuckolds of his heart*.
>
>*I demand an atomized account*.
>
>*this tinthetic surf*
>
>*the sacred service* (spied for the Inquisition)
>
>&ldquo;*Indo-chronology*&rdquo; heard by me at the time of the toxic
troubles in Philly (turned out to be *endocrinology!*)
>
>*He suffered from romantic fever*.
>
>*employees of the highest caliper*
>
>*Sodom and Camorra*
>
>*public enema No. 1* (or *2?*)
>
>*Hierarchy and lowerarchy*
>
>*in starkest/star-kissed Africa*
>
>*Avesta fideles* (Zoroastrian faithful)
>
>*Armored Christian Soldiers*
>
>*We hiked along the Appellation Trail*.
>
>*the Avogadro pair* (count & countess)
>
>*the abogado pair* (two lawyers)
>
>*Give me something practical, mink, fur example*.
>
>*Fight Rachel Prejudice!*
>
>*infradignitaries*
>
>*a Buffalo vendor selling buffalo in Rochester*
>
>*Our Colonel is a nut*.
>
>*I've never seen him show such emulsion*.
>
>*The psychopath of the cycle path*.

But one's head is beginning to go round in linguistic circles.
Enough of these oddmentalities.  When pigs had wings, the
swine flew.

*Answer to the puzzle on page 683:*

*Bishop* and *&eacute;v&ecirc;que*, both directly from Latin *episcopus*,
which is from Greek *ep&iacute;skopos*.


#### EPISTOLA {Charles Van Doren}

My copy of VERBATIM arrived today.  Delightful as
always.  Also beautiful.  I have remarked before on the contents;
now I praise you highly for your layout, typeface(s),
and overall design.

With regard to the Query by Messrs.  Olive and Revard
[V, 1], the word *gaper-block* (or *gapers' block*)—a traffic jam
caused by drivers gaping at an accident—has been used by
policemen reporting on Chicago traffic conditions for at least
five years.  I doubt if the word was invented in St. Louis.

[Charles Van Doren, Encyclopaedia Britannica]

### Notes Found in Bottles
*Deborah Wing*

*Location of (plural) find*: The Ducking Pond, Salem
*Inscription(s)*: &ldquo;It was all because my wife
didn't understand me...

—Reverend Dimmesdale&rdquo;

&ldquo;All for love and the world well lost....

—Hester&rdquo;

&ldquo;Phooey!

—Pearl&rdquo;

## So What Else Is Nous?
*Herb Kraus, Chicago, Illinois*

The Chinese call it the *Year of the Serpent*.  Political pundits
term it the *period of the Peanut*.  Lovers call it the *Time
of the Cuckoo*.  But grassroot grammarians know it as the
*Coming of Age of the Pronoun*.

This underpraised part of speech is probably the most
neglected, least memorialized, and most sparsely parsed in
the English language.  In spite of an occasional rock group
like the *Who*, a novel like *She*, and a Russian play like *He
Who Gets Slapped*, the lowly noun substitute has never before
reached great literary heights.  However, all this is now changing
in this era of the short, catchy name.  The past few years
have produced a reckless, almost feckless, proliferation of
pronominal publications in the magazine field.

Witness the French make magazine *Lui* 'him' and its female
counterpart *Elle* 'her.'  Closer to home is *Playboy's*
younger brother *Oui*, patterned after *Lui*, and pronounced
&ldquo;we.&rdquo;  Chicago's Italians clamor for *Fra Noi* 'among ourselves.'
*The New York Times* is publishing *US.  I AM* is being
circulated nationally to Italian-Americans; an enterprising
Spanish-language publisher is coming out with *Nuestro*
'ours,' and there is a thriving evangelical periodical called
*HIS*.  The British version of *Consumer Reports* is called
*Which?*

Verily, this is an idea whose time has come.  And since
everyone today is doing his own thing, there is a crying need
for pithy periodicals to suit every literary taste.  Here is a suggested
list for an enterprising publisher in search of untapped
audiences:

>*It*—for the nostalgic Clara Bow buff.
>
>*I*—for the egocentric ophthalmologist.
>
>*Dese, Dem and Dose*—for the Chicago Ward Committeeman.
(Da Mare, Editor)
>
>*Y'awl*—for the Southern yachtsman.
>
>*Which*—for the lecherous warlock.
>
>*His and Hers*—for the hotel towel collector.
>
>*Thou Art*—for the Quaker painter.
>
>*Cosa Nostra*—for the quiet Don.
>
>*Hic, Haec, Hoc*—for the Latin hiccuper.

And there is one little title I'm saving for myself.  I plan to put
out a quarterly devoted to the members of the gentler sex who
give themselves unselfishly to male needs and desires.  I shall
call it *The League of Women Votres*.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: *peter (as in peter out)*
*Clyde K. Hyder, Lawrence, Kansas*

Most dictionaries either state that the origin of *peter*,
'to fail, become exhausted, or give out,' as *A Dictionary of
Americanisms* explains the meaning, is unknown or attempt
no explanation.  Two exceptions, Wyld's *Universal Dictionary*
and Eric Partridge's *Dictionary of Slang* (1973 edition), list
French *p&eacute;ter* 'to crack or crackle' as a possible etymon, but
the similarity of meaning is not marked enough to make the
suggestion convincing.

The earliest quotation cited by the *OED* indicates that
Lincoln used the expression in 1865; but *A Dictionary of
Americanisms* cites a passage from the *Quincy* (Ill.)  *Whig* of
6 January 1846: &ldquo;When my mineral petered why they all
Petered me.&rdquo;  Another early quotation, also cited by the *DAE*,
is from H.H. Riley's *Puddleford* (1854): &ldquo;He 'hoped this
'spectable meeting warn't going to Peter-out.' &rdquo;

The capitalization of *peter* in these early quotations is
worth noting.  May not the word be an adaptation of the
name *Peter*?  An expression like *robbing Peter to pay Paul* reflects
former generations' familiarity with the Apostles, as do
substantives like *St. Peter's Wort, St. Peter's fish, Peter's barge,
boat*, or *ship*, (for the Church), and *Peter's Pence*.  A passage
in the Bible that seems to justify the use of *peter out* describes
Peter's attempt to walk on water.  He takes a few steps and
then, owing to insufficient faith, begins to sink (Matt. 14:
28-31).  Two other passages are also relevant.  Peter is among
those who have fallen asleep at a crucial moment, and it is
Peter that Christ addresses: &ldquo;What, could ye not watch with
me one hour?&rdquo;  (Matt. 26:40).  The impulsive Apostle's bitter
realization of failure comes after he has thrice denied any acquaintance
with Christ; when the cock crows, reminding him
that Christ had predicted his threefold denial, he weeps, realizing
that he has now failed in steadfastness and loyalty, as,
having petered out, he had previously failed in faith (Matt.
26: 69-75; Mark 14: 66-72; Luke 22: 56-62).

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dos, Don'ts &amp; Maybes Of English Usage*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780517345870/Dos-Donts-Maybes-English-Usage-0517345870/plp)
Theodore M. Bernstein, (Times Books, 1977), vi + 250 pp.

Reviewing such a book fairly and without nitpicking is a
difficult task for me, so I usually try to avoid it, especially
when I know the author as well as I do Ted Bernstein.  However,
honest is honest, so here we go.

My first complaint is about the price: 5&cent; a page is really
too exorbitant for serious comment.  That's the publisher's
fault; it ought to be made clear to Times Books that if you don't
think you can sell a large number of books because you aren't
going to spend the money and effort to do so, the solution is
not to try to make all your money on the few you think you
might sell.  This book would sell more copies at $7.95—a
fairer price—than at $12.50; it is unfair of a publisher to visit
his own shortcomings on the books he publishes.

Which, in a convoluted way, brings me to the title of the
book: it would more accurately have been named &ldquo;Dos,
Don'ts & Maybes of American English.&rdquo;  For example, under
AGREEMENT IN NUMBER, &ldquo;(Multiple subject.),&rdquo; Bernstein writes,
&ldquo;A common error is illustrated in the following sentence: 'The
Jones Company, together with other manufacturers of plastic
widgets, *have* been trying to reach an agreement with the
union.'  The phrase *together with* does not add to the grammatical
subject; ... Hence the verb should be singular: *has*.&rdquo;
That is in keeping with American practice; but by choosing
'The Jones Company,' Bernstein has introduced a different
sort of problem, namely, whether *Company* or the name of a
company (e.g., Kodak, IBM, Xerox) is treated as a singular
or plural.  In America, it is usually a singular; in England, it is
usually a plural.  Thus, in England, one would say *The Jones
Company have been trying*..., while in America *has*, as
Bernstein points out, would have been preferable.  Not required,
mind you, for Americans do say, &ldquo;IBM are going to
build a plant in the country,&rdquo; though it is rare.  In a way, my
comments are beside the point at issue (whether the parenthetical
&ldquo;...together with...&rdquo; phrase creates a compound subject
requiring a plural verb); on the other hand, Bernstein
should have selected an unambiguous example, particularly
since he does a good job of treating the other question under
*collective nouns*.

[The influence of British usage in America is more and
more evident: *The New York Times*, 1 April 1978, in referring
to the increased settlement for transit workers in New
York City, called it a &ldquo;6% Rise.&rdquo;  Unless I have been contaminated
completely by British English, I believe the more common
American form is *raise*.]

The organization of *Dos, Don'ts &amp; Maybes* is alphabetical,
by word or topic, with a handy cross reference if you happen
to look up the wrong item.  Words that occasion the same
kind of usage trouble are treated together, as they should be:
*alleged* and *accused* under *alleged, accomplice* and *confederate*
under *confederate*, and so on.  This practice is
economical of space and of rhetoric.  Without counting, I
would guess that about 500 topics are treated.  Many of the
entries are treated in other usage books and in dictionaries
that carry usage notes; I shall not bother commenting on
those except to say that Bernstein has a lively, friendly style
that seldom leaves the reader in doubt regarding the answer
he may be seeking.  In a few cases (*affinity*, for example), the
style becomes so technical that one doubts if a reader who
could understand the explanation would be likely to make the
error of usage.  But such instances are rare.  As the title implies,
the answer is sometimes *Do*, sometimes *Don't*, and sometimes
*Maybe*.  I do disagree with some of all three, and that is
what this review is about.

To be brief, I shall list my grievances and a bouquet or
two:

(1)  *anymore*—I don't accept it as a single word, even in
postpositive position.  B. approves of, &ldquo;The movies are no
good *anymore*.&rdquo;

(2)  *apostrophes*—I miss a comment on &ldquo;the 1900s&rdquo; vs. &ldquo;the
1900's.&rdquo; [I prefer the former.]

(3)  *as a matter of fact*—I am in complete agreement with the
following, quoted in full.  It is an excellent example of Bernstein's
sensitivity to the language:

>Nine times out of ten the expression *as a matter of
fact* is mere embellishment; if a statement is a fact it
need not be so labeled.  But on some occasions the words
are not intended to be taken literally as pointing out
that a statement is factual.  Rather they lend a flavor to
what is being stated.  Suppose you ask someone whether
he has ever attended a basketball game and he replies,
&ldquo;I'm going to one tonight.&rdquo;  It's a simple, rather flat
response.  But if he replies, &ldquo;*As a matter of fact*, I'm going
to one tonight,&rdquo; it could suggest that he's going for
the first time or that it was quite a coincidence that you
asked at this time or that he has been going to games for
years, all depending on the intonation and facial expression.
The words of the expression may not have much
meaning, but they do on such rare occasions provide a
light vehicle on which a tone or a sense can be conveyed.

(4)  *awful, awfully*—These words have undergone a semantic
change sufficiently long ago so that scarcely anyone considers
them in their literal senses of 'full of awe' any longer.  True,
their use in *He's an awfully good tennis player* is informal and
should not be used in more formal writing, but in colloquial
use they are okay. B., using the (otherwise) solecistic *awful
pretty* as an example, condemns *awfully* and demands *very,
highly, extremely*.  I don't share his prejudice, except for formal
contexts.

(5)  *bring, take*—B. writes: &ldquo;If a boss were to say to his secretary,
&ldquo;*Bring* this up to Mr. Jones on the fifth floor,' he would
be guilty of bad usage.  On the other hand, if he were to say to
her, '*Bring* me a chicken salad sandwich...,' he would be
correct....&rdquo;  As the Oldtimer used to say, &ldquo;That ain't the
way I hear'd it!&rdquo;  (A) In the first case, *take* would be correct.
(B) In the second case, *bring* would be correct only if the
sandwich were in the immediate vicinity of the secretary
(across the room or, if the sandwich and the secretary were
both in another room, the boss were shouting or speaking on
the intercom).  (C) If he expected the secretary to go out to
buy the sandwich, *fetch* would be the preferred word.  B.
doesn't mention *fetch*, here or anywhere that I could find.

(6)  *Britishisms*—Either the author of the article in the *New
York Law Journal* is wrong or B. miscopied it: (A) *lay-by*:
any paved area alongside a road where a driver may pull off
to rest, eat, or look after a malfunction of his car.  (B) *loose-slippings*:
never saw or heard it; the term *loose chippings*
refers to gravel or crushed stone that has not yet been bonded
into fresh asphalt in a road repair.  (C) *roundabout* and *circus*:
the former is generic; the latter is (usually) part of the
proper name of what Americans would call a *square* in town.
(D) *clearway* (one word): this does not mean 'no parking'; a
*clearway* is an express street where parking and the flow of
traffic are strictly regulated.  It would have been better to
have verified such matters with an authority, like Norman
W. Schur, whose new book, *British English: A to Zed*, will be
published soon by VERBATIM.

(7)  *but*—B.: &ldquo;If the pronoun appears elsewhere in the sentence
[than at the end], put it in the same case as the noun to
which it is linked by *but*:... 'No one (nominative) but *he*
(nominative) knows how he developed that interest.&rdquo;'  Such a
rule makes no logical sense, for it requires that *but he* be in
apposition to *no one*, and there is no precedent that I know of
in English for analyzing any appositive in association with
*but*.  It should be *but him* (object of *but*) in such constructions
where *but* is a preposition.

(8)  *commas*—A clear and simple treatment, complete as far
as it goes.

... and so forth.  Generally, Bernstein's comments are based
on his own common sense and good taste; on occasion, he
draws on what he finds in dictionaries and other reference
books.  I find that I agree with him most, but not all of the
time.  For instance, I agree that, within the same article, *data*
ought to be treated consistently as a singular or a plural, but I
disagree with the remark, &ldquo;the preference in good usage is to
keep it plural.&rdquo;  In most contexts, since *datum*, the singular, is
confined chiefly to surveying, *data* used as a plural strikes me
as a pedanticism.

If you like *Watch Your Language, More Language That
Needs Watching*, and *The Careful Writer*, chances are that
you will like *Dos, Don'ts &amp; Maybes*.  If you don't, you won't.
If you are unfamiliar with these Bernstein books, I can recommend
them as a nontechnical, middle-of-the-road, practical
approach to modern English usage in America, cheerfully
written and interlaced with puns, some even forgivable.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Whistled Languages*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=WHISTLED%20LANGUAGES%2A%20Rene-Guy%20Busnel&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20)
Ren&eacute;-Guy Busnel and Andr&eacute; Classe, (No. 13 in the Communication and Cybernetics series, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1976), 117 pp., 40 figures.  

Of the 5,000 and more natural languages spoken and
understood today, a few can also be *whistled* intelligibly by
certain of their users.  Those languages so endowed—in special,
limited, geographical areas—are Spanish (the Silbo Gomero
of the Canary Islands and Mazateco of Mexico), French (at
Aas, exclusively, in the Pyrenees), Turkish (at Kuskoy and
thirty-five other villages), and Tepehuan (and thirty other
Mexican Indian languages, according to Cowan/Busnel).  The
geography conducive to whistled communication and responsible
for the need is invariably extremely mountainous and
rugged.  The motivation is consistently shepherding.  Such systems
of communication by whistling, based on the language
of the user, are conventionally referred to as &ldquo;whistled languages&rdquo;
or &ldquo;whistled speech.&rdquo;

This form of communication is accomplished by the
sender's usually shrill whistling of the articulatory and timing
features of the language in question, and depends, of course,
on the reception and interpretation of this signaling by the
listener(s).

The authors of *Whistled Languages* have treated the
phenomenon of whistled communication both historically
and with regard for the related ecology, the acoustics and
range of the signal (as much as 5 miles!), different mechanisms
of production, pertinent phonology and phonetics, and
possible correlates in the animal kingdom.  These considerations
are enhanced with some forty figures depicting relevant
terrain, whistle techniques, and acoustic properties of the
whistles themselves; a phonetic analysis of the Silbo Gomero
of Canarian Spanish is extended feature by feature to the articulated
whistle, including prosodic and dialectal inferences.

One chapter is devoted to the implications of whistled
forms of human communication for comprehending analogous
non-human communication, especially in connection
with dolphins (*Tursiops truncatus*) and birds, and M. Busnel
is especially well known for his work in that area.

All in all, the book—as well as the ambitious explorations
it recapitulates—is well worth the effort of both authors and
readers alike and may well lead to futher scientific ventures
in the continuing enterprise of interspecies communication
attempts and analysis.  

*[Henry Truby, Miami, Florida]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Sensible Words: Linguistic Practice in England 1640-1785*](https://www.amazon.com/Sensible-Words-Linguistic-Practice-1640-1785/dp/0801819245/ref=sr_1_1?crid=56310BO73JL3&keywords=Sensible+Words%3A+Linguistic+Practice+in+England+1640-1785*+*Murray+Cohen&qid=1651860607&sprefix=sensible+words+linguistic+practice+in+england+1640-1785+murray+cohen%2Caps%2C359&sr=8-1)
Murray Cohen, (The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London, 1977), xxv + 188 pp.

The past dozen years have seen abundant research into
the history of linguistic thought, above all in the thought of
the post-Renaissance period; and it is about time, for there
are almost limitless treasures to be mined.  For what has been
happening, however, the metaphor of a mine is less appropriate
than that of a magical lucky dip, from which everyone
who pays his sixpence pulls out in his triumphant grasp exactly
what he hoped to find.  Could there be such a thing as a definitive
history?  It is not a question to which Dr. Cohen
chooses to address himself.  In a lively, but densely written *Introduction*
he distinguishes his intentions from those of more
conventional historians (like R.F. Jones and Aarsleff) whose
aim he characterizes as &ldquo;to establish extensive pedigrees for
particular ideas&rdquo; [xiv] and equally from the &ldquo;revolutionary&rdquo;
approach of Kuhn or the &ldquo;episteme&rdquo; of Foncault.  The word
*practice* in his title is crucial; his intention (though he slips
from it as the work progresses) is to concentrate on the numerous
second-rank writers rather than the few prominent
names, and so to seek the texture of the history of ideas &ldquo;in the
changing forms of basic texts&rdquo; [xx].  His work illuminates by
being subjectively interpretative; by telling you how the texture
feels to him, he invites you to examine and elucidate your
own response.  In this sense it is not a beginner's book, for to
some degree what you get out of it depends on the extent to
which you have a sense of the period to be illuminated.  It is
not designed to be refutable, and those whose interest in linguistics
is confined to what is scientific on Popper's criterion
will be baffled by it.

The substance of the book is arranged chronologically in
three chapters, covering the periods 1640-1700, 1700-1740,
and 1740-1785.  For the first, Cave Beck is taken as central—
not the cleverest, profoundest, or most influential, but in his
ordinariness the most representative of a class of seventeenth-century
linguistic thinkers characterized by a series of related
principles.  Sound, letters, and meaning are assumed to be
parallel systems in which ideally words are rationally organized,
represented by sequential symbols (Arabic numerals in
Beck's case); the essentials of the system are its basic elements,
and the representation of them must make visible sense.
These assumptions lead in several directions — at the practical
level, to concern with shorthand, signing and visual mnemonics,
and at the theoretical, to the ambition of using language
to recover the essence of things and to &ldquo;remake the
world in the image of God's first activity&rdquo; [3].  But in this most
ambitious conception lie the seeds of change, for it is a small
step from the essence of things to the composition and coherence
of things.  In the latter part of the seventeenth century
both Wilkins's realization of the limitations of tabular taxonomy
and Port-Royal's initiation of search for the rational
basis of language in the order of the mind rather than the order
of things, prepared the way for change.

For the second phase, 1700-1740, Cohen claims to give
more than the fresh angle of view offered in Chapter 1, and
to present &ldquo;distinctive linguistic theories and techniques&rdquo;
which &ldquo;have not been observed before&rdquo; [44].  Linguistic
writers of the period insist on their continuity with their
predecessors while in practice shifting the emphasis from
elements to discourse, especially written discourse.  Even
discussions of orthography are directed towards effective
reading and composition, and syntactically determined punctuation
becomes a focus of attention.  Though visual signaling
retains its importance, its purpose is not analysis and
cataloguing but method and sequence.  The shift is seen as
parallel to the literary change: &ldquo;The shift in linguistic method
and emphasis from lexical units to syntactic relations, from
the system's taxonomy to its operations, from a locus principally
*in* the world to one principally *among* ideas, is widely
evident in the poetry, prose, and critical ideas of the period,
but nowhere more characteristically, I think, than in the
various ways in which a temporal aspect subsumes the
spatial&rdquo; [74].

In the third phase it is taken for granted that the categories
and capacities of language are settled, and what is of central
interest is internal difference—between languages, between
periods of linguistic history, between different kinds of linguistic
work.  Practical and theoretical linguistics are different
tasks (though they may be carried out by the same man in
the same book, using visual, typographical cues to the function
of each passage).  On the theoretical side attention shifts
from natural or theological history and the operations, of human
understanding to the origin and progress of human societies.
In language and in literature the emphasis is on forms
as expressive possibilities rather than simply as the carriers of
particular meanings; the poet is newly explicit about the limitations
of language, and the linguist more modest in his claims
for his subject.

There are full and learned *Notes*, though references are
given according to the tiresome belle-lettristic convention and
there is no bibliography.  The book is full of challenge, and
merits the approach it advocates.  One leaves it with a fresh
view and can come back to it again and again to discover
more insights.  I plan to continue doing so, and commend it to
other readers for its capacity as a widow's cruse of new perspectives.

*[Barbara M.H. Strang, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: 

### The Written Word
(Houghton Mifflin, 1977), 460 pp.  

### The Right Word
(Houghton Mifflin, 1978), iv + 261 pp.*

### The Legal Word Book
Comp. by Frank S. Gordon and Thomas M.S. Hemmes, (Houghton Mifflin, 1978), vi + 296 pp.

Few casual users of dictionaries are aware of the wealth
of information that the average desk dictionary contains.  In
addition to spelling and syllabication of headwords and of
many derived forms, pronunciations, etymologies, synonym
lists and studies, and usage notes abound.  Some dictionaries
even include &ldquo;related adjectives,&rdquo; like *equine* under *horse*.
Publishers who had the foresight to computerize the information
in their dictionaries have the advantage of being able to
extract from their files certain kinds and classes of information
that was coded on input but that would, without the aid
of computers, be tedious to compile from the published dictionary
itself.  For example, if definitions are categorized by
subject, a computer could extract all of the words and definitions
relating to a specific (coded) field like inorganic chemistry,
veterinary medicine, or legalese.

Because of the integral nature of the information in a
dictionary, most such extracted matter dealing with a single
topic may seem a bit bare if required to stand alone in a book
by itself, but some exceptions come readily to mind, and, at
least, such matter can serve as convenient raw material
which, when embellished, can provide useful information.
*The Legal Word Book* would appear to be a book prepared
by sorting out legal terms that appeared in *The American
Heritage Dictionary*.  If so, the extracted material has been
expanded and reorganized into a number of convenient sections
including an A-Z Word List (from the *AHD*), Legal
Citations (from *A Uniform System of Citation*, 12th Edition),
Legal Forms (apparently original), Abbreviations (from
the *AHD*), and so on, through Postal Abbreviations and
Telephone Area Codes— 13 sections in all.  As a handy desk
reference for legal secretaries, this book should prove useful,
but it must be understood that it does not take the place of a
law dictionary.  On the other hand, law dictionaries do not
contain information like Forms of Address, Proofreaders'
Marks, Roman Numerals, etc.  The book offers 20,000 terms,
&ldquo;spelled and divided.&rdquo;

*The Right Word* is a very brief — too brief — synonym
dictionary with the discriminations among confusing words
picked up from the *AHD*.  The pickings are quite sparse
among the listings, for the smallest synonym dictionary will
provide more.  But the discriminations, a series of brief essays
discussing semantic clusters like *shy, bashful, coy, diffident,
modest*, or *help, aid, assist*, are useful.  Collective Nouns (*ex-
altation of larks*, etc.), Collateral Adjectives (*ape, monkey:
simian*), Color Terms, and a list of &ldquo;some of the major sciences
or branches of technology&rdquo; round out the book.

*The Written Word* is a chunky little book about the size
of a Big Little Book but not as thick.  (*The Right Word* is the
same size; *The Legal Word Book* is 5&frac12;&rdquo; &times; 8&frac14;&rdquo;.)  According to
its cover blurb, it is &ldquo;A concise, practical guide to writing, usage,
and style.  Featuring a Usage Glossary based on the recommendations
of *The American Heritage Dictionary's* unique
Usage Panel, to help you use words correctly.&rdquo;  I have mixed
feelings about blurbs that contain incomplete sentences beginning
with a participle, but very definite feelings about
*AHD's* Usage Panel, which set descriptive linguistics back 150
years (virtually the Stone Age as far as the study of language is
concerned).

This is not a very carefully done book.  In the first place, it
lacks an index to the section on grammar; in the second, it
makes errors that range from recommending *Origins* (without
giving Partridge credit), an execrable choice, to misspelling
*Chambers Biographical Dictionary* [sic].  Also, the *Book
of Lists* is missing as are many other reference sources.  The information
given in alphabetical order in the Usage section is
straightforward except where the phrase &ldquo;not acceptable&rdquo; appears:
not acceptable to whom?  to the Usage Panel?  On the
other hand, the treatment of *finalize* seems to be free of any
such taint.

In general, these books suffer from the fact that their
broad subjects cannot be properly convered in the compass of
so few pages (of such small size).  However, if the need is
limited it is easily fulfilled, and, as far as they go, these are
adequate digests of useful information for the (very) casual
user of language.  Laurence Urdang

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*An Illustrated Dictionary Of Chess*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=An%20Illustrated%20Dictionary%20Of%20Chess%20Edward%20R.%20Brace&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Edward R. Brace, (David McKay, 1977), 320 pp.

Ed Brace, with whom I have had the experience — that's
the word, *experience; pleasure* doesn't fit, neither does *opportunity*
— of playing chess, has compiled more than 2000 entries
into a very readable and extremely useful reference book
on chess.  Here are listed not only the rudimentary information
on the names and moves of the pieces but also succinct biographies
of chess masters (with their Elo ratings: a two-page
entry on Elo explains everything, including the fact that it is
named for Prof.  Arpad E. Elo, chairman of the Ratings Committee
of the FIDE, the F&eacute;d&eacute;ration Internationale des
&Eacute;checs), names and explanations of well-known openings,
defenses, and plays, including such useful matter as spelling
variants of names transliterated from Russian.  I was particularly
taken by a game at which I ought to excel, *Losing Chess*
&ldquo;a variant of chess in which the winner is the first player to
lose all his men....&rdquo;  Dozens of books on chess are listed, in
alphabetical order, providing a useful descriptive bibliography
to the game.  The language of chess emerges in such entries
as *Queen's Gambit Declined, sweeper, sealer, pawn
roller, Greek Gift Sacrifice*, and *Alcoholic Chess*, &ldquo;an absurd
game played on a large board with glasses or bottles of alcoholic
drink replacing the chessmen.  If the opponent's 'man' is
captured, the drink it represents must be consumed by the
capturer before the play proceeds.  B.H. Wood... relates the
story that Lasker is said to have won such a game 'by sacrificing
his queen in ridiculous fashion at the very outset of the
game.  The queen contained about a quarter litre of cognac;
quaffing this seriously incapacitated his opponent in the ensuing
complications.' &rdquo;  Ah!  They don't play chess the way they
used to.

Diagrams abound to illustrate various critical positions
in the strategies described.  Brace, who is a formidable player
(how else could I categorize him, since I have beaten him on
occasion), is an entertaining and knowledgeable writer.  Published
originally in England (hence the British spellings — *defence*
— and occasional Briticisms —*sandglass* for 'hourglass')
the *Dictionary* is now available in America — and a good
thing, too, when you consider that it is just in time to meet
the rush on the chess playing computers that is bound to develop
for Christmas.

As Svetozar Gligoric points out in his introduction, &ldquo;*An
Illustrated Dictionary of Chess* is an attempt to diminish the
existing gap between the huge amount of literature published
about chess and the lack of books giving general information
about the game and all its aspects.&rdquo;

*Laurence Urdang*

### Notes Found in Bottles
*Deborah Wing*

*Location of find*: The Thames at Coventry

*Inscription*: &ldquo;The night has a thousand eyes, the
day but one... alas....

— Godiva&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Unmentionables And Other Euphemisms*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Unmentionables%20And%20Other%20Euphemisms%20Jeremy%20Lawrence&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Jeremy Lawrence, (Gentry Books Ltd., London, 1973), 88pp.

&ldquo;On the excremental front, 'defecate' finds a rhyming
slang equivalent in either *pony and trap* or *tom-tit*; 'urinate'
in *snake's hiss* or *Mike Bliss*.  The last of these also took the
form *Micky Bliss* or simply, *Micky* — and how many people
partial to the phrase, *taking the Micky*, know that this is its
vulgar origin?&rdquo;

How many indeed?

*Unmentionables* explores our use of euphemisms, mysterious,
comic and often darnright ludicrous in a humorous and
lightly written manner.  Here is no attempt to review the history
and use of such rhetoric on the academic or comprehensive
level, and the reading of this book surely gains as a result.

The content is richly drawn from recounting expressions
aimed at safeguarding the coy from brutal mention of God,
the Dead, &ldquo;private parts&rdquo; and sexual activity generally, and
political or occupational embarrassment.  The emphasis is on
nineteenth-century creations, designed so as to meet the needs
of &ldquo;genteel&rdquo; middle-class Victorians.  (It was indeed the Victorians
who gave *genteel* a bad name, and today, &ldquo;the word is
used mockingly in reference to that era's obsolete standards of
false refinement.&rdquo;)

The material is drawn from both British and American
experience and carries a concluding chapter on Newspeak,
bringing our inherited euphemisms up to date: it claims that
Britain has still a long way to go &ldquo;before she becomes as
enmeshed in this sort of language as the United States.&rdquo;  Lawrence
then goes on to quote such topicals as *mopping up
operations* and *protective manoeuvres* for 'napalm bomb
raids.'

From our side of the Atlantic, I would doubt this charge,
and if the heyday of euphemisms is past, its popularity is well
in evidence as *garden flat* (situated at shady basement level)
and *Adult books* (as advertised in certain Soho shop windows)
bear ready witness.

*[Simon Smith, Nantwich, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {D.D. Paige}

Professor Donald Sears's piece, &ldquo;Ameritalian&rdquo; [I, 4],
has only lately come to my attention.  The following notes are
offered as a mild corrective to his sweeping conclusion that in
the last few years Italy has been borrowing words from America
rather than from France.

Of the 33 words and prefixes that he cites, 14 (*dancing,
bitter, garden, dry, leader, standard, W.C., cocktail, toast,
pullover, box, bar, touring* — not &ldquo;turing&rdquo;! — and *club* entered
in the nineteenth century.  Ten words or prefixes (*super-,
sexy, market, relax, motel, bowling, cracker, credit carta,
long drinks*, and *jumbo*) possibly entered Italian within &ldquo;the
last few years&rdquo; (though *market* and *relax* may have entered
from Great Britain rather than from America).  The remaining
eight do not fall into either group.

All 14 words in the first group above are listed in Italian
dictionaries published prior to 1935.  *Bar*, for example, officially
entered the Italian language in 1926, when by ministerial
decree it became exempt from the tax imposed on foreign
words appearing on signs on the grounds that &ldquo;the word *bar*
cannot be translated exactly into Italian, since the word *taverna*
does not in fact describe the sort of business that is now indicated
by the word *bar*.&rdquo;  As for *touring* and *club*, both appeared in Italian
at least as early as 1894, when the Touring Club Italiano was
founded in Milan.  Of the eight words that do not fall in either
group:

>*autogrill* is completely Italian: *automobile* plus *griglia*.
There is no American counterpart.
>
>*manzo amburghese*, like *T.V.* (pronounced &ldquo;Ti Vu&rdquo;), is an
assimilation.
>
>*mini*-, like *midi*-, and *maxi*-, is surely borrowed from the
French fashion world.
>
>*Gingerino* is, I believe, a brand name.
>
>*camping* only appears to be an import from American.
Whoever in the United States heard of a *camping*?  Our
word is *campsite*.  The obvious derivation is from the Italian
*campeggio*.  The -*ing* was added to the root on the
analogy of *dancing* 'a place to dance' for the sake of
what?  — class?
>
>*frigo* is certainly *not* from *refrigerator* but from *frigorifero*.
>
>*coupon* is, of course, French, and entered Italian from
that source before World War II.
>
>*parcheggio* is old and Italian.
>
>*stereo* is doubtful.  Why can it not be purely Italian?  (*hifi*,
also found in Italy, is another story).

There remain brand names and names of businesses, a
number of which Professor Sears cities.  These are matters of
snob appeal — like our *Paris belts, Hai Karate*, and *English
Leather* toiletries for men or shops like *Picadilly, Via Veneto*,
and *Rive Gauche* — and serve in merchandising and advertising
products and services.  Though there is only a raunchy joke
in the brand of sanitary napkins made in Turin, called *Pussy's
Best*.

All of which is not to deny that Italians do not import
American words, merely that Professor Sears's choices do not
illustrate his thesis.  After all, as every traveler knows, there are
*snack bars* and *jeans* (not to mention a *jeanseria*, a shop in Via
Balbi in Genoa).  *Product manager, account executive, art
director* and *design engineer* are common in advertisements offering
jobs.  And the drug culture has assimilated *trippare* 'to be
tripping on drugs.'

*[D.D. Paige, Middletown, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jeremy H. Thompson}

In one of your recent issues [IV, 3], I read some colorful
cricketing terms.  As an avid cricketer, I feel that the following
excerpt from *The Cricketer* [13, 4, 1977] might shed some
light upon this game of games, explaining simply the basic
rules of play.

>You have two sides, one out in the field and one in.
Each man that's in goes out to go in, and when he's out
he comes in and the next man goes in until he's out.
When they are all out the side that's out comes in, and
the side that's been in goes out and tries to get those
coming in out.  Sometimes you get men still in and not
out.  When both sides have been in and out including the
not outs, that's the end of the game.

*[Jeremy H. Thompson, Santa Monica, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Duncan M. Mennie}

To Willard Espy's query [IV, 2]: the nearest German
equivalent in form and meaning to *lean over backwards* is
*sich auf die Hinterbeine stellen (setzen)*.  Only the English
phrase conjures up literally the picture of a *man* pulling on a
rope with all his might as in a tug-of-war while the German
phrase refers literally to a *horse* pulling a specially heavy load
with all its might.  Figuratively both expressions mean *make
every effort* and are used of human beings.  Klappenbach et
al., *W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Gegenwartssprache* states that
the German phrase is &ldquo;South German and colloquial&rdquo; and
gives a quotation from Brecht's *Mutter Courage*, Scene 9,
&ldquo;Wenn wir zwei uns auf die Hinterbein stelln, k&ouml;nnen wir
unsern Unterhalt finden....,&rdquo; I would translate 'If we two
really put our backs into it...' despite Eric Bentley's 'look
lively' in the standard rendering.  Heinz K&uuml;pper, *W&ouml;rterbuch
der Umgangssprache* states that Mozart used the phrase in
1781 — South German again.

The trouble with *sich auf die Hinterbeine stellen* is, of
course, that it has a second and more common meaning:
literally 'rear up' (of a horse), hence figuratively 'make difficulties,'
'dig in one's heels.'  There are exactly parallel phrases
in Swedish and Dutch.

With 'dig in one's heels' one is brought back to the tug-of-war;
*falling over backwards* is the fate of the defeated side.
Could *bending over backwards* refer to the position adopted
by a man who is drawing a long-bow?  Or has alliteration been
a decisive factor?

*[Duncan M. Mennie, Newcastle-upon-Tyne]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Cop-outs set up for a well-armed conglomerate (7).  
9\. Possible baseball team to play the Tigers.  (7)  
10\. Hunting ally in hot and bothered full cry.  (7)  
11\. Heroic little saints face danger?  Not these runners.  (9)  
12\. Ring master. (3)  
13\. The goons next door, of all places!  (13)  
15\. Bird thou never wert, frequently enough.  (3)  
16\. Support of country before the postal service collapses.  (11)  
19\. Kind of kind.  (3)  
20\. Posthumorous remarks? (5, 8)  
22\. The flow of spring.  (3)  
23\. &ldquo;Am I anti-beer?  That's not my bag.&rdquo;  (9)  
25\. Fellow to get the edge, breaking the sound barrier.  (4, 3)  
26\. Missing notes, because of the conductor's absence of mind or perfect memory.  (2, 5)  
27\. Sister's being rattled by fights.  (7)

**Down**

1\. Beaten in court and rendered illegal.  (8)  
2\. Having tongue in cheek but not in check.  (7, 8)  
3\. The discipline to change one's mind.  (10)  
4\. Don't get rough, get even.  (5)  
5\. There's an excess despite appeal about the missile.  (8)  
6\. Places of concentration.  (4)  
7\. Preferred income, according to Wall Street brokers.  (4, 11)  
8\. Desist in their creed?  Not the faithful.  (6)  
14\. Headlocks to be held tight.  (10)  
17\. Harped on the absence of parents.  (8)  
18\. The captain's ship holds a cargo of herring.  (8)  
20\. People like this are in a devil of a fix, trying to help.  (6)  
21\. Feeling of insecurity, or term to that effect.  (6)  
24\. Underground network. (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. OCTOPUS  
9\. Leo-nine  
10\. T-ally-HO  
11\. O-st-RICHE-s  
12\. Ali  
13\. Neighbor-hoods  
15\. Egg  
16\. Nation-ALISM  
19\. Ilk  
20\. Funny epitaphs  
22\. Sap  
23\. I-n-EBR-iat-E  
25\. Mac-H ONE  
26\. No score  
27\. RESISTS  

**Down**

1\. Outlawed  
2\. Talking nonsense  
3\. Psychiatry  
4\. Smooth  
5\. PLE-Thor-A  
6\. Loci  
7\. High commissions  
8\. DEISTS  
14\. Hairpieces  
17\. O-rpha-N-ed  
18\. S-kipper-S  
20\. F-r-IEND  
21\. TREMOR  
24\. Root  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v5n2_1978-09)