--- 
title: "VOL V, No 4 [Spring, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Hindi Filmi English Is Coming!
*Jag Mohan, New Delhi*

Hindi Filmi English can be best described as the patois
that has evolved out of the hybridization of English
and Hindi—the official language of the Indian Union.  Hindi
Filmi English (HFE) is the argot of the people working in
Hindi films—more so of the film journalists—based in Bombay.
In recent years, HFE has matured from an oral tradition
into a written language.  With Roman transliteration, it is
spread on the printed page either in italics or in bold type in
newspapers, magazines, advertisements, and posters.  HFE,
which originated in the film studios, tea canteens, taxis, back
alleys, and boozing dens, is now heard in respectable drawing
rooms, posh hotels, and even in university campuses.

For a first acquaintance, here are a few examples of the picturesque
speech and patter of HFE culled from some journals:

>*filmi* *adj., attrib, noun* 'of or pertaining to motion
pictures': *filmi English; filmi politics; filmi dinner
party*.
>
>*Hulloji, Thank youji* *ji* is an honorific.
>
>*Arre, Yaar!*  'Hi, friend!'
>
>*bak bak* used as *adj*. in attrib position: *bak bak hero*
'hero who babbles a lot.'
>
>*bakofy* *vb*. 'to babble a lot.'
>
>*Chamcha* *n*. 'factotum; flatterer, admirer; troubleshooter.'
>
>*chamchafy* *vb*. 'flatter; today up to.'
>
>*chamchagiri* *n.* 'the art of flattery.'
>
>*pocha, pocha* *adj*. 'cloying, sickening': *She is full of
pocha, pocha sentimentalism.*
>
>*dhadham-dishum* *adj*.  'noisy, boisterous; fighting': *He
is good in dhadham-dishum scenes*.
>
>*seedhi-saadha* *adj*.  'simple; straightforward'; *She is a
seedhi-saadha woman*.  Masculine: *seedha-saadha.*
>
>*naach-gaana* *n*.  'singing and dancing'; *lit*.  'dance
[from *nautch*] and music [-*gaana*].'

These examples should be sufficient for lexicographers,
philologists, etymologists and neologists to recognize that a
new type of pidgin English is evolving and gaining currency.
Maybe Kenneth Hudson (*The Dictionary of Diseased English*,
Macmillan) and Paul Johnson (*Enemies of Society*, Nicholson
and Weidenfeld) will get furious at these verbal aggressions
on the English language.  But nothing can be done against the
sweeping tide of HFE.  Possibly, the late George Orwell would
accept HFE with a wry face and write a satirical piece.  After
all, he had lived in Burma when it was part of India.

A historical backdrop might be helpful.  Ever since India's
English connection began over three centuries ago, there has
been a two-way traffic in English.  Indians had to be anglicised
so that they could be useful in building up the Empire and in
maintaining it; the browns, the blacks, and the yellows had
to learn English perforce.  So did the Indians, since India was
the Kohinoor of the British Empire.  And, India contributed
many, many words to the English dictionary.

In this context, it must be recalled that all Indian
languages are related to the English language for they all
belong to the Indo-European family of languages.  Hindi and
English are distant, long-lost cousins.  Sanskrit, Hindi, and
the other major languages of India evolved out of the Indo-Iranian
branch, while English developed from the West Germanic
and Anglo-Frisian branch.  It must be remembered
that for centuries stretching back about two millennia, Indian
words had been creeping into English vocabulary.  Greek,
Roman, and Arab travelers were responsible for the adoption
of words from India like *amber, camphor, ginger, indigo,
lae, musk, opal, sandalwood*, and others into Middle English.

The name *India* does not belong to the Indians, in the
sense that none of the ancient texts of Indian languages contains
this word.  It is a gift of the Westerners—particularly of
the English.  They had heard of the River Sindhu (River Indus,
now is Pakistan) and through a process of corruption baptized
the *Aryavarta* of the Hindus and the *Hindustan* of the
Moghuls as *India*.

The Portuguese were responsible for channeling into
English words like *areca, betel, calico, cheroot, coir, copra,
joggery*, and others; these were derived from South Indian
languages of the east and west coasts—Malayalam, Tamil,
and Kannada.

The Moghuls provided *darbar, maharajah, nawab, sircar*,
and other words, which for the sake of administration
had to be coopted into the English language.

By the time Queen Victoria became Empress of India
and the *sahibs* and *memsahibs* (both words derived from
Arabic) settled down in the hill stations, cantonments, and
port towns, a goodly number of day-to-day Indian words
were current: *mulligatawny* 'soup,' *cashmere* 'cloth,' *jodhpurs*
'breeches,' *dungarees* 'clothes made out of coarse cloth,'
*arrack* and *toddy* drinks, *pilau* and *kabab* foods, *coolie* 'laborer,'
*mali* 'gardener,' and others.  The Indologists adopted
several words from the Sanskrit and Pali texts: *avatar, dharma,
karma, mantra, nirvana, stupa, vihar*, etc.

By the end of the nineteenth century, there were enough
Indian words and expressions current in the language of the
British to merit respectability.  In 1886, within 30 years of the
Sepoy Mutiny, John Murray published *Hobson-Jobson*, by Sir
Henry Yule and Arthur Coke Burnell, a &ldquo;glossary of Anglo-Indian
colloquial words and phrases of kindred terms, etymological,
historical, geographical, and discursive.&rdquo;  The
higgledy-piggledy Anglo-Indian that till then had survived
only through spoken tradition had achieved the status of, at
least, a documented dialect.

In the twentieth century, when Indian writers began to
use the English language creatively (unlike the *babu* administrators),
following the example of some pioneers of the late
eighteenth century (Michael Madhusudan Dutt, Swami Vivekananda,
the father of Rabindranath Tagore, and others),
the expression Anglo-Indian was reversed into Indo-Anglian.

It must be recorded that English writers like Edmund
Blunden, W.B. Yeats, and E. M. Forster patronized and
blessed the Indo-Anglian writers.  The greatest among them
was Rabindranath Tagore, who to date is the only Nobel
Laureate for Literature from India.

Mulk Raj Anand, Raja Rao, C.V. Desani and others of
the pre- and post-Independence periods contributed new
words to the English language, composed sentences in
English in the Indian manner and expressed Indian sentiments,
nationalist and otherwise.  They have created new
metaphors and images, coined neologisms and concocted
strange combinations of words and phrases.  So much so, India
has a pre-eminent place in Commonwealth literature.  &ldquo;We
cannot write the English.  We should not.  We can write only
as Indians,&rdquo; confessed Raja Rao (*Kanthapura* and *The Serpent
and the Rope*).  Mulk Raj Anand (*The Coolie, Untouchable*
and other novels) differentiated his &ldquo;pigeon English&rdquo; from
pidgin-English and asserted that while his &ldquo;pigeon English&rdquo;
soared to the skies, pidgin-English wallowed in the gutter.
According to him, &ldquo;native speech enters into the shell of the
sentences in the foreign language (English) through certain
indigenous words.&rdquo;  (Ms.) Kamala Das, the provocative poet
of feminine sensibility, has summed up the position of the
Indo-Anglian writer thus:

>I speak three languages,  
writing in two.  
>
>Dream in one....  
>
>It is half English, half Indian  
>funny perhaps, but it is honest.
>
>It is as human as I am human.  
>
>Don't you see?

A real tribute to India's contribution to the English language
can be found in the *Little Oxford Dictionary*, which contains
a &ldquo;Supplement of Words from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh
and Sri Lanka&rdquo; —in other words, what was meant by India
half a century ago or what is described as the Indian subcontinent
nowadays.  R.E. Hawkins, a former manager of the
Oxford University Press in Bombay and a long-time resident
in India, compiled this supplement, thus updating *Hobson-Jobson*.
Almost all the words in this supplement have found
their way into other English language dictionaries.  It is the
claim of Mulk Raj Anand that he has contributed not fewer
than fifty words to the Supplement through his writings.

Along with American English, Australian English,
British English, Canadian English, Irish English, Scottish
English, Welsh English, and Caribbean English, Indian
English has been honored with chairs and departments in
universities in India and elsewhere.

Having established the genealogy of Hindi Filmi English,
let me provide a closer look at HFE with the requisite
historical and socio-economic contexts.  The Anglo-Indian
Brahmins and Indo-Anglian pundits are likely to resent the
efforts of HFE to take off from the gutter and soar to the
skies.  HFE will first settle down wherever Indians are domiciled
in the West and the East.  Then it will migrate to adjacent
English-speaking areas.  Finally, this pigeon will build
its nest within the portals of academic institutions.

Hindi Filmi English, the evolving hybrid language, does
not belong to the Hindi heartland of the Gangetic plains in
the north but to Bombay and to the Hindi film industry based
there.  Bombay, the gateway to and from India, is a sprawling,
modern metropolis.  It is the melting pot of almost all
linguistic groups of India.  The Hindi that is spoken by the
polyglot population of Bombay is not the Hindi of the north.
The film industry and its ancillary businesses, in which at
least 100,000 persons are employed, provide the base for
HFE.  From the hothouse atmosphere of the studios, the tea
canteens, the illicit liquor dens, and the alleys and byways
where the workers live, trying to imitate the life-styles of film
stars, emanated this patois, born of the necessity of day-to-day
life.  The ordinary people, who speak debased Hindi and
&ldquo;broken&rdquo; English, had put in circulation a number of expressions
like *kaali-pilli* literally 'black and white' but connoting
'worthlessness,' *hera-pheri* 'underhand wheeling and dealing,'
*faltu* 'spurious,' *gol-maal* 'messy state of affairs,' and so on.

Over a period of time, film journalists and gossip columnists,
writing in English magazines, began to resort in a
hesitant way to this corrupted Hindi, transliterating it into
Roman script and italicizing it.  The Hindi *filmi* flavor and
feel were thus imparted to everything they wrote.  More than
any journal of the film industry, it was *Stardust* that succumbed
completely to HFE.  This glossy monthly for film
buffs and fans, with its gossip column entitled &ldquo;Neetu's Natter,&rdquo;
modeled after the columns of Hollywood's Hedda Hopper
and Louella O. Parsons, became extremely popular.
Teenagers, film-*wallahs*, and Indians settled in the U.K.,
U.S.A., and Canada reveled in reading the column.  *Stardust*
has a circulation of 130,000 with a total readership of
650,000.  It is priced high for India—35 cents (20 pence).  Its
popularity can be judged from the fact that the largest selling
daily has a circulation of 220,000 and sells for about three
cents (1&frac12; pence).

The credit for transforming the spoken hybrid dialect of
HFE into a respectable medium of expression with alliteration,
onomatopoeia, neologisms, and tense formations must
go to Ms. Shobha Khilachand, an enterprising, wealthy, and
captivating woman, who edited this journal from 1971 till
recently.  In a communication to the present writer, Ms.
Khilachand confesses that HFE &ldquo;existed before *Stardust* or I
arrived on the scene.  Only it wasn't considered chic enough
for common use and certainly no self-respecting editor
would've passed it for publication.&rdquo;  Writing elsewhere, she
has pointed out that the gossip columns written by all *filmi*
journalists &ldquo;follow one standard style—a *challu* 'easy-going'
one, using a strange blend of Hindi/English, which murders
grammar (Who cares about it?) but is immensely readable all
the same.&rdquo;  For the record, it must be mentioned that there is
a pretender—one Mohan Bawa, a *filmi* press-wallah 'journalist.'
He claims that it was he, along with &ldquo;a bright, bitchy,
intelligent girl called Indu Singh,&rdquo; who first launched the
style.  This is beside the point, for he was on the staff of *Stardust*
for only four months.  What is of relevance is that the column,
&ldquo;Neetu's Natter,&rdquo; is imitated in style and content by a
dozen other columns.  The language has seeped into advertising
copy.  Cocktail parties are animated with lavish quotes
from the *Stardust* column.  Overseas Indians writing home
use this language.  Its usage is spreading fast.

For the present, the vocabulary of Hindi Filmi English
cannot be more than 300 words, and they are acquiring adjectival
and adverbial forms.  Some more words deserve
notice:

>*patao* *vb*. 'fool (someone); lead (someone) down the
garden path.'
>
>*kanjoos* *adj*. 'stingy and knavish.'
>
>*khit-phit* *n*. 'verbal abuse': *a khit-phit* talk is 'a slanging
match.'
>
>*lafda* *n.* 'trouble; tangle, mess.'
>
>*tagda* *adj*. 'sturdy; upright.'
>
>*izzat* *n*. 'prestige; self-esteem.'
>
>*dada* *n. lit*.  (Hindi) 'elder brother'; *lit*.  (Bengali) term
of address for an elderly person; HFE: 'gang leader;
underworld figure; &ldquo;Godfather.&rdquo; '
>
>*maal* *n. lit*. 'goods'; HFE: 'illicit liquor; smuggled
goods; sexy woman.'

Who knows where the list will end?  Hindi Filmi English has
become a living language, soaring higher than any pidgin
and scattering its seeds as it goes.

## Out Is In—But I'm Not Into Out
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

I suppose things used to get checked out at a check-out
counter, and there was some slight semantic content to the
*out*, as well as the *check*, not to mention the *counter*.  Now (at
this point in pain), suffering from a minor annoyance in one
foot, I am urged by a solicitous wife to &ldquo;have the doctor check
it out,&rdquo; which seems to mean to examine a condition or look
into a physical problem.

The teacher told a young niece of mine with no foot ailment
to &ldquo;check it out&rdquo; at the public library; and she didn't mean a book
but a question of etymology.  When the redoubtable Bob Grant
of Radio Station WOR, New York City returned from a trip to
the Soviet Union recently and was being interviewed about his
experiences there, Patricia McCann, also of WOR, somewhat
surprised at ultra-conservative Bob's praise of the Russian people
and even of some conditions in the country, exclaimed, &ldquo;Why
Bob, you've mellowed out!&rdquo;  (October 6, 1978).

A student (one of mine, I'm sorry to say), having to admit
that he had insufficient data to support a claim made in
his dissertation, said, &ldquo;I'll have to research it out.&rdquo;  Another
one, wrestling with a problem in a German dialect, offered to
&ldquo;translate it out&rdquo; and see what answer might be forthcoming.
None was.

For some pedantic reason I find nothing acceptable in
the above examples, yet I am not uncomfortable with a host
of others like *try it out, work it out, sit it out, cut it out, act it
out, thresh/thrash it out, hear him out, dish it out, dole it out,
eke out, clear out, crowd out, point out, set out, wear out*,
etc., which either make some sort of literal sense or are rendered
acceptable by the hoariness of enduring idiomaticity
(unlike the last word).

I writhe at *investigate it out* and *rehearse it out*; why,
then, do I not react the same way to *try it out* and *act it out*,
which are not too different in content from the rejected culprits?
I'm not sure about *flesh it out* (or &ldquo;in&rdquo;?), but I suspect
that the denominative sin is of the flesh here.  We sometimes
fill in blanks while filling a form out.  I can't make it out!

When our track coach told us to *run it out*, when we
complained of a stitch in the side during a long cross-country
race, there was some sense, though not much comfort, to the
words.  We didn't &ldquo;relish it out&rdquo; —nor did we say such a thing.

A colleague in a deservedly nameless field reacted to a
sudden increase in enrollment in Latin and Greek classes in
our University with, &ldquo;I can't fathom it out!&rdquo;  And a friend
who subscribes to more periodicals than he has time to read
has decided to *cancel a few out*.  VERBATIM is not among
them.  During what has been called an &ldquo;on-going (or *ungoing?*)
situation&rdquo; in a Long Island community (a teachers'
strike), one official said he was sure that both sides could,
with good will, *arbitrate it out*.

A person calling up a dispenser of omniscience on a radio
&ldquo;phone-in&rdquo; (not &ldquo;out&rdquo;) program, recently (October 16, 1978)
asked whether it would be advisable for him to *rent his house
out* while waiting to sell it.  This sounded to me like renting
out chairs for a graduation—or a funeral.

The attendant at the gas station (which is probably called
something else by now) used to ask, elliptically, &ldquo;Check the
oil?&rdquo; or &ldquo;Check the front?&rdquo;  (the latter version being followed by
the revelation of a need for oil).  But for the last several months
he has adopted the &ldquo;in&rdquo; variant, &ldquo;Check the front out?&rdquo;

If I am asked to explain why I accept *try it out* and reject
*check it out* (although I have wild surmises, both psychiatric
and aspectual), I can only, with Col. Sanders, *chicken out*.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: *Unsavory Savories*
*Jack Shreve, Cumberland, Maryland*

The dissimilarity of the English-French cognates *bishop*
and *&eacute;v&ecirc;que* [V, 2] brings to mind an even more striking lineup
of dissimilar English-Romance cognates.  This involves the
name of the European mint called in British English *savory*,
in French *sarriette*, in Italian *santoreggia*, and in Spanish *ajedrea*.

All are from the same Latin word, *satureja*, and all
underwent uncustomary modifications.  The English word
was influenced by the unrelated word *savor*, the French word
shows the addition of the diminutive suffix, *-ette*, the Italian
word was confused with *santo*, 'sacred,' and the Spanish
word, coming from Latin influenced by Arabic, preserves the
Arabic definite article, *a(l)*-.

## Traduttore Traditore
*E.J. Moncada, Washington, D. C.*

We can now raise the veil of mystery which has, for so
long, been associated with the medical profession and which
so many of its members try so hard to perpetuate by writing
indecipherable prescriptions, by their teasing and noncommittal
&ldquo;Hmm's,&rdquo; &ldquo;Oh's,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Ah's&rdquo; while examining the
tension-wracked subject, and by their ponderous Greek and
Latin terminology:

>*ankyloglossia*: to put one's foot (up to the ankle) in one's
mouth.
>
>*arthritis*: excessive devotion to a legendary English king.
>
>*ballism*: excessive venery.
>
>*basophilia carpitis*: degenerate predilection for certain
type fish.
>
>*bathophobia*: childhood aversion to shower.
>
>*beri-beri*: a most grave disease.
>
>*bigeminy*: expression favored by rural physicians; of.
&ldquo;by cracky.&rdquo;
>
>*boophilus*: characterized by a fondness for scaring
others.
>
>*calculus*: material often difficult to pass.
>
>*depot therapy*: short-term counseling while awaiting
commuter train.
>
>*discopathy*: disease communicated in dancing establishments.
>
>*dura mater*: a strict and demanding medical school, as
opposed to a more placid *alma mater*.
>
>*eucrasy*: psychiatrist's pronouncement at the end of
therapy.
>
>*extragenital*: three testes.
>
>*Fallopian way*: a thoroughfare best known to dissolute
Romans.
>
>*forceps*: biceps, triceps and forceps.
>
>*fureur genitale*: pubic hair.
>
>*hemanalysis*: examination of virile subject.
>
>*heterophilic agglutination*: cellular racial intermarriage.
>
>*hieromania*: a compulsion to go ever higher.
>
>*highmoritis*: rising death statistics.
>
>*horizontal fissure*: recumbent angler.
>
>*humerus*: the funny bone.
>
>*hypotension*: anxiety at the prospect of an injection.
>
>*infarct*: suppression of desire to pass wind.
>
>*lordosis*: Jehovah complex.
>
>*mastatrophy*: plaque awarded to southern plantation
owner.
>
>*metrography*: subway grafitti.
>
>*metroparalysis*: subway strike.
>
>*muliebrity*: act or state of being stubborn.
>
>*nosopoietic* or *nosode*: literary composition on loved
one's nose.
>
>*orchidectomy*: snipping a pair of flowers, usually for a
loved one.
>
>*pox*: familiar medical salutation in the Middle Ages:
&ldquo;pox tibi.&rdquo;
>
>*pantaphobia*: fear of wearing slacks.
>
>*phagotherapy*: counseling for homosexuals.
>
>*phoresis*: not as good as a &ldquo;full house,&rdquo; but still a damn
fine hand.
>
>*pigmented*: having a dirty mind.
>
>*pleural disease*: double pneumonia (a singular malady).
>
>*polymorphous*: parrot-shaped.
>
>*pupils*, dilating: schoolchildren's recitations.
>
>*pyknosis*: insertion of finger in nose.
>
>*pyknic*: outdoor meal.
>
>*quittor*: one whom nobody loves.
>
>*regnancy*: incomplete pregnancy.
>
>*riboside*: an example of medical tautology.
>
>*syphilization*: when prefaced by &ldquo;modern,&rdquo; denoting an
era of high level in manners and taste.
>
>*tarsen*: of the Apes.
>
>*thyrotomy*: gangrenous hip joint.
>
>*vagus nerve*: what's needed at a gaming table in Nevada.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Overheard in an elevator: &ldquo;He's not able to prioritize his
work at all.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Well, first he's gotta learn to routinize.&rdquo;
[Lee Ash, Bethany, Ct.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Overheard at a showing of *Superman*, when the hero has
flown 1000 miles or so to save the screaming Lois Lane
from being buried alive.  He: &ldquo;How could he know she was in
trouble?&rdquo;  She (somewhat contemptuously): &ldquo;Don't you know
that Superman has x-ray hearing?!&rdquo;

## &ldquo;Indri!  Indri!&rdquo;
*Kenneth E. Hall, Middletown, Connecticut*

Linguists tell us that even while we're sleeping the English
language is constantly changing.  They don't need to tell
us.  It's perfectly obvious from the numerous words and phrases
included in the new dictionaries which not too long ago were
*not* included because their use was regarded by language authorities
as substandard and unacceptable.

To be fair about it, many things happen to the language
by sheer chance that are not in any way the fault of the dictionary-makers.
For example, the word *indri*.  This refers to a
short-tailed, silky-furred arboreal primate of the lemur family,
which is quite rare and looks to the uneducated eye like a
cross between a ghostly-faced monkey and an overgrown cat.
The French naturalist Pierre Sonnerat had never seen one until
his first trip to Madagascar.  It was pointed out by his native
guide, who yelled excitedly, &ldquo;Indri!, Indri!&rdquo;

After Sonnerat had added this word to the language of
science, he discovered, somewhat belatedly, that *indri* was a
word from the Austronesian language spoken in the Malagasy
Republic and merely meant 'Look!'  It was not the name of
the animal.

But by that time, it was too late.  *Indri* was an established
&ldquo;in&rdquo; word, and all the king's horses and all the king's men
couldn't put the dictionary back together again.  Which goes
to prove, perhaps, that Samuel Johnson was quite right when
he said: &ldquo;Dictionaries are like watches; the worst is better
than none, and the best cannot be expected to go quite true.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Charles A. Van Patten}

Mr. Alexander's &ldquo;War Against *whynot*&rdquo; [V,3] reminds
me of a court room incident in which the Judge asked the
Spanish interpreter &ldquo;Why is it that, every time the witness
says no, you interpret it as yes?&rdquo;

Of course the explanation was that the witness had said
*como no* which means 'yes' in colloquial Spanish just as *why
not* can mean 'yes' in English.

*[Charles A. Van Patten, New York, New York]*.

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard, Canute*

A leader of the National Graphical Association, the principal
British printing union, announced the other day that his
members were not King Canutes about the new technology
that is turning their ancient inky craft upside down.  He presumably
meant that the lads were not going to try to stop the
tides of innovation that are making many of them redundant.
(*Luddites* would have been a more appropriate metaphor.)
But he demonstrated again the need for a Society to Rehabilitate
the Reputations of Those Whose Names Have Become
Metaphorical Clich&eacute;s.  Many such monstrous towers of careless
metaphor are based upon foundations of painted smoke.

For example, in the great Boat Club in the sky Canute
must be indignant that he is daily slandered down here as a
megalomaniac who seriously believed that he could stop the
flowing tide.  What happened was the exact opposite.  Canute
(c. 995-1035) was the great sea-king of England and Denmark.
His fleets ruled the waves.  He was the last man to
waive the rules of seamanship.  If any contemporary knew
about the tides and other ways of the sea it was Canute.

The story of Canute and the tide is recorded only by
Henry the Archdeacon of Huntingdon, who wrote his *Historia
Anglorum* a century after Canute's death.  Henry says that
Canute sat on the bank of the Thames at Westminster and
commanded the rising tide to go back as a dramatic rebuke to
his sycophantic court.  He got his feet wet as a parable to demonstrate
to his magnates that there were forces in the world
greater than war, and to prepare them for his submission to
the Holy See in Rome.  Henry of Huntingdon adds that as a
gesture of humility Canute would never afterwards wear his
crown: he hung it, instead, on the head of an effigy of the
crucified Christ.  The story is found nowhere else.  It reads like
a pious ecclesiastical legend with homiletic intent.

It is an engaging paradox of the whirligig of time that in
careless rhetoric Canute has now been widely adopted as the
example of an infatuated and arrogant reactionary who seriously
believes that he can turn back the tides, usually those
unpersuasively historicist currents, the tides of history.  Politicians
and other noisy persuader evidently feel the need for
some such dummy figure as an insult.  And poor old Canute
has drawn the short straw.

Our Society for Onomastic Rehabilitation will have
plenty of other work to do.  It is probably too late to persuade
the cartoonists and politicians that no ostrich yet hatched has
ever buried its head in the sand.  But we ought to try to do
something for the unfortunate lemmings.  The popular notion
that the little rodents commit mass suicide by plunging off the
Arctic shore and swimming out to chilly sea is deeply ingrained
folklore.  It is repeated in such respectable reference
books as the *Encyclopaedia Britannica*: &ldquo;None returns, and
the onward march of the survivors never ceases until they
reach the sea, into which they plunge and are drowned.&rdquo;
Like most popular folklore this is pure nonsense.  No credible
observer has ever recorded the mass suicide of lemmings.  The
most that can be said is that on their periodic emigrations to
escape from overcrowding, lemmings cross rivers and lakes
tumultuously, like migrating ants, and many are drowned.
Yet the false idea that lemmings have a death wish conforms
to some evident need in rhetoric.  It has given rise to a concatenation
of other equally fallacious myths, from the belief of
Norwegian peasants that lemmings rain from the clouds like
cats and dogs, to the notion of some imaginative biologists
that lemmings are following instinctively in ancestral
footsteps from the Miocene period, when the Baltic and
North Seas were dry land.

It is all bunkum.  Lemmings just don't do what they are
supposed to do.  The only animal that regularly commits mass
suicide is Homo sapiens.  But evidently we have a need for
some vivid metaphor from Nature to illustrate the human
propensity to self-destruction.  The poor bleeding lemming
has been adopted as a rhetorical clich&eacute; to fit the description.

Our Society for Onomastic Rehabilitation will try to explain
that there was more to the great civilization of Byzantium
than Byzantine deviousness.  It is probably too late to
persuade anybody that Cloud-Cuckoo-Land is a highly desirable
residence.  And in fact all such attempts to correct inveterate
errors are mostly likely, a priggish waste of time.  We
evidently need to believe rubbish about Canute and lemmings
for our rhetorical purposes.  And so the names have
come to represent things that never happened.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Linguistic Atlas Of England*](https://www.routledge.com/The-Linguistic-Atlas-of-England/Orton-Sanderson-Widdowson/p/book/9780415151290) and [*The Linguistic Atlas Of Scotland*](https://www.routledge.com/The-Linguistic-Atlas-of-Scotland-3-Volumes-Scots-Section/Speitel-Mather/p/book/9780415571500)
H. Orton, S. Sanderson, and J. Widdowson, eds., (Croom Helm London Humanities Press, Atlantic Highlands, NJ,  Macmillan, Toronto, 1978), 450pp. and J.Y. Mather and H.H. Speitel, eds., (Croom Helm, London; Shoe String Press, Hamden, CT; Macmillan, Toronto), Vol. 1, 1975, 429pp., Vol. 2, 1977, 292pp., 

*[By special arrangement, VERBATIM readers may order
these books at the following prices: England, U.S. $62.00
postpaid; *Scotland Vol. 1*, U.S. $48.00 postpaid; *Vol. 2*, U.S.
$48.00 postpaid.  Send order to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426,
with remittance in U.S. dollars.  We regret that we are unable
to offer these books outside the U.S. and Canada.]*

That language varies from place to place to a greater or
smaller degree has always been acknowledged and speakers
have always been conscious of it.  The poor Ephraimites who
could not say *shibboleth* found that out only too well (Judges
12: 4-6).  Fortunately, not all differences in language have
had such dire consequences.  The systematic study of localized
varieties of speech, traditionally known as dialects, did not
really start for English until the 18th century.  Most of the early
attempts were the gathering of dialect words from a particular
area, usually undertaken by a local clergyman or
schoolmaster.  In some cases remarks on pronunciation and
grammar prefaced these dialect glossaries.  Valuable as these
studies are they give only a haphazard idea of dialect areas.
There is no way of knowing how *house* is pronounced all the
way from Essex to Edinburgh, what areas show the undiphthongized
*hoose* and so on.  Similarly one could not know
where people say *car-handed, caggy-handed*, or *kay-handed*
for 'a left-handed person.'  A.J. Ellis and Joseph Wright tried
to remedy this.  Ellis collected material on the pronunciation
of certain words, *so, now, the, gate*, etc. and divided
England and Lowland Scotland into several different dialect
areas on the basis of his findings.  He designated the areas
Southern, West Southern, North Midland, West Northern,
South Lowland, and so on.  These simple geographical terms
have been taken over by dialectologists ever since and have
only been subject to minor modifications.  Although Wright
himself completed the monumental task of producing a dialect
dictionary of English, beyond general statements there
was no clear picture of where certain words occurred.

In the latter part of the 19th century, dialect material
was being collected in both France and Germany in a
systematic way and later published in map form as the *Atlas
Linguistique de la France* and the *Deutscher Sprachatlas*.  In
England no mapping of dialect material took place, and in
the 1920s Wright himself admitted this defect in English
dialect studies.  More than fifty years later Wright's plea has
finally been met by the publication of the *Linguistic Atlas of
England* (*LAE*) and two volumes of the *Linguistic Atlas of
Scotland* (*LAS*).  The origins of both of these undertakings are
admirably sketched in detail in the Introduction to the
volumes.  The impetus to produce them came from various
sources: Hans Kurath, who needed detailed knowledge of
English dialects with which to compare his studies of
American dialects, Eugen Dieth of Zurich, who had worked
on English dialects and had also helped to found the
*Sprachatlas der deutschen Schweiz*, as well as from a number
of British scholars such as Harold Orton of Leeds and John
Orr of Edinburgh, who was acquainted with the work of
Romance dialectologists.  Such are the intellectual ancestors
of these undertakings.  Coming late into the field has had its
advantages, for both projects have been able to draw on the
experiences of earlier work.

One immediate question that arises is, Why should there
be a separate survey of dialects in England and Scotland?
Ellis and Wright did not make such a distinction.  There is in
fact an overlap in that Northumberland and Cumberland
(now Cumbria) are dealt with by both atlases.  The *LAS* also
deals with dialects in Ulster.  The reason for this twofold division
seems, according to the introductions, to be historical
and personal.  In 1947, the Philological Society appointed
three survey editors for the study of English (including Scottish)
dialects: John Orr in Edinburgh, Harold Orton in
Leeds, and C. L. Wrenn in Oxford.  From this developed two
dialect surveys, the Linguistic Survey of Scotland (LSS) and
the Survey of English Dialects (SED), which have provided
the material for both of these atlases.  The *LAS* bolsters up its
claim for being a separate undertaking by seeing itself as the
heir to a tradition of dialect and linguistic study in Scotland
stretching back at least as far as the 17th century.  These two
surveys, however, acknowledge the debt each owes to the
other and are an example of scholarly cooperation.

They differ, however, in several points.  The *LAE* deals
with pronunciation, grammar (including both morphology
and syntax), and vocabulary, whereas the *LAS* deals only
with vocabulary in the two volumes under review.  This difference
reflects the difference in collecting the material from
which the maps were drawn.  The material for the *LAE* was
collected by the direct method; that is, fieldworkers, trained
in phonetics, were sent to various chosen localities in England
to find informants (more about them later) and to work
through a questionnaire with them, transcribing their
responses in phonetic script.  Altogether, eleven fieldworkers
investigated 313 localities, mostly small towns and villages.
Stanley Ellis, who covered 118 of these, is perhaps the best
known fieldworker, having appeared often on television and
radio.

The *LAS* on the other hand used the indirect method,
that is, postal questionnaires were sent out to the headmasters
of primary schools who were asked to choose informants who
&ldquo;should if possible be middle aged or older and a lifelong inhabitant
of your district.&rdquo;  The fieldworkers of the *LAE* were
similarly instructed &ldquo;to seek out elderly men and women...
who were themselves natives of the place and both of whose
parents were preferably natives also.&rdquo;  Thus, although the
methods of eliciting material were different, the range of informants
was similar, both atlases portraying an old-fashioned
type of speech.  Many urban sociolinguists criticize
this type of survey, but it must be said that both surveys have
made explicit the restrictions which they imposed and are
aware that they are dealing with only a limited amount of
material.  The value of these kinds of survey is that they provide
material on which further studies can be built.  The speech
varieties of the great conurbations cannot be fully understood
if we do not have a description of the old rural dialects of the
surrounding areas.  The most obvious problem raised by the
indirect method is that of the spelling of words by lay-informants.
The *LAS* says that phonological material would
be collected in a different way.  In the Introduction there is a
detailed section on &ldquo;The Interpretation of the Informants'
Spelling.&rdquo;  In most cases the editors have used the majority
form, e.g. since *car*- occurs more frequently than *kar*- 'left-(handed)',
it is the form chosen (*LAS* 1,6).  The chief difficulties
are with vowel signs, but consonants present some problems
too; for example, both *ch* and *gh* occur for the sound at
the end of *loch*, the velar fricative.  To enable the reader to
judge for himself, seventeen &ldquo;phonetic orthographic maps&rdquo;
are given in Appendix A and four in Appendix B of *LAS* 1.
The *LAE* does not run into such problems.  Both atlases do not
contain all the material which was obtained in LSS and SED
but only representative maps which are typical of interesting
distributions in England, Scotland, and Northern Ireland.

The method of eliciting and showing the distribution of
words, word geography, is onomasiological; that is, one starts
with a notion like 'left-handed' or a &ldquo;thing&rdquo; like 'icicle' and
tries to find out and then display on a map all the words used
in different areas of the country for the particular notion or
thing.  The dialectologists who have drawn up the questionnaires
have a good idea at the outset which words are going to
be of interest.  In asking questions, the *LAS* has been more
detailed than the *LAE*.  Map L9 *dung* in *LAE* has the two
words *dung* and *muck*.  *LAS 1*, 62 has the same two words but
designating *cow dung*.  On maps *LAS 1*, 62 *horse dung, 1*, 63
*sheep's dung* and *1*, 68 *fowl dung* a great variety of words are
used, e.g. *orts, dollars* (*1*, 62), *parties, tartles, purls, trotties,
trintle* (*1*, 63) and *pen, scootings* (*1*, 68).  By defining the question
more narrowly, the *LAS* has obtained a much more differentiated
response.  Altogether, the two volumes of the *LAS*
map 180 notions and the *LAE* maps 65.  It must not be forgotten
that 207 lexical maps using material from the SED had
already appeared in 1974.  Unlike phonological maps, lexical
maps are renowned for showing random variation, both in
the number and geographical distribution of the words
recorded.  Dialect areas are never set up by reference to lexical
criteria alone.  The actual mapping of the words differs in the
two atlases, as can be seen from the two maps (figs. 1 and 2).
One way to map informants' responses is to enter the appropriate
answer at the appropriate locality, but this is rather
cumbersome and requires large-scale maps.  A refinement on
this is to have a symbol for similar forms and enter the symbols
on the map.  This method is used for the phonetic orthographic
maps of *LAS 1*.  For instance in map 1 of Appendix A
*round*, any occurrence of *round* is represented by &middot; and any
occurrence of *round* by &square;, the other forms being neglected.
By this means the reader can see the distribution more clearly;
areas with clusters of &middot; and areas with clusters of &square; become
clearly discernible.  This kind of map is known as a symbol
map.  A further refinement would be to draw lines separating
off the areas with *round* from those with *roond*.  The lines
that delineate areas where one form occurs predominantly
are called *isoglosses* and a map that uses them is called an
*isogloss map* (see fig. 1).  The *LAE* clearly marks in all the
isoglosses in every map but the *LAS* uses hatching of various
kinds.  The latter method avoids the arbitrary drawing of an
isogloss and, with the different kinds of hatching being allowed
to overlap—signifying transitional areas where there is no
clear dominance of one form—it may give a more realistic
picture.

All methods of mapping are to some extent an interpretation
of the data.  Both atlases agree, however, in not entering
the words on the map itself but in using a legend, in the *LAE*
with numbers representing the words, in the *LAS* with boxes
showing the different sorts of hatching.  The *LAE* gives more
information in its legend such as etymology, first date recorded,
and provenance, if the word comes from a foreign language.
This is an unfortunate omission in my opinion in the *LAS*.  It
would be very useful to know which words came from
Gaelic.  One surprising thing is how many ordinary words
have an unknown or obscure etymology, for instance L8 of
the *LAE tip* (v) shows eight words: *cowp, keck, kick, shelve,
shoot, skell, tip, tipe* of which only *shoot* has a clear
etymology and *cowp* may come from French.  The *LAS* has,
in addition to maps, the informants' responses listed county
by county with general comments.  The *LAE* does not have
this since the basic material of the SED has already been
published.  What comes through in the study of all these maps
is the incredible variety of dialect words that surveys of this
kind can bring to light.  There are nine items which are dealt
with both by the *LAE* and the *LAS*; of these, the words for
'icicle' (L58 and *LAS 2*, 68, figs. 1 and 2) show a wide variety
of forms: *clinker bells, clinkers, conka-bells, icy bells*, and
*daglets* only in England whereas *tanklets, ice-shockles* (in
various forms), occur in both England and Scotland.  Of more
infrequent forms *frosty caundles* only occurs in the Shetlands
and *staapel* and *spicket* only in Northern Ireland.  The fact
that there is an overlap like this makes it imperative for any
future studies to use material from both surveys.  The *LAS* has
several appendices in Vol. 1: A and B giving phonetic ortho-graphical
maps, which we have already mentioned, C giving
a list of the informants with details of their sex, age, length of
residence, and birthplace of father and mother, followed by a
map of all the localities, D containing other maps, and E the
contents of the postal questionnaire so that it is clear which
items have been mapped and which not.  Vol. 2 repeats the information
on informants and the map of localities; it also has
the contents of the second postal questionnaire, and indexes of
the lexical maps of both volumes and of every word shown on
every map, thus allowing the volumes to be consulted easily.
The *LAE* too has several appendices: an index to the maps
(with the questions used), notes on the lexical responses, and a
list of unmapped responses for each lexical map.  For instance,
on L58, *cockle-bells, ice-bugs, snipes* are shown but unfortunately
with no information as to where they occurred; for
that one would have to consult the SED Basic Material.
Finally, an alphabetic index of mapped notions is included.

I have concentrated on the lexical material because that
is shared by both the *LAE* and *LAS*.  The *LAE* also has 249
phonological, 83 morphological, and nine syntactical maps,
the last being of only marginal interest.  The morphological
maps concentrate on verb forms, noun plurals, and pronouns.
M45 (*we*) *have got* is interesting because it shows the form
*getten* or *gotten* used in several areas of England, as of course
it is in American English, whereas in standard British English
the -*en* has been lost.  M68 shows the distribution of four
forms for *she: she, hoo, her*, and *shoo*, the last being a blend
of *she* and *hoo*.  The bulk of the *LAE* is made up of
phonological maps which show the distribution of the different
pronunciations of a particular word.  Many of these
maps have been reduced in size so that two can be got on one
page.  Different areas are again marked off by isoglosses, but
instead of there being numbers in the areas which are then
identified in a legend, the relevant sound or combination of
sounds is entered in phonetic script in the area concerned.

Thus on Ph50 *butter* and Ph51 *thunder* [u] appears in the
north and midlands and [&and;] in the south, the latter being the
standard British English vowel.  The maps are listed according
to their Middle English source, short vowels, long vowels and
diphthongs, and consonants.  There is a good commentary on
the maps in the introduction, but the use of slant lines / / is
never explained; although they are presumably meant to
signify phonemes, it seems unwise to use them since the SED
did not deal with broad phonemic transcription but with narrow
phonetic transcription and their use may well confuse the
general reader.  The maps do not use slant lines, but the
editors have subsumed several phonetic symbols under one
more general symbol.  Many of the phonological maps show a
number of different forms, e.g. Phl49 *house* not only shows
the undiphthongized vowel but many different diphthongal
forms.  Maps Ph149-154 represent ME &umacr;, except before *r*, and
they all show a very similar distribution.  The isogloss that
separates the undiphthongized [u:] from diphthongal forms
occurs at the same points on each map.  It is on the basis of
such regular distribution that dialectologists can divide up a
country into different dialect areas.  Ellis, Wright, and dialectologists
ever since have used this u/au isogloss to divide the
northern dialects from the north midland dialects.  The boundary
u/au varies slightly from word to word and other criteria
are used in addition in characterizing northern dialects.  Thus
the boundary between dialects is not something rigid, like an
international boundary, but rather a transitional zone, or
bundle of isoglosses.  The widespread Cockney pronunciation
of *thr*- as *fr*- turns up in the Home Counties and East Anglia
as well, shown in Ph234 *three*, 235 *thread*.  The retention of
the *r* in the pronunciation of -*er*, although lost in standard
British English, is retained in many dialect areas, notably the
west country, parts of Lancashire, Northumberland, and the
West Midlands, shown in Ph244 *butter*, 245 *farmer*.

The publication of this large amount of material is a
milestone in the study of English dialects.  It &ldquo;freezes&rdquo; the
rural dialects of the early 20th century.  Many readers may
wonder why, although they come from a particular part of
the country, a word or pronunciation shown to be current
there is unknown to them.  That is because dialect study is
continual.  Situations change and new surveys will have to be
made.

What use are the maps in these volumes apart from
showing us the distribution of certain words or pronunciations?
Their main importance will be in the historical study of
English, particularly of its phonology.  The complicated
phonological maps will enable the historical linguist to give a
firmer basis to hypotheses he might make about the passage of
one sound to another.  The pronunciation of the vowel in
*house*, Ph149, can be ranged along a scale from the undiphthongized
[u:] to the standard [au], and further development
to [a:].  Many of the intermediate values may have been
the ones used by Shakespeare or Milton and their contemporaries.
If we are now better able to localize certain words and
pronunciations in British English dialects, we can perhaps in
some cases trace features of American English back to their
British origins.  Now that all the hard work of collecting, drawing
the maps, and editing is over, it is up to linguists and lay-people
interested in English dialects to make good use of these
well-produced volumes.  There is enough material here for
many a long evening.

*[Charles V. J. Russ, University of York, England]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Power Writing, Power Speaking: 200 Ways To Make Your Words Count*](https://www.amazon.com/Power-Writing-Speaking-Words-Count/dp/0688032958)
Comp. and ed. by N.H., S.K., and P.S. Mager, (William Morrow and Company, Inc., 1978), 288 pp. 8-3/16&rdquo; &times; 5-1/2&rdquo;.

I found the title of this book so off-putting that I wasn't
going to review it.  By chance, I opened it to page 235 where I
spotted a quotation from VERBATIM: clearly, editors and compilers
with the extraordinary good sense of the Magers should
not have their work overlooked, so I dived in.

This book is by no means the Napoleon Hill treatise it
pretends to be, either in title, subtitle, blurb, or stated purpose.
I got the distinct feeling that the Magers had prepared
the manuscript and had been persuaded by the publisher (or
his sales manager) that, as it stood, the book would have little
or no appeal: plenty of good steak, but (as Mr. Hill would
have it) no sizzle.  Thus was an otherwise useful and interesting
work on the multifarious rhetorical devices of English
(and language in general) forced into a Procrustean bed
(that's a metaphor!) of a market that may not know exactly
what to do with it.

*Power Writing* is basically an encyclopedic dictionary of
rhetorical tools, from *abusio to zeugma*: it contains clear definitions
of all devices and gives many citations of examples of
each.  (One of my pets, probably banned in Texas, is missing:
*copulative asyndeton*; and *adversative asyndeton* isn't there
either.  But *asyndeton* is and so are all my old friends—*hysteron
proteron, synecdoche, malapropism*, and *paranomasia*,
which is listed under *puns*.)  What makes the book so useful is
that with each classification are listed many examples from
literature.  Usually, a book of this kind lists only one or two
examples, and the listing of a half dozen or more not only
serves the reader with useful information but aids the clarity
of the description.

How this book is going to help anyone &ldquo;avoid triteness in
[his] next club speech&rdquo; I cannot say; I can say that the title
and blurbs should be ignored.  Buy the book: it will add a
useful and interesting work to your library.

*L. U.*

## How to Keep Dictionaries out of the Public Schools
*Edward B. Jenkinson, Indiana University*

The perennial protectors of the young dislike dictionaries
that contain &ldquo;dirty&rdquo; words.  The obscenity obliteraters
abhor words like *hot, horny*, and *hooker*.  They disapprove of
*crocked, coke*, and *clap*.  *Across-the-board* leaves them against.
Specific definitions of *deflower* and *bed* join several dozen
other words on lists that the guardians of virtue classify as
&ldquo;blatantly offensive language.&rdquo;

After several parents charged that &ldquo;seventy or eighty&rdquo;
words in *The American Heritage Dictionary* are obscene or
otherwise inappropriate for high-school students, the school
board ordered the dictionary removed from the high school in
Cedar Lake, Indiana.[^a1]
In Eldon, Missouri, after twenty-four parents filed a complaint noting that thirty-nine words in the
*AHD* are &ldquo;objectionable,&rdquo; the school board voted to remove
the dictionary from a junior high school.[^a2] 

The dictionary protesters obviously overlooked almost
all of the 155,000 words in the nearly 1,600 pages of the *AHD*
and focused only on the so-called dirty words.  One parent in
Eldon was reported as having said: &ldquo;If people learn words
like that it ought to be where you and I learned them—in the
street and in the gutter.&rdquo;[^a3] A school board member in Cedar
Lake noted: &ldquo;We're not a bunch of weirdo book burners out
here, but we think this one [the *AHD*] goes too far.&rdquo;[^a4] 

*Bed* was one of the more frequently criticized entry
words in the Cedar Lake controversy.  Among the definitions
are &ldquo;a place for lovemaking,&rdquo; &ldquo;a marital relationship, with its
rights and intimacies,&rdquo; and &ldquo;to have sexual intercourse with.&rdquo;[^a3] 

Anticipating a protest against the *AHD* and other dictionaries
in 1976, Texas Education Commissioner Marlin
Brockette stated that no works would be purchased that &ldquo;present
material which would cause embarrassing situations or
interfere in the learning atmosphere in the classroom.&rdquo;  By
quoting that subsection of the Texas textbook adoption proclamation,
Commissioner Brockette apparently justified the
removal of these five dictionaries from the purchase list in
Texas: *the AHD, The Doubleday Dictionary, The Random
House Dictionary of the English Language—College Edition,
Webster's New World Dictionary—Students' Edition*, and
*Webster's Seventh Collegiate Dictionary*.[^a3]

Commissioner Brockette's decision was reported in varous
Texas newspapers on November 12, 13, and 14, 1976.
Four months before he announced that the five dictionaries
would not be on the purchase list, Dr. Brockette received bills
of particulars from various groups of citizens about the dictionaries
that had been submitted for adoption by the State of
Texas.  Six of the cover letters which I have examined that accompanied
the bills of particulars cited these two subsections
of the Texas textbook adoption proclamation:

>1.7  Textbooks offered for adoption shall not include
blatantly offensive language or illustrations.
>
>1.8  Textbooks offered for adoption shall not present
material which would cause embarrassing situations
or interference in the learning atmosphere of
the classroom.

The chairperson of a textbook committee of a prominent
organization of women wrote this about *Webster's New World
Dictionary of the American Language*:

>Reviewer is shocked that a supposedly reputable publisher
would offer for adoption a book which is debasing
the English language.  Students need the basics
rather than sub-standard language.[^a5]

The chairperson of the organization's reviewing committee
listed these twelve words, among others, as examples of
the &ldquo;objectionable material&rdquo; she found in the dictionary:

| WORD               | REASON FOR OBJECTION                                 |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------- |
| *across-the-board* | Betting on horse racing in Texas is illegal.         |
| *attempt*          | Ties word into subject of murder.                    |
| *banana republic*  | insulting to Latins                                  |
| *bawdy house*      | unnecessary                                          |
| *bed*              | Why is sexual intercourse mentioned?                 |
| *the big house*    | slang—unnecessary                                    |
| *brain*            | Definition denotes violence.                         |
| *bucket*           | slang: the buttocks                                  |
| *f*                | Refers to a brothel (*claper*) and gonorrhea: slang. |
| *coke*             | slang for cocaine                                    |
| *crocked*          | slang for intoxicated                                |
| *deflower*         | to cause loss of virginity: slang?                   |

Lovers of language and frequent users of dictionaries
would probably not consider these words to be &ldquo;objectionable
material&rdquo;; nor would they consider the following words,
and/or specific definitions of them, to be &ldquo;blatantly offensive
language&rdquo;:

>*bastard*    
*easyrider*   
*fag*    
*fairy*    
*gay*     
*G-string*  
*head* (as in *acidhead*)  
*john* (prostitute's customer)  
*lay*  
*queer*  
*shack*  
*slut*  
*tail*  
*tail-end*

The removal of the five dictionaries from the purchase
list in Texas did not go unnoticed.  Several organizations concerned
with what is taught in the schools hailed the removal
as a major victory.  One such organization noted[^a6]:

>God gave parents a number of victories.  In Texas alone,
the State Textbook Committee did a good job of selecting
the best of the available books.  Then, the State
Commissioner of Education removed 10 books, including
the dictionaries with vulgar language and unreasonable
definitions.

That statement was included in an announcement distributed
by Educational Research Analysts in Longview,
Texas.  Founded by Norma and Mel Gabler, ERA is billed as
&ldquo;the nation's largest textbook review clearing house,&rdquo;[^a3] providing
&ldquo;thousands of textbook reviews&rdquo;[^a3]
that &ldquo;concentrate on pointing out 'questionable' content.&rdquo;[^a4]

A person concerned with specific words or definitions (or
both) in dictionaries can send a contribution to ERA and receive
copies of the bills of particulars that led Dr. Brockette to
place the five dictionaries on the no-purchase list.  A concerned
person can also request reviews of hundreds of textbooks.

The ERA-distributed reviews concentrate on what's wrong
—not with what's right—with textbooks and dictionaries.  Using
such reviews as guidelines, concerned parents can underscore
&ldquo;objectionable&rdquo; passages in textbooks and take the books
to school board meetings to point out why children should not
have to study such works.  The concerned parents do not have
to indicate the sources of the objections: rather, all they have to
do is get the ear of a sympathetic school board member and
hope to get a book or dictionary removed from a public school.

The tactic works.  Concerned citizens in a number of states
have used ERA-distributed reviews to complain about &ldquo;objectionable&rdquo;
books that contain &ldquo;blatantly offensive language.&rdquo;
Fortunately, the critics of education are not always successful
with their attacks on books.  However, the victories are more
and more frequent, and each victory gives the censors renewed
purpose.

As I write and speak about the new wave of censorship in
the public schools, I frequently ask myself, or I am asked, what
can be done to prevent the removal of dictionaries and textbooks
from the schools.  Here are five steps that every person
can take:

>1.  Check the wording of the state's textbook adoption
bill to make certain that the language in it does not permit
the removal of dictionaries and textbooks simply because
they contain a few words that some people would
construe to be &ldquo;blatantly offensive.&rdquo;
>
>2.  Attend meetings of the school board (or school committee)
and speak out, at appropriate times, for academic
freedom and the students' right to learn.
>
>3.  Attend state or local hearings on textbooks submitted
for adoption.
>
>4.  Form a local organization for the preservation of academic
freedom and the students' right to know.
>
>5.  Write letters to newspaper and magazine editors protesting
the removal (or attempts at removal) of any books
from the local schools.

***

[^a1]: *Newsletter on Intellectual Freedom*.  Volume XXV, No. 6, November 1976. p. 145.

[^a2]: Reported in *The St. Louis Post-Dispatch*, April 18, 1977.

[^a3]: *Ibid*.

[^a4]: See footnote 1.

[^a5]: Undated &ldquo;Bill of Particulars&rdquo; submitted to the Texas Education
Commissioner by the Textbook Chairman of the TSDAR.

[^a6]: See green printed sheet distributed by Educational Research
Analysts.  The sheet is entitled &ldquo;THE MEL GABLERS—Consumer
Advocates for Education.&rdquo;


### OBITER DICTA: *The Game of the Name*
*Joan Knaub, University of Colorado, Boulder*

Old newspaper editorials on long-ago presidential campaigns
and policy reveal that a lot of history and high feeling
are compressed in chief executive nicknames.  *The Great
Emancipator* is a case in point.

But the liveliest of these epithets are those which indicate
displeasure from some part of the populace.  For instance,
George Washington had some detractors who dubbed him
the *Stepfather of the Country*.

Many of the unflattering presidential sobriquets were
rooted in heated campaigns or unpopular decisions.  Grover
Cleveland was the *Buffalo Hangman*, the *Stuffed Prophet*,
and the *Perpetual Candidate*.  The last description serves as a
reminder that Cleveland was both the twenty-second and the
twenty-fourth president, as well as the Democratic nominee
in 1888.

Tyler, the first vice-president elevated to chief by the incumbent's
death, was *His Accidency*.  Hayes, victor in the
most disputed election in U.S. history—the one that took five
months to determine the winner—was ever after the *Fraud
President*.

Van Buren comes through as a 19th-century swinger
with the *Enchanter, Petticoat Pet*, and *Whiskey Van*.  John
Adams was *His Rotundity* and, as founder of the U.S. Navy,
*Old Sink or Swim*.

Brevity was most usual with these presidential subtitles,
but an exception was Hoover's *The Friend of Helpless Children*
with Jackson's *The Land Hero of 1812* a close runner-up.

Some presidents earned a range of nicknames, proving
the partisanship of politics.  McKinley was both *Prosperity's
Advance Agent* and *Wobbley Willie*, while Wilson was either
the *Phrasemaker* or *Coiner of Weasel Words*.

If the President had been a military man, his successful
battles could provide a title or two.  Teddy Roosevelt was the
*Hero of San Juan Hill.  Tippecanoe and Tyler Too* made a
euphonious duo.  And Grant earned accolades as *Unconditional
Surrender*, the *Hero of Appomattox* and, less flattering,
the *Butcher of Galena*.

Some names were more accurate than witty.  Buchanan
was the *Bachelor President*, Arthur was *Our Chet*, Pierce was
*Handsome Frank*, and *Silent Cal* was just that.

Among the more colorful nicknames were Benjamin
Harrison's *His Grandfather's Hat* (a reference to a White
House relative), Polk's *Napoleon of the Stump*, Fillmore's
*The Wool-Carder President*, and Monroe's *The Last of the
Cocked Hats*.

Even the revered Lincoln didn't escape an occasional
brickbat.  Along with *Honest Abe* and *The Sage from Spring-field*,
he was also the *Illinois Baboon*.  Lincoln, however, does
take the honors among presidents as having the most recorded
epithets, 19 in all, while Taft and Harding have nary a one
between them.

The heat of issues which generated these names has cooled,
but sifting through ashes provides both amusement and perspective
on the political past.  And, after all, even though
some early citizens may have claimed a *Stepfather* for the
country, at least so far no one has named a *Godfather*.


#### EPISTOLA {Clyde K. Hyder}

Not for the first time I am constrained to quote the so-called
Printers' Bible, which substituted *printers* for *princes*
in Psalm 119:161, making it read: &ldquo;Printers have persecuted
me without a cause.&rdquo;  A verbal nihilist turned *noting* into
*nothing* in my article on *peter out* in your September issue
[V,2], thereby changing the meaning almost as completely as
the printer of the famous Wicked Bible who omitted *not* from
the Commandment that concerns adultery.  My sentence
should have read: &ldquo;The capitalization of *peter* in these early
quotations is worth noting&rdquo; (please, not *nothing*).

An interesting article on &ldquo;Porcine Semantics&rdquo; in the same
issue tempts me to offer two comments:

1\.  Joseph Wright's *English Dialect Dictionary* defines
*hog* as &ldquo;a young sheep of about a year old, before it has been
shorn&rdquo; and cites illustrations of this meaning.

2\.  The unique *Hammus alabamus* created by cartoonist
Al Capp (perhaps named Salomy rather than Salome) is more
obviously *sui generis* than other hogs.

*[Clyde K. Hyder, Lawrence, Kansas].*

## How Off-track Betting Endangers Our Mother Tongue: Draining Color from the Horseplayer's Gift of Gab
*Francis J. Walsh, Chicago, Illinois*

The betting messenger services are under wraps by order
of the Illinois Supreme Court, but there is a lot of smart
money and political pressure around town in favor of setting
up a legitimate off-track betting network.  Just like New York.
You'd only have to walk around the corner to drop your dough.
Naturally, this extension of temptation is being deplored on
all sides: by preachers, professors of urban economics, some
race track operators, budget-strapped housewives, mothers of
twelve, constant readers; even supermarket operators and
landlords, who see the grocery and rent money going through
the betting wickets.

Our collective morality and our continuing money supply
have always been under threat from one direction or another.
So what else is new?  New, and to be viewed with alarm, is the
threat the OTB system poses to our Mother Tongue.  The race
track, it can be fairly argued, is a most productive potting shed, a
fruitful compost pile that keeps the language fermenting and
blooming.  Look at it this way: It is six, two and even that
your friendly, nearby OTB branch will be designed with all
the color, warmth, and ambiance of a currency exchange.  Or
the ante room of a public foot clinic.  It will be you, a clerk
behind the glass screen, a tattered common racing form or green
sheet.  And silence.  And that's all.  You might as well be doing
business with a vending machine.  (Next revolting development:
&ldquo;Dial-a-Trifecta!  Let us charge your wagers to your
telephone bill.&rdquo;)

In such plasticized, sterilized surroundings could you ever
hear such fervent, rich jargon as the following, overheard
barside at Sportsman's Park during the flats season there last
spring?

The chalk come in like trained pigs!

This lamentation with a little hop on each word was offered up
by a bruised horseplayer.  He had favored long shots.  The fates
had fancied favorites.  Eight races in a row had been won at
odds of 5 to 2 or less.  At the track, at the track bars, or in the
stands where the action is, parsing this agonized yelp can be
as much fun (almost) as holding a winning ticket.  For *chalk*
read 'betting favorite.'  The word, as race track etymologists
can tell you, is an anachronism, left over from the days of live
bookmakers at such sporty spas as Saratoga and the old Washington
Park race track, out around 63rd street and Cottage
Grove avenue in the early 1900s.  As post time neared, the
bookies would erase odds quotations furiously, chalking in
the shorter prices as the faithful bet with both hands on
emerging favourites.  Out of the cloud of chalk dust came the
cryptic term, *the chalk horse*.  To this day favorite players,
bucking the sophisticated tote machine will say, if you ask
them their pick, &ldquo;I went to the chalk.&rdquo; (Note: the use of *came*
instead of *come* in the complainant's outcry, above, would be
unthinkable.  The horseplayer, as the cabbie, lives, for purposes
of expression, in the more vivid historical present tense.
Of course the reference to *trained pigs* is simply a locution
combining the affection-cum-derision with which the player
regards the beasts he loses his money on.)

Are you going to hear that kind of rich gab in the
bloodless, sterile, Orwellian OTB betting booth that seems to
be just around the corner?  Not likely.  For stalking the wild
word, the track can be a happy hunting ground.  Offered here
are a few notes gathered over years of &ldquo;traveling on the Erie&rdquo;
at barside and along the rail around Chicago tracks.  Read
'em and weep, for these expressions may become as extinct as
noble Chaucerian English, polluted out of currency by OTB
robots.

*He win laughin' by five open lenths*.  Here two meanings
may be held simultaneously.  Could be sheer joy shared by horse
and bettor.  A more particular observation: the horse had excess
steam in the stretch and the jock had him under the tightest of
holds so that the beast's teeth were bared, lips pulled back by
the bit, showing a wild and wonderful simulation of a horse
laugh.  (Note: the *g* in *lengths* is never sounded or admitted.)

Alternatively: *The teamster brings him home with his
head in his lap.  Teamster* equals 'jockey.'  The *head* is that of
the horse, pulled up so tight it looks to be in the lap of the
rider.  You must learn the lingo, for pronouns and antecedents
in track talk can be as tough to sort out as a four-horse photo
finish.  For instance, the loser squeals, *I'm home free but he
hangs in the stretch*.  The adept knows the *I* is the bettor and
the *he* is the horse who seems to hang in the air, ballet-like,
while the field rushes by him.  All right class: once around the
track and watch your antecedents.

Another bit of poetry with a pair of interpretations: *I got
caught in the switches*.  Could be a jockey complaining about
two horses coming together in front of him to form a blind
switch to block and throw his horse off stride.  If intentional
this move could set up an &ldquo;Inquiry.&rdquo; *Foul*, a naughty word, is
out.  *Inquiry* is in and when flashed on the board it sends the
patrol judges to the movies to see who done what to whom.

Or *getting caught in the switches* could describe the awful
dilemma of the tout who takes his client's or his box-mate's
money designated by them for the five horse, say.  At the mutuel
windows the tout switches all funds to his own choice, the
two horse, and guess what?  The five horse wins.  The rogue
best slink off home quietly or switch over to the grandstand
for the balance of the day.  From winners and losers alike the
breezy language gushes forth.  This jeremiad from an all-day
loser: &ldquo;I didn't ever find out whether them guys in the cashiers'
cages were monkeys or Chinamen.&rdquo;

It's a safe bet that in the vitreous enamel precincts of the
OTB cells you will never hear invoked the hallowed names of
Duffy and Sweeney, two shadowy princes of the sport of
kings.  To *take it on the Duffy*, an expression now practically
obsolete, was the turn of the century equivalent of to 'take the
money and run.'  Duffy the Bookmaker simply walked out on
his obligations after a disastrous day.  At the end of the day's
sport the faithful came around to collect only to find Duffy
long gone: sticks of chalk, blackboard, their money, keister
and all.  Through the years many another absconder has
*taken it on the Duffy*.  And not without some reverential attention
from the sporting gentry.  If the high roller's defalcations
got into six figures he was said with some awe to have
*taken it on the Arthur H. Duffy*.

Sweeney, according to legend, was a horseman of a different
color; a bookmaker, too, but supposedly privy to the
insidest of inside information.  (Horseplayers go to their
graves convinced that somebody knows something.)  *Running
for Sweeney*, in sporting circles, came to mean 'malingering,
just out for the exercise, not really trying.'  So much clout had
the legendary Sweeney that he could manipulate the performances
of horses and riders and always seemed to know
whether owners were out to win or just sending the horse out
for a little breeze.  If he knew the latter he would make the
horse a stiff favorite, igniting the bettors' greed with dreams
of a sure thing.  He knew he couldn't be beat.  Hence the
dawdling horse was said to be *running for Sweeney*, not for
the owners or the put-upon betting public.

One of the prime sources for this kind of sport of kings'
English was a fixture at Chicago tracks, a professional tout
who went under the nom du course of Persian Sam.  Sam's
fierce Levantine eye could calculate to the dollar the amount
of money the mark might have in his poke or the old girl in
her reticule.  After about the sixth race, Sam could be observed
touting the ladies of uncertain age when business with other
clients had turned sour.  &ldquo;Charlie Potatoes&rdquo; was his withering
epithet for the timid $2.00 bettor, and he shot for bigger
game.  Thus he was often tapped out, caught in the switches.
When he died a few years back, Persian Sam was the subject
of a few fond obituaries by knowing turf writers.  As one of
them, demonstrably a graduate student of our subject, wrote
on the day of the funeral:

>Persian Sam in this morning's line figures to be about six
to five to be gathered up into that great Tap City in the
sky.

And, as one wise guy on the copy desk added, &ldquo;When he gets
there they'll probably put the 'INQUIRY' sign up on the board.&rdquo;
But we must all be charitable.  Hold on to your tickets until
the result is official.

The natural ecology of etymology needs no such artificial
additives as OTB branches.  They could be hazardous
to the health of a growing vocabulary.  Language lovers must
vote &ldquo;No&rdquo; to any OTB proposition.  Take the Erie out to the
track and listen.  Eavesdroppers' paradise.  A sure-fire fix for
word addicts.  May the fates or Gov. James Thompson (circle
your choice) preserve us from any further threats to the
natural development of our beloved and continually wagging
Mother Tongue.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We regret that due to the increased price of coffee we
must charge for every other cup.  This does not apply to
coffee served with meals or police officers.&rdquo;—sign in a New
Orleans restaurant.  [Dot Luckey, Gretna, Louisiana.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *[Rail Talk: A Lexicon of Railroad Language](https://www.amazon.com/Rail-talk-lexicon-railroad-language/dp/0931408008)*
Collected and edited by James H. Beck, (James Publications, Gretna, Nebraska,
1978).

Mr. Beck has undertaken a sizable task in this compilation
of railroad terms.  He rummages through all 140 years of
the Railroad Era, and, his low-key introduction notwithstanding,
he covers the range of vocabulary from slang to
workaday terms and highly technical descriptions.  To my
personal satisfaction, he steps outside the usual haunts of the
engine and caboose into the business office as well—an area
usually ignored.

While the range of Beck's material is stunning, two
points detract from his effort.

The first difficulty is suggested by Mr. Beck's acknowledgment
that the book started as a &ldquo;semantics project.&rdquo;  It is
evident that Mr. Beck is more at home with phonemes than
with flatcars.  What else are we to conclude from this definition
of so basic a term as &ldquo;track&rdquo;:

>The space between the rails and space of not less than 4
feet outside each rail.

To define track in terms of space instead of structure is unsatisfying.
Other definitions range from precise to vague to descriptive
while a couple are just plain wrong.  One wonders if
Mr. Beck has spent much time outside his study recently.  The
pictures which illustrate the book are of 1950s' vintage, and
the steam engine diverts most of his attention from the contemporary
diesel.

The second problem focuses on the organization of the
material.  Mr. Beck alternates between redundant definitions—he
will define a verb and its participle separately—
and bald cross-references.  When one term can carry several
meanings he arbitrarily itemizes them or runs them together.
There are several inexplicable omissions.  For instance, he
describes many different classes of wheel arrangements on
steam locomotives without ever telling us what the &ldquo;tender&rdquo;
is.

In addition, I think the general reader encountering the
more technical terms could have benefited more from simple
line drawings than from involuted explanations bristling with
more unfamiliar terms.  Finally, as a personal aside, I prefer
my books with page numbers.

Of course, the first of the above criticisms comes from
working on railroads (most people don't), while the second
stems from the critical reading of a lexicon nonstop from
cover to cover (few people do).  Perhaps my comments should
not weigh too heavily against this opus.  It is a perfectly suitable
reference tool for the general reader.  As I gather that is
what Mr. Beck intended, one must say he has done his job.

*[Jim Goodwin, Essex, Connecticut]*

### Notes Found in Bottles
*Deborah Wing*

*Location of find:* Under Tower Bridge

*Inscription:* &ldquo;There's nothing so becomes a man
as modest stillness and humility.

With apologies for any inconvenience....

—*Uriah Heep*


#### EPISTOLA {Clark Holt}

Philip Howard [V,3] asserts &ldquo;We desperately need a
word to mean 'people who are living together but not married.' &rdquo;

Thomas Middleton, &ldquo;Light Refractions,&rdquo; *Saturday Review*,
May 28, 1977, page 47, raises the question &ldquo;How do
you refer to the member of the opposite sex who has moved
under the same roof and into the same bed with your son or
daughter?&rdquo;  Fortunately, Mr. Middleton has a correspondent,
Mrs. Gordon Corbett, who has made an excellent suggestion,
the French word *intime*.  &ldquo;...It has another advantage.  It
permits a nickname.  Now I can refer to the beloved partners
of our children as our own dear Timmies.&rdquo;

*[Clark Holt, Park Ridge, Illinois]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Remarks On Colour*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=wittgenstein%20remarks%20on%20colour%201978&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Ludwig Wittgenstein, ed. by G.E.M. Anscombe, trans. by Linda L. McAlister and Margarete Sch&auml;ttle, (University of California Press, Berkeley, 1978), 126pp.  

As a boy of fourteen interested in mechanics, Ludwig
Wittgenstein built himself a widely admired sewing machine.
As a student of aeronautics in 1910, he designed a prototype
jet engine.  As an Austrian grade-school teacher dissatisfied
with the available elementary dictionaries, he prepared one
of his own, which was published in 1926.  And as a medically
inexperienced &ldquo;lab-boy&rdquo; who wanted to help the English in
the Second World War, he surprised doctors by devising an
estimating technique that aided the treatment of war injuries.

Faced with any problem, Wittgenstein impressed those
who knew him with his concentration, energy, and seriousness.
If necessary, he retired to a secluded home in Norway to
work out his solution undisturbed.  As a philosopher, Wittgenstein
was one who wished to settle problems efficiently,
not debate or prolong them.  Late in his life, he chose to confront
many of the philosophical problems raised by the subject
of color; he died before completing his investigations and
polishing his remarks for publication.

G.E.M. Anscombe, Wittgenstein's friend with whom
he lived his last months and with whom the philosopher left
his final manuscript, has done the student of Wittgenstein a
great service by publishing both the original German and the
English translation of *Remarks on Colour*.  Furthermore,
Anscombe has given the student all of the drafts of Wittgenstein's
manuscripts in order to compare the revisions the
writer made.

For the student of philosophy, Wittgenstein asks some
standard but still unanswered questions: Does pure white exist?
How does luminosity change color values?  And, What is
seeing?  More originally and provocatively, he asks, &ldquo;Why is it
that something can be transparent green but not transparent
white?&rdquo;  &ldquo;There is the glow of red-hot and of white-hot: but
what would brown-hot and grey-hot look like?&rdquo;  And, &ldquo;Do I
really see the hair blond in the [black and white] photograph?&rdquo;
For this logical positivist who thought that all philosophical
problems arose from the illusions created by the ambiguities
of language, these are predictable questions.  In fact,
at one point Wittgenstein asks:

>What is there in favour of saying that green is a
primary colour and not a mixture of blue and yellow?
Is it correct to answer: 'You can only know it directly,
by looking at the colours'?  But how do I know that I
mean the same by the words 'primary colours' as
someone else who is also inclined to call green a
primary colour?  No, here there are language games
that decide these questions.

Unfortunately, though Wittgenstein was trained in the
natural sciences, he does little more than speculate on color in
epigrammatic fashion.  Furthermore, transitions between his
terse, numbered reflections are often vague or nonexistent.

Often, however, the transitions are not needed, for the
epigrams stand very well by themselves as when Wittgenstein
imagines &ldquo;someone pointing to the place in the iris of a Rembrandt
eye and saying: 'The walls of my room should be
painted this colour.' &rdquo;  Or, equally successful is this passage in
which he wonders:

>Couldn't a member of a tribe of colour-blind people
get the idea of imagining a strange sort of human being
(whom we would call 'normally sighted')?  Couldn't
he, for example, portray such a normally sighted person
on the stage?  In the same way as he is able to portray
someone who has the gift of prophesy without having
it himself.  It is at least conceivable.

For the students of language, even those with an interest
in color, however, Wittgenstein's remarks will be of little use.
Occasionally the philosopher is guilty of belaboring the obvious.
At one point he states in apparent seriousness, &ldquo;In the
Tricolour, for example, the white cannot be darker than the
blue and red.&rdquo;  Elsewhere he writes in childlike candor, &ldquo;A
cube of green glass looks green when it's lying in front of us.
The overall impression is green; thus the overall impression of
the white cube should be white.&rdquo;

Before being too critical though, it is well to recall Wittgenstein's
own remark in this volume, &ldquo;In every serious
philosophical question uncertainty extends to the very roots of
the problem.  We must always be prepared to learn something
totally new.&rdquo;  Wittgenstein did not live long enough to show
his famous fly the way out of the bottle, but his provocative
and thoughtful speculations suggest several new approaches
which may ultimately result in an exit for his trapped insect.

*[Sterling Eisiminger, Clemson University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dr. Bernard J. Freedman, FRCP}

Dr. R.J.L. Waugh has drawn the attention of your
readers to the lack of any single word in the English language
other than *fart* for the 'passage of rectal flatus.'  Members of
the medical profession frequently encounter difficulty in
making their meaning clear to patients without causing embarrassment
when enquiring about this aspect of bowel function,
and both parties tend to use circumlocutory expressions
which are capable of being misunderstood.

Most of the bodily functions can be described by words
suited to polite society or physiological terminology: for example,
*eructate, masticate, sternutate, micturate, defaecate
(defecate), copulate*.  But there is no corresponding word for
*fart*, which remains taboo with a large proportion of the population.
In my lecture to the Listerian Society at this hospital
on 30th April 1974, I proposed that the act of passing rectal
flatus should be termed &ldquo;deflatulate&rdquo; in its verbal form, when
a single word was needed in circumstances unsuited to the
monosyllabic alternative.  &ldquo;Deflatulate&rdquo; is self-explanatory
and is in the same series as those in the above-mentioned list,
and I suggest it be adopted for general usage.  As a matter of
historical interest, the obsolete *crepitate* was used in the 19th
century, but the term did not specify whether the gas being
discharged was gastric or rectal.

*[Dr. Bernard J. Freedman, FRCP, King's College Hospital, London].*


#### EPISTOLA {Donna Abrams}

I enjoyed &ldquo;Public Servants&rdquo; by Noel Perrin [IV, 4], but
as an active member of the National Association of Parliamentarians
and the Indiana State Association of Parliamentarians
I must write about his use of *chairperson*.

As early as 1975 our organization has been on record regarding
*chairman* vs. *chairperson*.  When the question was
put before some four hundred active parliamentarians, *chairman*
received our unanimous vote for the accepted term defining
'one who presides.'  (The word *chairman* is generic.)

According to *Roberts Rules of Order, Newly Revised*, on
pages 18-19, page 24 and pages 98-99 the presiding officer is
correctly addressed &ldquo;Mr. Chairman&rdquo; or &ldquo;Madame Chairman.&rdquo;

An example of another &ldquo;good&rdquo; word that is being &ldquo;desexed&rdquo;?

*[Donna Abrams, Indianapolis, Indiana].*


#### EPISTOLA {Gerardo Joffe}

Kay Haugaard is mistaken in her article [V, 2] regarding
the etymology of the word *fart* (&ldquo;akin to German *faren*, to
go&rdquo;).  The German word in question is *fahren* (not &ldquo;faren&rdquo;)
and it has nothing to do with *fart*.  The German equivalent is
*Furz*, and this good old Teutonic term, essentially the same in
both languages, is obviously onomatopoeic in origin.

I am delighted to have been able to make this small, but
perhaps important contribution to the science of linguistics.

*[Gerardo Joffe, San Francisco, California].*


#### EPISTOLA {William R. Harmon}

...Young persons of my acquaintance have used the
terms &ldquo;mate,&rdquo; &ldquo;partner,&rdquo; &ldquo;housemate,&rdquo; and &ldquo;live-in friend,&rdquo;
the latter striking me as a most attractive description.  A local
columnist (Herb Caen) has proposed the term &ldquo;ummer&rdquo; as the
solution.  This term stems from the very human resolution of a
verbal dilemma posed by a mother introducing her daughter's
cohabitant: &ldquo;...and this is George, my daughter's—
um, er....&rdquo;

*[William R. Harmon, El Cerrito, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Largent Parks, Sr.}

I am distressed because those green growing lilacs are being
trampled upon.  That derivation of *gringo* is firmly imbedded
in Mexican history and folklore.  It is such a lovely
story.

Those of us from the USA who spend much of our time in
Mexico find the term very useful.  It keeps us from using
&ldquo;American&rdquo; which is thoroughly abused by tourists (American
citizen, American money, always spoken arrogantly).
Mexicans resent this as they consider themselves American,
being inhabitants of the American continent.

To preserve our dignity, we are called Norte Americanos
but that also includes the Canadians.  Being a native Texan, I
reject the term &ldquo;yanqui.&rdquo;  This is a corruption of the word I
learned before starting school &ldquo;damnyankee&rdquo;—one word, indivisible
and fully descriptive.

So we are gringos (*gringa*, f) and proud of it.  Please don't
trample on the green growing lilacs.

*[Largent Parks, Sr., Guadalajara, Mexico].*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman D. Stevens}

Had Mr. Devereux been better versed in American humor
he might not have made the glaring error that he did in
referring to Ellis Parker Butler's famous *Pigs Is Pigs* (1906)
[V,2].  The entire point of Butler's neglected classic is that, in
fact, sometimes pigs are not pigs.  To refresh Mr. Devereux's
memory the whole plot of *Pigs Is Pigs* revolves around a shipment
of guinea pigs that Flannery, a pigheaded agent of the
Interurban Express Company, insists must be paid for not at
the rate of domestic pets ($.25) but at the rate for pigs ($.30).
While the controversy rages the guinea pigs multiply and
overrun the express office.  Flannery concludes that, &ldquo;Next
toime I'll know that pigs of whativer nationality is domestic
pets—an' go at the lowest rate....  So long as Flannery runs
this expriss office—pigs is pets—an' cows is pets—an' horses
is pets—an' lions an' tigers an' Rocky Mountain goats is
pets—an' the rate on thim is twinty-foive cints.&rdquo;

*[Norman D. Stevens, Storrs, Connecticut].*


#### EPISTOLA {D. S. Chisholm}

Not so fast!  I, too, raised my eyebrows when I first heard
*mid-wiffery* [V,3], but eventually found something like it in
the old *Century Dictionary*, more like &ldquo;mid'wifri.&rdquo;  Also, I
think it was MacNeil who said it, and this could explain the
pronunciation.  I believe he is Canadian.

*[D. S. Chisholm, Kent, Connecticut].*


#### EPISTOLA {Richard Toeman}

We do not know the word *humongous* here, but I have
found used the word *ginormous* [*gi(gantic + e)normous*]
among our teen-age children and their peers for the last three
or four years.

[Richard Toeman, London, England].


#### EPISTOLA {R. Heath}

The sole inscription on a prominent notice in the middle
of the N. Yorkshire moors: IT IS FORBIDDEN TO THROW STONES
AT THIS NOTICE.

*[R. Heath, Scarborough, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {Sam Hinton}

Mr. Urdang missed a couple of important points in his
&ldquo;You Know What I Mean&rdquo; [V, 2].  He regrets that the &ldquo;older
tests&rdquo; were mistakenly thought to measure &ldquo;intelligence&rdquo;;
such regret is fully justified, and was shared by the &ldquo;pressure
groups&rdquo; he mentions.  What bothered them was that school
boards and other agencies were acting as if basic intelligence
were really being measured, and were adjusting educational
methods accordingly.  In consequence, hundreds of kids whose
language at home differed from that used in school were labeled
&ldquo;mentally retarded,&rdquo; and placed in special classes for &ldquo;slow
learners&rdquo;—all because they had not had a chance to learn
enough standard English to cope with the tests.  So these
pressure groups suggested that if the tests were going to be used
in this manner, they should at least be given in a language the
students could understand, and that correct answers should
not require an easy familiarity with WASP culture.  The upshot,
of course, has been that California schools are no longer
permitted thus to categorize their students on the basis of mass
testing.

To people whose English is at best shaky, these tests appeared
as just another manifestation of a social structure in
which their own success requires far greater talent and effort
than is required of members of the more favored groups.  And
there is no denying the trauma to youngsters who feel that they
are denied access to dominant roles in the mainline culture
unless they completely renounce the culture and language of
their parents and other respected adults with whom they share
their daily lives outside of school.  It is not &ldquo;rubbish&rdquo; to think
that their cultural heritage is being insulted.

The aim of bilingual education is to help these youngsters
retain a pride in their cultural identities while providing them
with the skills that will permit them to move at will between
differing cultural systems.  An immediate practical result of
good bilingual education is that students learn more English
that way, and they learn it without being made to despise their
own home language.

The article sees irony in this movement because, it claims,
our immigrants came here in the first place in order to escape
from their native cultures.  But they didn't intend to leave their
cultures, they were trying to get away from unjust and oppressive
political and economic systems, and that's not the
same thing at all.  And there is a double irony when one
remembers that the ancestors of our Black Americans wanted
desperately *not* to come here, and that—in my part of the
country, at least—Hispanic Americans were here long before
&ldquo;we&rdquo; were.  And don't forget the Indians, some of whose
leaders are quite rightly asking to be spoken of as &ldquo;Native
Americans&rdquo;—precisely for the purpose of reminding the rest
of us of the ethnic sequences in populating this continent.

America has never been successful as a melting pot unless
one interprets that metaphor in a culinary, rather than a
metallurgical, sense.  To the extent that we have become a
cultural unit, we are like a good Oriental dinner cooked in a
*wok*, with each bit of vegetable and meat retaining its own
identity while contributing to the delightful nature of the
whole.

The tone of Mr. Urdang's article makes me think he may
have been suffering from the temporary effects of a less well-prepared
repast, which someone called a *meal* and set before
him with a &ldquo;There you go!&rdquo; and a &ldquo;Have a good day!&rdquo;  I do
hope he's feeling better now.

*[Sam Hinton, School Relations Officer University of California, San Diego].*


#### EPISTOLA 

I am feeling fine, thank you.  In response to the above letter
and to others in the same vein, I should point out that one
purpose of my article was to admit to some personal prejudices
about language to which few professional linguists who
consider themselves scientists—with all of the impartiality
that connotes—would acknowledge in themselves.  In so doing,
I called them prejudices.

Another purpose of the article was to attack bilingualism
in education.  Without wittering on about babies and bath-water,
I fully realize that all that can be expected from the
pursuit of any given policy is that it should be beneficial to
the largest number of people possible and if harmful at all,
then so to the smallest number.  That is the principle of utilitarianism
on which I touched.  As Mr. Hinton presents his side
of the argument, I see aspects of the problem that had not occurred
to me before.  However, we have experimented with
both monolingual and bilingual education in this country,
and the recent history of the bilingual system has given every
indication that it doesn't work in most cases.  That isn't to say
that it may not work in southern California or in certain
other areas, only that it has allowed the quality of education
in other parts of the country to deteriorate to an unconscionably
low level.  It is difficult to reconcile the advantages that
may accrue with the many disadvantages, in terms of a poorer
quality of education, that the majority must suffer.  Moreover,
notwithstanding the upbeat attitude of Mr. Hinton toward bi-lingual teaching, it has yet to be demonstrated that it has provided
anyone — &ldquo;Native Americans&rdquo; or others — with a better
education, which is the real issue.

At bottom, it is my view that the aim of an educational
system is to educate people.  It should not, of course, do so at
any cost.  But the benefits of a good education usually far outweigh
the loss of certain other values, and it is my contention
that in our pursuit of bilingual education we may be seeing
the perpetuation of certain cultural values to the detriment of
the fundamental purpose of any educational system, which is
not to further ethnic considerations but to teach.*

We all know how poor the ordinary educational system
is in this country; interference with its precarious state by introducing
issues that are not directly concerned with educating
people has further imperiled whatever qualities still survive.
Bilingual education can serve only to obscure the basic issues
of education and, in so doing, force standards yet lower by
sidetracking students (and teachers) into concerns of linguistic
and cultural irrelevancies when they ought to be learning
(and teaching) the three R's.

—*Editor*


#### EPISTOLA {Greg Raven}

What trials you as a linguist must put up with!  It must
be terrible to spend one's life observing something that one
can never really change.  You must grind your teeth into dust
as you fight back your desire to tinker with the language, to
write the dictionary the way it SHOULD be written.

And what do you get for all of your hard work?  The hatred of
the masses.  And now they're out to get you.  The hoi polloi is
working in concert, consciously using the words &ldquo;like&rdquo; and
&ldquo;you know&rdquo; just to drive you crazy.  Then there are those
scummy cretins who insist upon expressing their opinions, full
in the knowledge that they are of no value!  The very super-subtlety
of those subservient idiots must rankle terribly when
they call you &ldquo;sir&rdquo; as they serve you a &ldquo;meal&rdquo; ('Death to the
unwashed bastards!'), although I must admit that I myself
once thought that a square meal was the only type a linguist
ever ate.

I totally agree with you about the state of today's education,
and I applaud you for abandoning the subject for the
time being (except for those two rather long paragraphs),
although I believe that you are on the right track.  Not only
should we base all schooling entirely upon IQ tests to ensure
that those less qualified students are immediately farmed out
to their future roles as prostitutes and con artists, but we
should also encourage the development of these and other
skills, if for no other reason than to obviate the possibility of
being labeled elitists or somesuch.

Poor Kay Haugaard has a similar, equally serious case of
the same malady.  As one who evidentally has been a close
personal friend of nearly everybody of any importance at all
since day one, she must be dying a death of a thousand cuts as
she watches the deterioration of our fine, logical language.

Likewise, J. Walter Wilson is to be congratulated for
sharing his absolute knowledge of the *true* meaning of &ldquo;off
again, on again,&rdquo; as Clyde K. Hyder should receive accolades
for living long enough to tell us exactly how Peter schemed to
get his name into common usage many years after his death.

All in all, it seems to me that the lot of you, the contentrigid,
impotent, mewling &ldquo;guardians of our culture&rdquo; should
take off your blinders and get out of your towers in order to
better understand what in the world is going on.

As a high school drop-out, I know that I am less than
perfect.  Even so, you will not soon catch me constructing a
sentence like &ldquo;...it is Peter *that* Christ addresses....&rdquo;
(&ldquo;Etymologica Obscura,&rdquo; page eleven, third paragraph).

In short:

>VERBATIM: Would you like another issue?
>
>I: (*Shaking head*) I'm fine, thanks.

*[Greg Raven, Los Angeles, California].*


#### EPISTOLA {Paul Hoaken, M.D.}

Having read Jeff Miller's quite overblown and misleading
piece about the &ldquo;Canadian unity crisis&rdquo; [V, 1] (apparently
as seen through the eyes of an American expatriate who
has had a limited experience of Canada), I can assure your
readers that all Anglophone Canadians who were raised in
the 1930s and 1940s were taught that the word lieutenant is
pronounced &ldquo;leftenant,&rdquo; the common Canadian pronunciation
according to the *Dictionary of Canadian English* (Avis,
Drysdale, Gregg and Scargill, W.J. Gage Limited, Toronto
1967).  By the way, this dictionary mentions as well: &ldquo;esp.
U.S., l&uuml; t&eacute;n &#92;?&#92; (&uuml; as in *ooze*) not &ldquo;lyootenant,&rdquo; as suggested
by Mr. Miller.

My purpose in writing, however, is not to dispute Mr.
Miller's views, but to draw to your attention two examples in
the same May issue of a common misuse of a technical term.
Bruce Price, noting that sometimes the Hebrew P is our
P and sometimes our Ph (or F), wrote: &ldquo;Even with that
schizophrenia, it's worth reporting that the alchemical associations
assigned to the Hebrew P....&rdquo;  Jeff Miller wrote:
&ldquo;Ultimately, some other Englishman or other (*sic*) brought
the poisonous malapropism over here, contaminating the
fragile Canadian body politic with a rash of 'loo-,' 'lieu-'
and 'lef-' tenants and, partially at least, the schizophrenia
behind it.&rdquo;  Although the meaning of this sentence is
obscure, it is evident that in both examples, the term
*schizophrenia* is used to indicate a splitting apart or
splitting into two of what should be unitary.  Consistent
with this is the common misconception of schizophrenia as
split personality, in psychiatric diagnostic terms, dissociative
reaction.

Schizophrenia, a term coined by the famous Swiss psychiatrist
Eugen Bleuler, is a derivative of two Greek roots and
means literally a splitting of the mind (*Klein's Comprehensive
Etymological Dictionary of the English Language*, Elsevier,
New York, 1971).  The splitting Bleuler meant was not a splitting
of the personality into two (or more!  — as described in
such popular accounts as &ldquo;The Three Faces of Eve&rdquo; and
&ldquo;Sybil&rdquo;) but a &ldquo;splitting of the psychic functions&rdquo; (E. Bleuler,
*Dementia Praecox or The Group of Schizophrenias*, International
Universities Press, New York, 1950) by which Bleuler
meant cognitions, striving or volitions, and emotions.  In the
normal person these are congruent and consistent; in the person
with schizophrenia, fragmented and inconsistent.  Although
rarely, a person suffering from schizophrenia reports
feeling as if he or she is two persons, this is not a characteristic
symptom; so the connotation of the term as it is popularly used
is incorrect, and unfortunate as well, since it perpetuates a
misconception about this serious mental disorder.

*[Paul Hoaken, M.D., Hotel Dieu Hospital Kingston, Ontario, Canada]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

TO AVOID DANGER OF SUFFOCATION, KEEP AWAY FROM
BABIES AND CHILDREN. — *on a plastic garment bag*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

*That explains the shortness of breath one may experience
while jogging past a schoolyard.*  [from Mrs. G.H. Garbolevsky, Norfolk, VA]


#### EPISTOLA {Mary Louise Gilman}

I particularly enjoyed Vera L. Harding's &ldquo;Shocking
News from the West&rdquo; [V, 1].

The story of the French girl who spoke of American boys'
being good and bad reminds me of one a woman in the State
Department in Vienna told me some years ago.  She was
spending the night with some friends in Germany, and it
turned unseasonably cold overnight.  The eiderdown comforter
kept slipping off, so she pulled up the flannel-like bottom
sheet and slept next to the mattress.

The next morning, her hostess anxiously asked if she had
been warm enough.  Mary Jane's German was a bit sketchy,
but she never hesitated to use it.  She wasn't too sure of the
word for &ldquo;mattress&rdquo; *(Matratze)* and it came out *Matrose*.  Not
until some time later did she learn that the reason everyone at
the breakfast table erupted into laughter was that she'd said
she'd kept nice and warm as she slept next to the sailor!

*[Mary Louise Gilman, Hanover, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {John L. Rayment}

Jeff Miller's fascinating tussle with the *lieutenant/leftenant*
problem [V, 1] does not explore what is, to my way of
thinking, the most likely route for the transition between the
two groups of spellings and pronunciations.

It seems to me to be highly probable that at some time,
*lieu*- was either mis-written or mis-read to produce *liev*-, because
*v* frequently stands for *u* in print and is confused with it
in manuscript.  Subsequently the *v* became softened, as is
often the case before an unvoiced sound, like *t*, to *f. Lieutenant*
to *lievtenant* to *lieftenant* and all stations onward.  As simple
as that.

*[John L. Rayment, Ongar, Essex]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Bernard Meltzer on WOR's advice show, *What's Your
Problem*, in a commercial for mausoleums: &ldquo;Burial
underground is dirty, muddy, and crowded.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Carolyn Hurless}

I received my copy of VERBATIM [V, 3] today and put
aside all activities that I might read this issue from cover to
cover.  I have to write a letter about an error on page 5,
paragraph 6 of the article &ldquo;The Arabic Star-Names&rdquo; by E.E.
Rehmus.

He states that &ldquo;...the star Algol, which is located in
Taurus....&rdquo;  That is *not* where Algol is located — at least not
since three nights ago.  It is located in the constellation
Perseus, and is Beta in that constellation.  It also happens to be
a variable star, a spectroscopic binary.

The Hebrews saw Algol as *Rosh ha Satan* ('Satan's head')
...it was also seen as Lilith, Adam's legendary first wife.
(That story comes from those talmudists!)  The Chinese gave
Algol a most gruesome name, *Tseih She*, 'The Piled Up Corpses,'
and astrologers said it to be the most violent and dangerous
star in the entire northern heavens!  However, for the
group of us known as Variable Star Observers, it is the most
noteworthy variable star in the northern sky.

For 2&frac12; days it stays at about 2.3 magnitude.  (On a clear
night with no moon, the unaided eye can see 6th magnitude.)
At the end of 2&frac12; days it begins to dim slightly and then more
and more rapidly to 3.5 magnitude, with light oscillations
taking about 9 hours.  Its total period is about 2 days 20 hrs 48
min 55 seconds.  This was confirmed as far back as 1694.  No
doubt it was evil to those long ago who were aware of its
variability, and thus it was a demon star.

It is also interesting to note that at nine o'clock in the
evening of the 23rd of December, when on the Meridian,
Algol is almost exactly in the zenith of New York City.  Shades
of astrology... if those fiends knew that ...why anything
could happen—think of the predictions that would roll out!

*[Carolyn Hurless, Starlight Observatory Lima, Ohio]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The 1979 Radio Shack catalogue lists an Electronic
Fever Thermometer &ldquo;for both oral and rectal use.&rdquo;

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Shot in the dark.  (8, 7)   
9\. Was the old moralist sexy as a turnip?  (7)  
10\. Upshot of the court battle.  (7)  
11\. Arrangement suitable for framing.  (5)  
12\. The end of three monkeys.  (9)  
14\. No dole, as long as one uses his head.  (6)  
15\. Sinatra medley arranged by a skilled hand.  (7)  
20\. Come safely through the storm.  (7)  
21\. Buy!  or Try!  Immediately, too.  (6)  
23\. Cold sausage.  (9)  
26\. Chain reaction from flying saucers.  (5)  
27\. The star made it in a pile returning with relief for his woes.  (7)  
28\. Tim and I, not being forward, dined last, to do as others do.  (7)  
29\. Very light alarms.  (8, 7)  

**Down**

1\. Young scamp here to sing about love?  Just too pushy!(8)  
2\. Cupid's bow.  (5, 4)  
3\. Find Utopia and fortune with a flying machine.  (9)  
4\. Major losses of interest.  (6)  
5\. Super suds.  (8)  
6\. Six squares are foursquare.  (5)  
7\. Marriage of convenience for a fair trade.  (5)  
8\. American flagpole sitter.  (5)  
13\. Fire a depth charge.  (3)  
16\. Charging, in writing, about a little cocaine. (9)  
17\. Yankee article on Paul Bunyan, cherry trees and jumping frogs.  (9)  
18\. The Politburo, at first blush.  (8)  
19\. Saboteur blows up the wolf pack.  (8)  
20\. Man's inhumanity to man.  (3)  
22\. In hard times GI joins the smart farm boys.  (6)  
23\. Stared openmouthed... (5)  
24\. ... at the birds?  No sir!(5)  
25\. Wind up right by the Riviera, it's so much better.  (5)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Infrared picture  
9\. Puritan  
10\. Lobbing  
11\. Setup  
12\. Innocence  
14\. NO-odle  
15\. ARTISAN  
20\. Weather  
21\. AD-verb  
23\. GROUND-hog  
26\. CHINA  
27\. PAN-ace-A  
28\. I-miT-ATE  
29\. Distress signals  

**Down**

1\. Imp-O-sing  
2\. First love  
3\. AUTOPI-lot  
4\. Ennuis  
5\. Pilsners  
6\. Cubic  
7\. Union  
8\. Eagle  
13\. Can  
16\. Indi-C-ting   
17\. Americana  
18\. Red-heads  
19\. U-BOATERS  
20\. War  
22\. Ag-GI-es  
23\. Gaped  
24\. O-r-N-is  
25\. Nice-R  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v5n4_Spring_1979)