--- 
title: "VOL VI, No 1 [Summer, 1979]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Colorful Language
*Sterling Eisiminger, Clemson University*

In 1969, Brent Berlin and Paul Kay, two linguistic anthropologists,
published an important study entitled *Basic
Color Terms: Their Universality and Evolution*.  After surveying
color terms in ninety-eight of the world's approximately
three thousand languages, Berlin and Kay concluded that
there was a strong unanimity among the world's languages.
&ldquo;Although different languages encode in their vocabularies
different *numbers* of basic color categories, a total universal
inventory of exactly eleven basic color categories exists from
which the eleven or fewer basic color terms of any given language
are always drawn.&rdquo;[^a1]
Two exceptions may exist in Hungarian and Russian, both of which may be developing a
twelfth basic color term, but it remains to be seen if these new
colors are true basic terms.[^a2]  Of course there are many more
than eleven color terms in English.  Maerz and Paul's *Dictionary
of Color*, 1930, cites over three thousand color names,
and the Optical Society of America estimates that the human
eye can discriminate between seven and a half and ten million
colors.  There are, in fact, many technical applications of
color, but they are beyond our present concern which is to
take a cultural-linguistic approach to the subject of color
associations.

In addition to a fixed maximum number of color terms,
Berlin and Kay observed that the order in which a language
acquires colors is partially fixed.  For example, since Jal&eacute;,
spoken in the highlands of New Guinea, has only two basic
color terms, these colors must be black and white.  A language
with three basic color terms will have acquired black, white,
and red; one with four terms will have black, white, red, and
either green or yellow; one with five will have black, white,
red, green, and yellow; one with six will add blue to the
preceding five; and one with seven will include brown.  If a
language has eight, nine, ten, or eleven basic terms it will
have acquired purple, pink, orange, or gray, but not in any
particular sequence.[^a3] 

Despite this fixed partial order and the apparent universality
of eleven as the maximum number of basic color terms,
when color associations in different languages are compared
a notable lack of order and universality is the usual result.  In
the following paragraphs, Berlin and Kay's eleven basic color
terms and their associations are examined in a dozen mostly
Indo-European languages in order to learn what different
cultures associate with colors.  No attempt has been made to
be exhaustive or to deal with purely descriptive color phrases
or with color symbolism.  Cited below are usages typical
among the many.

Though there are unconfirmed reports of white devils in
Africa, *white* generally connotes fairness (*that's white of
you*), harmlessness (*white magic*), professionalism (*white collar*),
surrender or peace (*white flag*), and the white race
(*white slavery*).  With a few exceptions (*whitewash* and *white
feather*, for example), *white* has positive connotations in
American English.  Though the English speak of tuberculosis
as *the white death*, most Indo-European languages regard
*white* positively, probably because of its association with the
heavenly bodies and the white race.  In Russian, for example,
*beloe zoloto* 'white gold' is cotton; *beloe ugol* 'white coal' is
water power, and *belye nochi* 'white nights' are those of the
midnight sun.  In Spanish *hijo de la gallina blanca* 'son of a
white chicken' is for some reason a lucky fellow.  And in
French *mariage blanc* 'white marriage' is an unconsummated
one.  An unconsummated war, or a cold one, is *guerre blanche*
'white war,' while an English *greenhorn* is a French
*blanc-bec* 'white mouth.'

*Black*, on the other hand, in most languages has generally
negative connotations probably because of its association
with night, the underworld, and death.  Among speakers of
Hindi, though, it is *white* that is the color of funeral attire
and widows' dresses.  In English there are exceptions too
(*black belt* and *in the black*, for example), but words and
phrases like *blacklist, blackmail, black market, black mass,
Black Death, black-hearted, blackguard, black deeds, black
magic, blackball, black book*, and *black humor* are overwhelmingly
in the majority and may be a factor in the widespread
prejudice against the Negro.  Many Negroes, however,
perhaps to spite this prejudice, prefer to be called *black*.
Some miscellaneous phrases from other Indo-European
languages show the generally negative associations of *black*.
In Russian, *chelovek* 'black person' is a commoner, and his
*ch&euml;rnaia rabota* 'black work' is heavy, unskilled labor, while
in German the same phrase, *Schwartzarbeit*, means 'illegal,
non-union work.' When a Frenchman is *noir* 'black' he is 'suffering
from the English blues' or he is drunk.  A French
remedy for either condition might be *un roman noir* 'a black
novel,' which is a literary thriller, or a Gothic novel.

Richer sources of color expressions than *white* and *black*
are the primary colors: *blue, red*, and *yellow.  Green*, a secondary
color, that is, one made by combining two primaries,
is the only hue outside of the primaries to rival them in frequency
of color phrase.  Among the primaries, however, *blue*
is by far the most popular with phrase makers as William
Gass has abundantly shown in his grand, sensual celebration
of the color in *On Being Blue*, 1976.  English phrases include
*to blue* 'to squander,' hence *to blow, a bluebeard* 'a man who
marries in order to kill his wife,' taken from Charles Perrault's
1703 story), *blue ruin* 'gin,' *bluenose* 'a resident of
Nova Scotia or a puritan,' *the blues* (shortened from *an attack
of the blue devils*, who could depress anything), *blue blood*
(borrowed from the Spanish *sangre azul*, aristocrats who
wished to distinguish themselves from &ldquo;dark-blooded&rdquo; Jews
and Moors), *bluestocking* (from a fifteenth-century Venetian
intellectual society whose members wore blue stockings to
distinguish themselves), *blue movie* (possibly from the use of
blue lights in striptease shows), and *blue laws* (from the color
chosen by the Covenanters, later the Puritans, to distinguish
themselves from the Royalist's *red.  Blue* was probably chosen
because of its heavenly associations and the rhyming association
with *true*).

In other languages, the associations with *blue* are just as
varied as they are in English.  A Dutchman *staan blauwbekken*
'standing in a blue bowl' has been left to cool his heels.  An
Italian singing with *voce azzurra* 'blue voice' is crooning softly.
But *blue* is not always gentle.  Rage, for example, takes a
variety of colors in English including *red* and *purple*, but in
Swedish and French anger is *blue*.  A Frenchman who is *blue*
may also be inexperienced or politically conservative; if he
tells a *conte bleu* 'a blue story' he is telling a fairy tale, and if
he is in a *resie bleu* 'blue rest' he is flabbergasted.  The Germans,
it seems, are also fond of *blue* as an element in their
color idioms.  A German who is *blau*, 'blue' is slightly drunk,
a state many find themselves in on *blauer Montag*, 'blue Monday'
a day on which little is done.  If a German takes *eine
Fahrt ins Blaue* 'a blue trip' he is wandering perhaps in search
of *die blaue Blume*, 'the blue flower' which is any mystic object
of a romantic quest.  If he tells *blaue Geschichten* 'blue
tales' he is lying, which might provoke someone to give him
*ein blaues Auge* 'a blue eye' or worse, fire *eine blaue Bohne* 'a
blue bean' or bullet at him.

Only slightly less popular than *blue, red's* popularity is
due to the universal color of blood and fire.  Examples from
English include: *see red* 'be enraged,' *red-faced* 'flushed with
embarrassment,' *red-handed* 'with the blood of one's victim
still on one's hands,' hence, 'in the act,' *paint the town red*
'have a wild time,' and *red-hot* 'burning,' or 'full of scandal.'
From the folk belief that *red* objects enrage bulls comes *red
rag*, which is 'anything that incites anger.'  From the *reddish*
tint of copper comes *red cent*.  From the passionate associations
of *red*, derived mainly from anatomical coloration,
comes *red-hot mamma* and *red-light district*, an area where
prostitution is common.  Among writers, *red* has long been a
popular color because of its sharp contrast with the usual *blue*
or *black* inks.  *To redline* an aircraft, thus, is 'to ground' it; *to
red-pencil* is 'to censor or correct,' and to be *in the red* is to be
'in debt,' derived from an old bookkeeping practice.  *A redletter
day* is a holiday marked in *red* on the calendar or, by
extension, any significant day.  In other languages, the
amorousness of *red* is common.  *Cuento colorado* 'red tale' in
Spanish is an indelicate one; in Turkish *kizilbas* 'red woman'
is 'scarlet woman' in English.  Other associations are more difficult
to explain: in German a novel's *roter Zwirn* 'red thread'
is 'an unbroken, clear chain of events.'  In Italian the yolk of
the egg is *rosso d'uovo*, 'red of the egg.'  But the language in
which many would expect to find an abundance of *red* is Russian
since it is Russia's national color, and popularly *a red* is a
communist or a political radical.  Consequently Russian expressions
which feature *red* are generally positive in their
overtones.  Something said *skazat' dlia krasnogo slovtsa* 'in a
red way,' for example, is amusing; *krasny&#92;?&#92; orator* 'red
speaker' is an eloquent one, and anything which is *red* is
beautiful or valuable.  It is not surprising that *red* and
*beautiful* in Russian come from the same Slavic root.

Like the other primary colors, *yellow* has long been a
popular basic color term.  During the Middle Ages in
England, for example, *the gift of a yellow flower* meant the
recipient was a cuckold.  More recently, because of *yellow's*
associations with disease and the western bias against Orientals,
*Yellow* has continued to have negative associations in
English.  *Yellow journalism*, for example, is sensational in
nature though it derives innocently from &ldquo;The Yellow Kid,&rdquo;
an early American comic strip which was printed in *yellow*.
Other examples include *the yellow peril* which was the feared
immigration of the Oriental people into the West, and out of
this bias and fear probably came the terms *yellow* and
*yellow-bellied* meaning cowardly.

Outside of English, *yellow* retains its negative associations
in the European languages.  Though envy is *green* in
English, it is *yellow* in French, Italian, and German.  Furthermore,
*wyla&cacute; swa &zdot;&oacute;lci&cacute;*, 'to have a yellow quarrel' in
Polish is to vent one's spleen.  *Sharshe phul dekha*, 'to see
yellow' is to lapse into unconsciousness in Bengali.  A Turk
who is *saricizmeli* 'yellow' is a nobody, but a Russian worker
who is *zheltoroty&#92;?&#92;*, is 'yellow' or 'inexperienced.'  If he is confined
to *zh&euml;lty&#92;?&#92; dom* 'a yellow place,' he is a lunatic.  A
Frenchman who is *un jaune* 'a yellow' is a traitor or a
strikebreaker, and his *ris jaune* 'yellow smile' is a wry or
maudlin one.  An Italian who reads a *giallo* 'yellow' is enjoying
a mystery novel or what a Frenchman might call *a black
novel*.

Like *yellow*, phrases which include *green* are among the
oldest in English.  Shakespeare's *green-eyed monster*, which
may derive from Ovid, has given us *green-eyed* and perhaps
*green with envy.  Green gown*, a term for 'illicit lovemaking,'
*green winter* 'a temperate one,' and *to green* 'to yearn,' are as
old as the Shakespearean monster.  More recent are the
English expressions *green thumb* 'skill with plants,'
*greenroom* 'the actors' waiting room painted green to soothe
eyes strained by harsh stage lights,' and *greenhorn* 'an immigrant
or inexperienced person.'  Thanks to the German
author Karl May, *greenhorn* has been introduced into German
though a German is more likely to refer to a tyro as a
*Gr&uuml;nschnabel* 'green beak.'

Curiously, *green* has amorous connotations in several
languages: *vert histoire* 'green story' in French is 'an off-color
tale'; *yesillenmek*, 'to be green' in Turkish is 'to be sexually
aroused'; *a green goose* is English 'harlot,' and *viejo verde* 'old
green man' in Spanish is 'a lascivious one.'  In German, *green*
suggests youth, growth, and hope,' and these associations are
generally true in most Indo-European languages because of
*green's* obvious connections with nature.  Nevertheless, a person
who is *looking green* has 'a sickly appearance' perhaps
because of the color of putrifying flesh.  Other expressions,
however, which make use of *green* are harder to classify.  To
be *essere al verde* 'in the green' in Italian is 'to be in the
[English] red,' that is 'in debt'; *prendre sans vert* 'to catch
someone without green' in French is 'to catch someone napping';
'to be scared green,' in Chinese is 'to be very scared,' or
*rage nil* 'scared blue' as a Bengali speaker would say; *g&ouml;ra sig
gron f&ouml;r* 'to green up to someone' in Swedish is 'to play up to
someone'; and *darse un verde* 'to give oneself a green' in
Spanish is 'to amuse oneself.'  Finally, the French regard slang
as *langue vert* 'green language' and any tart response as a
*green* one.

Probably because of their relative scarcity in nature, the
other secondaries, *purple* and *orange*, are notably lacking in
color expressions.  An exception to this generalization is the
use of *purple* in English.  Examples include *purple patch* or
*passage* 'highly rhetorical, undistinguished writing derived
from Horace's *Art of Poetry,' purple language* 'pungent or
profane language,' *born in* or *to the purple* 'born to an
aristocratic family,' *purple testimony* 'erotic or lurid
testimony,' *purple time* 'a happy affair,' and *purple passion* 'a
violent passion.'  With the exception of *purple's* suggestion of
royalty (because originally only the wealthiest could afford
the purple dye which was made from the Purpura shellfish),
*purple* is very seldom used in color idioms outside of English.
Similarly, *orange* is rarely used except in occasional references
to the House of Orange in Northern Ireland.  In Spanish,
however, *naranjada* 'orange drink' is a rude saying or
deed, and *naranjo* 'orange tree' is an ignoramus.

One of the most curious aspects of color phraseology is
the compound color phrase.  *Black and blue* (preserved also in
*black and blue Monday*) is perhaps the most common of these
phrases in English.  In German, however, one is beaten *gr&uuml;n
und gelb* (or *gr&uuml;n und blau*) 'green and yellow' (or 'green and
blue'), and a *black eye* is *blue*.  If a German sees *gr&uuml;n und
gelb*, he feels dizzy, but if he is *gr&uuml;n und gelb*, he is angry.
Similarly, a Bengali speaker is enraged if he is *rage lal* 'yellow
and red.'  The Spanish, though, have the most curious compound
color phrase: if a Spaniard *darse un verde* 'gives
himself a green,' he is 'amused'; if he *darse un verde con dos
azules* 'gives himself one green and two blues,' he is 'highly
entertained.'  Why *blue* should provide an extra measure of
amusement is unknown.

As with the secondaries, there is one tertiary color, a color
resulting from the mixture of two secondaries, that has
been very popular with phrase makers: *gray*.  In English there
are *graybeard* for an old man, *gray matter* for intellect, and
*gray eminence*, a translation of the French *eminence grise*,
for one who exercises power behind the scenes.  A Frenchman
who is *gray* may be old and fuddled but may also be slightly
drunk or as the Germans would say, *blue*.  If he *en voir de
grises* 'makes someone see gray,' he is 'giving his opponent a
rough time'; if he *faire grise mine &aacute;* 'gives someone a gray
look,' he is giving his rival 'a cold shoulder.'  To the Germans,
*der kleine graue Mann* 'the little gray man' is 'the devil'; *ein
graues Elend* 'a gray misery' is 'a hangover,' and *graue
Vergangenheit* 'gray antiquity' is 'the remote past.'  *Gray* also
suggests the past and dreamy meditations in Italian probably
because of their association with the elderly.  An Italian suffering
*pensieri grigi* 'gray thoughts,' therefore, is 'in a brown
study.'

The English expression *brown study* may have
originated from the supposed inherent thoughtfulness and
repose of *brown*, or it may derive from the expression *to do
up brown* which originally meant 'to put someone thoroughly
in the dark, or to deceive.'  *Do up brown* came to mean,
however, 'to do anything thoroughly,' and it thus may be the
origin of the phrase *browned-off*, meaning 'thoroughly disgruntled.'
More common, however, than any of these brown
phrases is *brown-nose* 'a toady who wins favor by paying very
close attention to his superior's bottom.'

Perhaps the reason for the scarcity of phrases which
make use of *brown* is that different languages arbitrarily and
unscientifically mark off the color scale without precise
limits.  Thus German *Braunkohle* 'brown cabbage' is American
'broccoli' which to Americans is very green whether
cooked or not.  Furthermore, the German *Rosenkohl*, 'rosy
cabbage' is the English 'Brussels sprouts,' but even more baffling
is that English *red cabbage* is *blue* or *red* in German and
*black* in Italian.

*Pink*, the third of the tertiaries, is very scarce indeed.
Because of its closeness to *red, pink* and *pinko* often are used
to refer to a Communist.  And because of its association with
blood and health, the English expression *in the pink* means
the highest degree of health or excellence in general.  Beyond
these expressions, *pink* is used primarily in descriptive
phrases, but even in these expressions its use is limited.  The
expression *pink eye*, for example, is not a description of the
eye's color but is a reference to a small European flower
which the eye resembles when it is swollen shut with conjunctivitis.

The fact that *blue* in German may mean 'drunk' while in
English it may mean 'depressed' is hardly a refutation of
Berlin and Kay's pioneering research.  But the curious and
usually inconsistent color associations in the twelve languages
researched here are strong indications of linguistic relativism.
Why two cultures associate different colors with a similar
idea, feeling or attitude is a perplexing cultural question that
needs further study by students of psychology, sociology, anthropology,
and language.

22 March 1979: ABC-TV morning news: Steve Bell announced
that Mary Leakey's recent archaeological find:
&ldquo;the 3.6-million-year-old footprints of the direct descendant
of modern man.&rdquo;  [Robert J. Powers, *Shreveport, Louisiana*]

&ldquo;Rowdy control techniques for libraries including special
games and stories for difficult children,&rdquo; listed among
the &ldquo;aids&rdquo; to be found in *The Elementary School Library in
Action*, Parker Publishing.  [Joan C. Sanders, *Bardonia, New
York*]

In the event that anyone may be laboring under the delusion
that divine retribution (surrogate division) has
gone the way of secularism, let him be warned: American
savings banks now threaten punishment for onanism by cautioning
that those who buy certain kinds of savings certificates
shall be subject to severe penalties for &ldquo;premature withdrawal.&rdquo;
At last they are wreaking vengeance on those who
are trying to get *out* of the act.

***

[^a1]: Brent Berlin and Paul Kay, *Basic Color Terms: Their Universality
and Evolution* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969), p.2.

[^a2]: Ibid., pp. 35-36.

[^a3]: Ibid., pp. 2-4.

## Body English
*Jay Siwek, M.D., Middletown, Connecticut*

The early anatomists must have enjoyed their work, for,
at least, they seemed to have brightened the tedious task of
dissecting as shown by the wit they used in naming the
myriad parts of the body.

The food we eat passes down the *esophagus* 'food carrier'
and into the stomach.  From there it travels through the
*pyloric* 'gatekeeper' *valve* into the *duodenum*, so named for
its length of 'twelve' fingerbreadths.  Next is the *jejunum*
which, during dissection, was most often found empty or
'fasting.'  The *vagus* nerve 'wanders' extensively throughout
the body, innervating most of the gastro-intestinal tract.  And
as if one 'belly' wasn't enough, the anatomists describe several
*ventricles*, both in the heart and brain.

The nomenclature of the genitourinary tract is further
embellished.  Many people know that a *vagina* is a 'sheath'
that can envelop a &ldquo;sword,&rdquo; and that our word for the
surgical removal of the uterus, *hysterectomy*, and *hysteria*
stem from the same root because hysteria was formerly attributed
to uterine disturbances.  Naming the fleshy prominence
over the pubic bone in women the *mons veneris* 'mountain of
love' indicates a certain romantic disposition among
anatomists, but this is in contradistinction to the name for the
nerve that transmits sensation from the genital region, the
*pudendal* 'to be ashamed.'  Only grown-ups have *pubic* 'adult'
hair; and although a woman has a *clitoris* 'little hill,' men
have *orchids* (the lesser known term for the 'testicles' based on
their resemblance to orchid bulbs and more familiar to us in
the term denoting 'inflammation of the testes,' *orchitis*).  *Testes*
(cognate with *testify*) bear 'witness' to manhood and virility,
and reside in a literal, etymologically speaking, 'sack,' the
*scrotum*.  Babies come from little seeds, we're told, but who
would think the seed was an 'acorn'?  Both the clitoris and
penis have one: *glans*.

If someone says you have *rocks in your head*, he may not
be far off from the truth.  The brain contains, among things
other than dreams, 'sea monsters' (*hippocampus*), 'bridal
chambers' (*thalamus*), 'almonds' (*amygdala*), 'olives,' a 'pine
cone' *pineal gland*, and 'fruit stones' (*putamen*), all enclosed
in a fibrous covering, the *dura mater* 'tough mother,' as the
longshoremen would say.  The *sagittal* suture line, which runs
brow to occiput in the skull, appears as though sliced through
by an 'arrow.'  (Was this named by an anatomist related to
William Tell?)  And infants, whose minds aren't constricted
by paradigms of abstract thinking, have 'fountains' *fontanelles*
on the tops of their heads.  Those of you with 'breasts'
on the brain will be glad to know there are two additional
*mammary bodies* inside of everyone's head, and *mastoid processes*
on either side externally.

Certain appellations show a particularly clever mind behind
them.  The colored irises of the eye are named after the
goddess of the rainbow, and the word *pupil* 'little girl, doll'
originated from the children's name for the tiny reflection of
oneself seen when looking closely at another's eyes.  The *sartorius*
muscle is found in the thigh and is used in sitting cross-legged
'like a tailor' at work.  The *popliteal* 'ham' area is
behind the knee, and this association is found in our colloquial
use of the term *hamstrings*.  The strong cheek muscles
which enable us to blow horns are called *buccinators*
'trumpeters.'  And, my favorite, the midline indentation in
the upper lip, is termed the *philtrum* 'love potion.'

Other epithets indicate a more abstract association.  The
*hyoid* bone in the neck is 'U-shaped' (that is, like *upsilon*), the
*sigmoid* colon is 'S-shaped' (like *sigma*) and the *deltoid* muscle
in the shoulder is 'triangular' (like *delta*) in form.  There are
several 'crescents' in our hands (*lunate* bones) and knees
(*menisci*).

The anatomists saw a variety of animal likenesses in a
diverse collection of bodily parts.  We bear 'goose feet' *pes
anserinus* in a group of web-like muscles of the thigh.  The
base of the spine is curved like a 'cuckoo's bill' *coccyx*.  Just
above the *coccyx* is the *sacrum*, a 'sacred' bone because of its
use in sacrifice.  In this vicinity are the slender strands of
nerves at the end of the spinal cord, the *cauda equina* 'horse's
tail.'  There are 'earthworm-like' muscles in the hands *lumbricales*
and a 'worm' in the brain (*vermis*).  'Goats' had their
ears pierced for identification, and the corresponding cartilaginous
portion of our ears is designated the *tragus*.  The tiny
hairs which grow from the ear canal are also called *tragi*.

Foods are plentiful.  'Sesame seed-like' bones in the hands
and feet (*sesamoids*), 'lentils' in the eyes (*lens*), 'beans' in the
knees (*fabella*), and 'a small grape,' that fleshy hanging-drop
in the back of the throat (*uvula*) join the other edibles already
mentioned.

Kitchen items abound.  We're walking collections of
'forks' (*clavicles*), 'funnels' (*choana*, nasal passageways),
'sieves' (*ethmoid* bones in the nose), 'flasks' (*ampulla*, part of
the intestines), 'a small pan' (*patella*, the kneecap), and even
'vinegar cruets' (*acetabulum*, the hip-joint sockets).

Other household objects are scattered about the body.
We have 'drawers' in the intestines (*haustra*), 'staircases' in
the ears (*scala*), and 'frames for wicker-work' in the feet (the
*tarsal* bone).  Personal artifacts decorate our nooks and crannies.
There are 'brooches' (*fibula*, a leg bone), two kinds of
'combs' (*crista* in the skullbones, and *pecten* in the intestines),
and many 'purses' (*bursa*; cf. *bursitis*).

When there's work to be done, we come furnished with
the tools of various trades: 'hammers' (*malleus*, an ear bone),
'little hammers' (*malleolus*, an ankle bone), 'anvils' (*incus*, an
ear bone), 'a handle' (*manubrium*, part of the breastbone),
'pulleys' (*trochlea*, in several places), 'hooks' (*uncus*, in the
brain), 'sickles' (*falx* in the brain), and 'a plowshare' (*vomer*,
a nose bone).  But all work and no play certainly wouldn't be
right, so we have a child's 'top' (*turbinates*, in the nose), 'bubbles'
(*bulla*, in the nose), 'horns' (*cornu*, in several places),
and 'a pale ball' (*globus pallidus* in the brain) to play with.

For outdoor recreation, we may go horseback riding
with 'stirrups' (*stapes*, an ear bone) and 'bridle' (*frenulum* in
the mouth) in hand, or go sailing a 'boat' (*scaphoid*, a wrist
bone) on 'a lake' (*lacuna*, in several places) under 'a bridge'
(*pons* in the brain), confident in the sturdiness of our 'keel'
(*carina*, in the lungs).  We might also look for 'shells' (*concha*
in the nose, *cochlea* in the ears) along the way.

And if we must go forth into combat, we're equipped
with 'helmet' (*galea*, part of the skullbone) and 'sword' (*xiphoid*,
at the end of the breastbone), 'trumpet' (*salpinx*, the
Fallopian tubes) and 'shield' (*thyroid*).

And when the anatomists ran out of images and names
for the numerous bones or arteries, for example, they would
simply call one the *Innominate* 'unnamed,' and still have the
last word.

ERRATUM [*I* before *E* department]

As a large number of readers have pointed out, John
Gummere's column appears regularly in *The* [Philadelphia]
*Inquirer*, not, as reported earlier, The &ldquo;Enquirer.&rdquo;

## Antipodean English: *Infinite Variety*
*G. W. Turner*

How big is a dialect?  For some people it is coextensive
with a language—there is only one form of English or French
or Japanese that merits serious attention, and that is the
standard or correct form, the one taught to foreign learners.
But should a Japanese learner learn British or American
English?  Or might he even learn Australian English?
Australian English, after all, is a language with about as
many speakers as Dutch, Czech, or Hungarian, that is,
perhaps twice as many as the number of speakers of its direct
ancestor, the English of Shakespeare's time.

Australian English itself is noted for its uniformity, but it
is not absolutely uniform.  The argument that establishes its
own right to separate existence can be extended to its subvarieties.
Queensland English or South Australian English also
have a right to exist, and New South Wales English is accordingly
seen to be but one variety, even if a seminal and still influential
one.  Admittedly, differences within Australia are
small, mainly a matter of a few items of vocabulary, and they
are becoming smaller still as government exercises its wellrecognized
standardizing influence.

Modern linguistic varieties differ from medieval trade
and regional dialects in the extent to which they are subjected
to standardizing pressures from government and commerce.
Government encourages standardized names for trees, fruit,
or fish to protect buyers, while sellers themselves regulate
names to encourage trade.  New Zealand growers adopted the
name *tamarillo* for 'tree tomato' expressly to recommend it
with a nice-sounding name, and 'Chinese gooseberries' grown
in New Zealand were renamed *kiwi fruit* to promote sales in
the U.S.A.  Similarly Australian fishermen found that *redfish*
sold better than *nannygai* though the difference is entirely
linguistic.

Commercial and official names are subject to standardization,
but this does not prevent colloquial names from lingering
on in speech and informal use.  Although a fish called
*callop* in South Australia has been officially named *golden
perch* throughout Australia, it continues to be called *callop*
among South Australian fishermen, even in a television program
for fishermen run by the Australian Broadcasting Commission,
and in the official *South Australian Yearbook* it is
entered as &ldquo;golden perch (callop).&rdquo;

Other regional colloquialisms survive because they are
not of interest or concern to commerce or government.  A
'swimming costume' is called variously *bathers* in South
Australia and Western Australia, *cozzie* in New South Wales
and *swimmers* in Queensland.  What are *sandshoes* in South
Australia may be called *runners* in Victoria.

Slang is particularly subject to regional variations of this
kind.  A Western Australian writer, Stuart Gore, has noticed
that &ldquo;the *connie*, the *ronnie*, or the *yonnie*, which the youth
of other states *bish, biff*, or *peg* at a target becomes for the
West Australian boy a *boondie* or a *brick*, which he may
either *lob* or *heave*.&rdquo;  Probably to most Australians *connie* is
more likely to suggest a bus or tram conductor than a stone to
be thrown, but the general point is valid; juvenile stone
throwing, though not entirely beyond the interest and concern
of administrators, is hardly likely to have its special
vocabulary effectively controlled by the recognized arbiters
of usage, and the economies of standardization have little
relevance in the colorful world of slang.

Local life may have its peculiarites with peculiarities of
vocabulary to match.  Because Adelaide was laid out with a
green belt or park surrounding the city, newcomers soon
learn the term *the parklands* as one of special significance.
Because some of the early settlers in South Australia were
from Germany and retained national ways in food and entertainment,
*mettwurst* 'a kind of sausage' or *schuetzenfest* 'an
annual rifleman's contest and public picnic' (with nowadays
a fair amount of beer to drink, a component perhaps reinforced
by association with *Oktoberfest*) are words generally
known to South Australians.  *Deli* is not an abbreviation confined
to South Australia of course, but its age is reflected in its
deviation in meaning from the longer *delicatessen*.  The *deli* is
'a small shop open for long hours selling perishable goods and
newspapers.'  Even the patriotic *Kitchener bun* suggests a
replaced German name, apparently *Berliner*, though the
Berliner is now available as a slightly different bun.

A telegraph pole, designed by J.C. Stobie in 1924, made
from two steel rails with concrete between them to resist
white ants is called a *stobie pole* in Adelaide.  The word is so
established that it is sometimes difficult to convince Adelaide
students that it is not the name for a telegraph pole wherever
English is spoken.  Sometimes no particular reason for a local
term is obvious.  When a headline announces that *pushers* are
to be allowed on Adelaide buses, the permission extends not
to 'peddlers of drugs' but to 'a child's pushchair.'  Other terms
used in Adelaide and perhaps nowhere else are *floater* 'a meat
pie immersed in pea soup,' *fritz* 'a luncheon sausage' (called
*Vienna sausage* in Melbourne, *Devon* in Sydney, and *German
sausage* or *Belgian sausage* in New Zealand), *salt damp*
'rising damp,' and *spoon drain* 'a shallow drain across a
street.'

In its language as in other ways, farming in Australia
shows a mixture of independence and regulation.  Owners of
small fruit farms (locally called *blocks*) along the Murray
River are called *blockers* in South Australia but *blockies* in
Western Victoria.  If they grow dried fruits, they refer to 'the
removal of the stems of raisins (or sultanas) in the process of
packing' as *titting* if they are in South Australia or *capping* in
Victoria.  In Western Australia the same process is called *pinning*.
In Queensland a wheat crop is *headed*, in Victoria
*stripped*, and in South Australia *harvested*, but lucerne is
*reaped*.  In South Australia a farmer *seeds*, in Victoria he
*sows*, and in Queensland he *plants*.  In South Australia
farmers take wheat to *silos*, in Western Australia to *bins*.
Though weeds have their standard Latin names (and farmers
are likely to know them), popular names persist and are often
local.  The *Bathurst burr* (*Xanthium spinosum*) is called *three-corner
jack* in South Australia and *double-gee* or *devil-jee* in
Western Australia.  This last name seems to be connected with
the South African *devil's thorn*, a similar weed, and its name
in Afrikaans, *dubbeltjie* or *duwweltjie*.

All of the information in the preceding paragraph has
been gleaned from students (the source of much academic
lore).  My own farming experience was in New Zealand,
where a great deal of further variation could be recorded.
The variant names of weeds alone would furnish material for
several articles.  Such records have their usefulness and it is to
be hoped that national dictionaries will someday record
them.  In the meantime the sporadic jottings above will serve
to hint by implication at the infinite variety of language.

—*University of Adelaide*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;OFFICE OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS NOT YET
READY,&rdquo; headline in Dallas Morning News, n.d. [Javan
Kienzle, Dallas, Texas]


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: *GI for the IG*
*Sgt. Maj. Dan Cragg, Arlington, Virginia*

>GI for the IG 'cause that's the thing to do.
>
>GI for the IG 'til you're black and blue.
>
>Oh, GI for the IG so when the Man comes through
>
>He'll see that you've GI'd for the IG and won't gig you.
>
>—*From *The Dark Other*, by J. B. Post, Verdun, France, 1963.
Quoted with the permission of the author.*

Having &ldquo;GI'd for the IG&rdquo; more times than my permanently
scabbed knees and elbows prematurely creaky from overwork
care to remember, tracing the etymology of this and other
examples of U. S. Army slang and jargon is a very personal
and nostalgic endeavor.

*GI* as we have used the word since World War II comes
from the abbreviation for 'government issue' or 'general
issue.'  It was originally applied in adjectival form to almost
everything used or issued by the Army, such as *GI cans, GI
shoes, GI haircuts, GI soap, GI brushes*.  The acronym became
so popular that it soon replaced the full form for soldier
and was applied in such insipid monstrosities of the nonce as
*GI Joe, GI Jane*, and (horrors!) *GI Kraut*.  But the root of *GI*
is galvanized iron.

Since World War II *the GIs* has become synonymous
with 'the trots,' and as soldiers are most susceptible to this inconvenience,
it is linked in many minds with the Army word
and not gastrointestinal diarrhea, from which the expression
originated.  Its association with the military was further reinforced
during the years of the Vietnam War, when most soldiers
deployed in Southeast Asia suffered from gastrointestinal
diseases at one time or another.

Used with certain unprintable modifiers, *GI*, as in &ldquo;He's
real GI,&rdquo; was once very common for a martinet or military
pettifogger.  But this application is being replaced by *gung ho*
and *hard-core* (a Vietnam War word).

Wentworth and Flexner (*Dictionary of American Slang*)
state that *GI can*, meaning 'any large metal can used to hold
refuse' (or peeled potatoes or iced cans of beer, but not necessarily
in that order) traces back to the 1920s.  These cans were
called GI because there were made of *galvanized iron*.  That
*GI* in this sense was widely used in the Army before World
War II is a fact beyond dispute.  But in the May 1948 issue of
the *Infantry Journal* the editors took Mr. Mencken to task
over the etymology of *GI* in *The American Language: Supplement
II*, accusing him of having &ldquo;strayed from the path of
accuracy and scholarship&rdquo; and advising him, &ldquo;If you want to
think that *GI* came to mean general issue only after the outbreak
of World War II, we can only sorrowfully conclude
that your research among master sergeants of twenty years'
service is totally inadequate.&rdquo;

Mencken acknowledged the ancient lineage of *GI*, citing
Colby (Colonel Elbridge Colby, *Army Talk*, 1942; this book,
a classic, was dedicated to Mr. Mencken) as an authority for
its use in the Army, from *galvanized iron*, even before the
First World War.  I have traced it in this sense to 1907, when
A. W. Whitehead, in the *Cavalry Journal* for April 1907
(&ldquo;Handling a Wagon Train&rdquo;) wrote, &ldquo;The following is the
equipment of Wagon trains sent from this post [Fort Leaven-worth]
to the Ft. Riley maneuvers in 1906:

Bucket, G.I. on strap near axle under body.&rdquo;

Its later application, whether that was before or during the
early years of World War II, was reinforced by the much
older meaning.

Mr. Post, in the verses quoted at the beginning of this
piece, uses *GI* in shortened form in the sense of 'GI party,' or
a general cleaning and scrubbing prior to an inspection.  *GI
parties* used to be held in Army garrisons every Friday night
to prepare for the traditional Saturday morning inspection of
quarters conducted by gimlet-eyed company commanders' first
sergeants.  Nevertheless, the effort expended getting ready for
the inspector general's (IG) annual walk-through was something
to behold.  I believe that if some of those &ldquo;parties&rdquo; in
which I have participated had been filmed and the film shown
in certain countries overseas, our most truculent enemies today
would long since have turned to growing cabbages.

Some of today's master sergeants with twenty years' service
note that among soldiers the use of *GI* is beginning to wane.
*GI parties* have become unfashionable and today's soldier can
afford to buy the things that were once issued to him, while
regulations have been relaxed to the point where *GI haircuts*
are the exception.

With the end of the draft the perpetuation of military
slang and jargon in the general language should begin to decline
as a generation of Americans with no military service
grows up.  It may not be too long before words like *GI* will
sound strange on the tongue and those who use them will thereby
reveal their years.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Room's Dictionary Of Confusibles*](https://www.amazon.com/Rooms-Dictionary-Confusibles-Adrian-Room/dp/0710001207) and [*The Dictionary Of Diseased English*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Diseased-English-Kenneth-Hudson/dp/0333258533)
Adrian Room, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, London, Henley, 1979), 153pp., 2 appendices. and Kenneth Hudson, Macmillan, (London and Basingstoke, 1977), xxviii + 267pp.

There are a number of books on the market giving a
commentary on the language we use.  Room's *Confusibles* is
one of those books that one thinks might be useful, and so
purchases, and probably does in fact use on occasions.  A confusible
is, according to Room, 'a word that not only resembles
another in spelling and pronunciation, but one that additionally
has a similar or associated meaning' (p. 2).  As such, they
occur in pairs, and Room lists about 800 in short articles, arranged
alphabetically, on pairs or groups of words.  They include
the *it's/its* pair ('possibly two of the commonest confusibles
in the language'), *imply/infer*, even *stalactite/stalagmite*,
with a handy mnemonic working on the inclusion of one letter,
'C for *c*eiling, G for ground.'  More technical words are
also discussed—*Oxford Group/Oxford movement, umlaut/
ablaut, poplin/Crimplene/Terylene* and obscure pairs such as
*sinecure/cynosure*.  Room's style is informal and the articles
are brief, his main concern being to be clear.  Cross references
are good.  The book also has an appendix of prefixes and suffixes
with details of the meaning, language of origin, examples,
and variant spellings.

The book is clearly designed for the native speaker of
English who never *can* remember the difference between *x*
and *y*, rather than the foreign learner.  It fills a gap well.  One
could obviously list omissions: some that come to mind are
*oriented/orientated, due to/owing to, upstream/downstream*,
and the inclusion of *theatricals* with *hysterics/histrionics*.

Hudson's book is more a commentary on the language
than notes on distinguishing confusibles.  His starting point is
that English is a diseased language, by which he means that
English 'either deliberately or unconsciously, is used with so
serious a lack of precision that it ceases to be an effective
means of communication and serves only to confuse or mislead'
(p. xix).  Clearly, much redundant jargon is criticized:
here are the statements in alphabetically arranged entries on
being *aware* (of nothing, just 'aware'), providing *back-up*,
having *charisma*, with consequent *grass-root* support, and of
course *hopefully* having an *on-going, meaningful*, but nevertheless
*low-key relationship* at the *interface* in a particular
*situation*.

Hudson illustrates his statements with quotations from a
wide variety of sources (taken over the ten years 1966-76),
from menus to broadcast news bulletins, but mainly from
newspapers.  U.S. and Australian usage is reflected as well as
British English.  One annoying feature is the occurrence of a
few entries with headwords such as 'definite article' (referring
then to its omission, as in *Prime Minister Callaghan*, instead
of *the Prime Minister, Mr. Callaghan*).  These occur in the
same form as the headwords for particular words which make
up the rest of the book.

Hudson goes a definite step further than Room: Room
offers a descriptive rather than prescriptive book; Hudson explicitly
writes that he is not culturally neutral: and he is at
pains to issue a call to arms to stop the spread of the disease
affecting the language.  If one can accept Hudson's self-confessed
prejudices (e.g., against social scientists, and in
favor of the wine-correspondent of the London *Times*), one
can find this book entertaining.

Both books reflect current works on the changing English
language.  Both are useful alongside Philip Howard's *New
Words for Old* (Hamish Hamilton, London, 1977), and *Words*
(1975) and *More Words* (1977) both published by BBC, London,
in providing reflections on current English.  Room's is the
more permanent, but Hudson's the more significant in critically
looking at the present condition of the language.

*[Martin Manser, Aylesbury, England]*


### OBITER DICTA: *Plus is 'in addition,' plus it means something more*
*Dwight Bolinger, Palo Alto, California*

Caldwell Titcomb [V, 2] finds &ldquo;no excuse for misusing
*plus* to duplicate what can properly be expressed by *also, too,
moreover, besides, furthermore, as well, to boot*, and *in addition*—not
to mention *and*.&rdquo;

There is indeed a surplus of plussage in all those other
terms, but *plus* is one of those rare increases among function
words—a new relative.  It signifies not just 'in addition,' but
'in addition to *which*'—the other words add to what has gone
before; *plus* holds it in view and enlarges on it.  *Plus* is semantically
a new member of the set of relatives starting with
*where*, for example, *whereupon*, and it bears the same relation
to *in addition* that *whereupon* bears to *then*:

>The lecture began, whereupon I got up to leave = at which
point I got up to leave.
>
>The lecture began; then I got up to leave.
>
>A 20% discount, plus we pay all postage and handling
costs = in addition to which we pay etc.
>
>A 20% discount; in addition we pay etc.

One may not like this upstart, but it will not do to appeal to
logic or to close one's mind and dismiss it as the product of
linguistic barbarians.  It performs a function that is not shared
by any of its near-synonyms and is more ingenious than barbaric.
Let's not deny the creative impulse when it is put to
work by ordinary speakers.


#### EPISTOLA {(Capt.) Ronald A. Wells}

Leafing through *Mainliner* (no hidden symbolism, there,
I hope) *Magazine* for November 1978 on a recent flight on
United, I came across a reference on the expression &ldquo;*Face*!&rdquo;
Apparently, it is an abbreviation of &ldquo;In your face, Ace!&rdquo;

>To emphasize their dunking achievements, basketball
players have even been known to follow up their performances
with such barbed remarks as &ldquo;In your face,
Ace,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Ol&eacute;, Jos&eacute;.&rdquo;

I've played a fair amount of basketball in my day (when
they were using peach baskets), but never have heard the expression
used.

*[(Capt.) Ronald A. Wells, U.S.C.G. Academy New London, Connecticut]*


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA: *&ldquo;My name is Hanes&rdquo;*
*Gerald Cohen, University of Missouri-Rolla*

One of the tasks of etymologists is to spot etymological
treatments that have lain unnoticed in obscure places and to
bring them to the attention of other scholars.  Presented below
is one such item that I noticed last summer in the course of my
research on slang.  It appears in the N. Y. newspaper *The
Subterranean*, Nov. 15, 1845, p. 4, col. 1, where it was reprinted
from the *Evening Star* (exact date:?).  A check of the
*Dictionary of American English* and Mathews' *Americanisms*
...shows no mention of *My name is Hanes*, and this expression
has therefore apparently been overlooked by scholars of
American English.

There are thousands of people in this country who
make use of the common expression &ldquo;My name is Hanes&rdquo;
when they are about leaving a place or party suddenly,
yet few know from whence the expression is derived.  A
more common saying, or one in more general use, has
never been got up.  We hear it in Maine, in Georgia, in
Maryland, and in Arkansas—it is in the mouth of the
old and the young, the grave and the gay—in short,
&ldquo;My name is Hanes&rdquo; enjoys a popularity which no other
cant phrase does—be it our next care to give its origin.

Some forty-five years since, a gentleman by the name
of Hanes was travelling on horseback in the vicinity of
Mr. Jefferson's residence in Virginia.  Party spirit was
running extremely high in those days.  Mr. Jefferson was
president, and Mr. Hanes was a rank federalist, and as
a matter of course, a bitter opponent to the then existing
administration and its head.  He was not acquainted
with Mr. Jefferson, and accidentally coming up with
that gentleman, also travelling on horseback, his party
zeal soon led him into a conversation upon the all-absorbing
topic.  In the course of the conversation,
Hanes took particular pains to abuse Mr. Jefferson, calling
him all sorts of hard names, run(ning) down every
measure of his administration, poked the non-intercourse
act at him as most outrageous and ruinous, ridiculing
his gun-boat system as preposterous and nonsensical, opposed
his purchase of Louisiana as a wild scheme—in
short, took every leading feature of the day, descanted
on them and their originator with the greatest bitterness.
Mr. Jefferson all the while said little.  There was no
such thing as getting away from his very particular
friend, and he did not exactly feel at liberty to combat
his argument.

They finally arrived in front of Mr. Jefferson's
residence, Hanes of course, not acquainted with the
fact.  Notwithstanding he had been vilified and abused
&ldquo;like a pickpocket,&rdquo; to use the old saying, Mr. Jefferson
still, with the true Virginia hospitality and politeness,
invited his travelling companion to alight and partake of
some refreshments.  Hanes was about getting from his
horse, when it occurred to him that he should ask his
companion's name.

&ldquo;Jefferson,&rdquo; said the President blandly.

&ldquo;What!  Thomas Jefferson?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes, Sir: Thomas Jefferson.&rdquo;

&ldquo;President Thomas Jefferson?&rdquo;  continued the
astounded Federalist.

&ldquo;The same,&rdquo; rejoined Mr. Jefferson.

&ldquo;Well, *my name is Hanes*!&rdquo; and putting spurs to his
horse, he was out of hearing instantly.

This, we are informed, was the origin of the phrase.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Meg Casey}

Nominations for the &ldquo;Unconsciously Appropriate and
Inappropriate Metaphor Hall of Fame&rdquo;:

1\.  &ldquo;After a prolonged dry period the first flush of storm
water run-off is equivalent to raw sewage.&rdquo;  [from a handout
(March 1978) for an environmental science class.]

2\.  &ldquo;There continue to be disagreements and lack of trust in
regard to the way in which student complaints to the Associate
Dean are handled.  This area is most sensitive, and
there are occasionally charges of racism associated with actions
taken in this area.  Some faculty members perceive that
Black students complain to a Black Dean and are given carte
blanche.&rdquo;  [from an internal memorandum distributed to
members of a certain department.  Both from Miami Dade
Community College, Miami, Florida.]

*[Meg Casey, Miami Dade Community College]*

## Epenthetically Speaking
*Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York*

I have been collecting examples of epenthesis for some time
and would like to share my findings with VERBATIM readers.

Epenthesis is the insertion of an extra consonant or vowel
in the pronunciation of a word.  The extra vowel use has a
word for itself, anaptyxis.  Thus saying &ldquo;scrapegoat&rdquo; for
*scapegoat* is epenthesis, but saying &ldquo;mischievious&rdquo; for *mischievous*
is vowel epenthesis.

The epenthetical word can gain legitimacy by widespread
use.  The original word was *plenitude*, but &ldquo;plentitude&rdquo; is
easier to say and understand.  *Sobriquet* is the French form
yet &ldquo;soubriquet&rdquo; has made the dictionary as a variant.  And I
suppose &ldquo;deviltry&rdquo; developed from the old *devilry*.

The epenthetical quirks of the average person are the
most amusing.  I have heard someone say that he was going to
buy &ldquo;a cartoon of cigarettes.&rdquo;  And, of course, everybody
knows the one who said, &ldquo;My arthuritis is killing me.&rdquo;  This is
of serious import to an &ldquo;athaletic&rdquo; type.  These are the same
people who enjoy a good &ldquo;fillum.&rdquo;  These are also the people
who warn you to look out for the &ldquo;poison ivory.&rdquo;

This may make so-called educated people smile, but they
themselves are not free of committing epenthesis.  I have
heard a Carter aide on the radio mention &ldquo;the sovereigntry of
the Panama Canal,&rdquo; and it was no slip of the tongue because
he repeated the mispronunciation.  Supposedly better
informed speakers have uttered &ldquo;grievious&rdquo; for *grievous*.

In the area of sex, the most popular word that is garbled
is the &ldquo;prostrate&rdquo; gland, and on sober thought its malfunction
could well do that to a man.  When Dr. Conton, an 18th-century
Englishman, invented his contraceptive device, the
name soon became *condom*, but many purchasers of this article
request &ldquo;condrums.&rdquo;  I feel that the existence of the word *conundrum*
is responsible for this.  Incidentally, *Webster 8* says of
*condom* &ldquo;origin unknown&rdquo; but the etymology in the *Webster's
New World Dictionary* refers to the aforementioned doctor
with a question mark.  One more sex note.  I asked a neighbor
what the new photography shop was, as it called itself &ldquo;Picture
Shop.&rdquo;  He informed me that it was a &ldquo;pornio place.&rdquo;

Humorous epenthesis is deliberate, but I can think of only
one, offhand.  That's the word &ldquo;bazoom.&rdquo;  Inadvertent humor
is solemnly expressed by the housewife at the fruit and
vegetable store (or greengrocer's) who asks for &ldquo;sparrow
grass&rdquo; or &ldquo;asparagrass.&rdquo;  Children especially are addicted to
saying &ldquo;chiminey&rdquo; for *chimney*.  Customers in record shops
have asked for &ldquo;monaurial records.&rdquo;  In all seriousness, pool
players say the ball &ldquo;caroomed off the side.&rdquo;  The doubling of
the *o* does have a funny, or perhaps a more important sound,
as when *ponton* became &ldquo;pontoon.&rdquo;

I would very much like to learn more of these from the
readers.  They are elusive things to keep in mind.  But isn't
everything?  I must leave you now.  A police car is racing
down my street, its &ldquo;sireen&rdquo; screaming.


#### EPISTOLA {Helen L. Linn}

In re review of *Remarkable Names of Real People* or
*How to Name Your Baby* [V, 1].

I remember (*Miss*, I always assumed?) *Silence Bellows'*
comments in the former &ldquo;Queries and Answers&rdquo; pages of the
*New York Times Book Review* — also that it always appeared
as *Silence Buck Bellows* and I always felt the middle name
added panache!

Thought you'd be interested in a list of names I compiled
when I was doing Travelers Aid work, volunteer, at the desks
of that organization in Pennsylvania and Grand Central Stations.
These were all real people whose names I wrote down
on the file-card, as instructed.  They intrigued me then, and
they do now, as I go over the list again: *Corday Debshells;
Venus Scott; Pearl Bramble; Caserine Deadwyler; Cazetta
Anderson; Pearlie Mae Boyd; Queen Esther Williams;
Dovalyne Mattingly; Novella Boyd; Dozier Gardner;
Vaughn Payton; Kizzie Royster; Exodus Burrows*.  The last
four were men.

Tucked into that same part of the little notebook I used
for my TA work, I found a yellowed newspaper clipping, undated,
headed FANCIFUL NAMES ON CHAPLAIN'S LIST, and
telling of the names the hospital chaplain, Reverend Joseph
Toth, had collected while serving at City Hospital in
Cleveland.  Here are some of the names: *Ozavenus Notre
Dame Farley; Iva Incision; Seymour Avenue Jeeter; Ladies
Home Journal Jones; Vaseline Malaria*; and *Soda Waters*.
Twin boys were named *Edward* and *Re-Edward*.  The Green
family named the children *Bee, Ivy, Lettuce, Myrtle, Olive,
Sage*, and *Paris*, Father Toth reported.

*[Helen L. Linn, Westfield, New Jersey]*

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard, Legalese*

Those who think that civilization as we know it is coming
to an end and that the Dark Ages are about to descend
again sometimes cite the &ldquo;decay&rdquo; of English as a symptom of
the supposed general decline of civilization.  Myself, I doubt
whether decay is an apt metaphor for the way that a
language constantly evolves to meet the new needs of those
who use it.  If you believed in vegetable metaphors, you
could, I suppose, say that Latin decayed after the fall of the
Roman Empire.  That was because different and barbarian
chaps were speaking and writing the stuff.  Political and social
change produced the change in language.  And as Helen Waddell
showed unforgettably, the &ldquo;decayed&rdquo; Latin of the Dark
Ages was a vigorous, poetic, and eloquent language for the
ecclesiastical and other purposes for which it was needed.

In a lecture to a society of sages at the Athenaeum
recently, the learned and witty George Steiner argued that
English was in a poor way in the United Kingdom.  All the
best poetry and fiction, he said, were being written in the
United States.  Well, yes, up to a point, Lord Copper.  There
are some Brits from Graham Greene and Iris Murdoch to Ted
Hughes who still manage to turn out good stuff.  And in certain
branches of English, from biography and academic
writing to television, British writers and talkers are in the first
division; indeed, near the top of it.  But in general it is not surprising
that a country as big, rich, and diverse as the United
States should produce more good writers than a comparatively
small, run-down, and at present introspective island.

The only two British politicians who speak with the
clarity and eloquence of previous generations (leaving on one
side the wisdom or folly of what they say) are Lord Hailsham
and Enoch Powell.  Most of our politicians use language
designed to conceal the poverty of their thought and to
mislead the public or appeal to their baser instincts.  But then
most politicians since the time of Cleon have done that.  Many
academics use pretentious jargon that is not clear even to
those inside their discipline.  The churches were once the
repository of good English.  Pick up any book of seventeenth-century
sermons, not by an acknowledged master of language
such as John Donne but by an otherwise obscure parson, and
you will find the English language used to the service of God
in a living and beautiful way.  How long is it since we heard a
bishop say something interesting?  But leaving that aside, how
long is it since you heard a bishop say something in language
that is lively and clear?

One place, at any rate, where even pessimists about the
language acknowledge that good English survives is on the
Bench.  Judges still talk conspicuously good English, and do it
extemporarily.  Of course, it is part of their training.  Since all
judges were once barristers themselves, they are used to
speaking and making themselves understood.  A barrister who
pleads before a judge has to make his meaning clear.  He has
to cite the proper references.  He has to explain what he means
by a particular example, even more so when he has a jury to
persuade.  It is harder to persuade a jury than to gull a television
audience.  A politician can get away with weasel words
and slippery argument because he has nobody except the
hecklers to contend with.  A lawyer who is obfuscating
language has to contend with the judge, who will often pull
him up if he starts twisting the language.

One of our learned and purist Circuit Judges has sent me
some new words that he has noticed emerging in his courts
over the past few months.  The first is *adamance*, as in (from a
report by a social worker in Southwark): &ldquo;He has expressed
his *adamance* that he will become a responsible member of
the community.&rdquo;  The Oxford lexicographers cannot determine
when the substantive *adamant*, meaning 'a fabulous
hard metal or rock,' became an adjective meaning 'inflexible,'
particularly in *to be adamant*, meaning 'stubbornly to
refuse compliance with requests.'  As an adjective, *adamant*
usually means 'a negative determination not to do something'
rather than a positive determination, for instance to turn over
a new leaf and become a responsible member of the community.
In spite of its barbarously bastard birth, *adamance* is
an attractive new word, as fits a substance that was for centuries
confused with lodestone and credited with magnetic
powers.

The Judge's second new word, *abscondition*, as in &ldquo;bail
was refused because of the likelihood of *abscondition*&rdquo; is less
attractive and seems otiose.  We already have *absconding* and
*abscondment* in the vocabulary as nouns.  In the Judge's exemplary
sentence, &ldquo;because he was likely to abscond&rdquo; would
be less abstract and more vigorous.  Like the rest of us, social
workers sometimes want to soften the sharp truth with
abstractitis.

The Judge's third new word is *orality*, as in &ldquo;the English
criminal trial is moving away from its character of extreme
*orality*&rdquo;; that is, it is 'not now so insistent upon solely oral
evidence.'  This appeared in a recent article in the lawyers'
trade magazine *Justice of the Peace*.

In fact, *orality*, meaning 'the quality of being oral or
orally communicated,' is already in the British vocabulary as
a rare and supposed to be obsolescent word.  Evidently our
need for it is reviving.  In any event, it has a respectable
pedigree going back to the seventeenth century, as well as its
new legal function.

The Judge's final contribution was not a new word but
an example of the old linguistic vice of jargon, circumlocution,
and beating around the bush.  It comes from a recent
report from a Remand Centre.  The subject of the report was
said to be &ldquo;unlikely to make attitudinal changes until the
maturation process has been completed.&rdquo;  I suppose that it
was felt to be unduly blunt to say that the subject of the
report was unlikely to change his attitude until he had grown
up.  British English is protected from the decay supposed to be
nibbling away at it by the vigilance of, among others, those
precise and witty purists, the Judges.


### OBITER DICTA: *Parameter of Parameters*
*Gerardus Wynkoop, Little Silver, New Jersey*

Back in the 1960s the academic password was *dichotomy*.
This was succeeded in the early 1970s by *parameter*, usually
found in the plural, and that is now giving way to *simplistic*.
The curious thing about the *parameter* craze was that practically
none of the users could explain the mathematical
meaning of the word, though that was the discipline from
which it was borrowed.

The word was probably first used by Apollonius of Perga
(&ldquo;The Great Geometer&rdquo;) in his master treatise on conics, of
which the first four books in the original Greek survive.
Three more survive in an Arabic translation and the eighth
book has perished in the ruins of time.

A simpler illustration for a parameter can be found in
the Cartesian equation for a straight line: *y* = *ax* + *b*.  This is
a typical parametric equation, the parameters being *a* and *b*.
They determine the slope and intercept of the straight line
(where and how it is to be drawn on the graph).  Their most
important characteristic, however, is that they are constants
which may be given any value the mathematician wishes.
When he does assign definite values, say *y* = 2*x* + 3, then it
ceases to be a parametric equation; it then becomes only a
particular straight line.

Going back to Apollonius and his conics we can now use
the ellipse to illustrate the meaning of the metaphor &ldquo;the
parameters of life.&rdquo;  I won't bother you with the equation for
the ellipse; all you need know is that it has two parameters.
These determine the shape of the ellipse, whether it is almost
a circle (Plato's symbol for perfection) or squashed down to
the shape of a blimp or cigar.

The metaphor then is rightly understood as focusing, not
on limitations beyond the control of human beings, but on the
few factors which can to some extent be manipulated by the
actors in the drama.  When one includes among the *parameters*
of life elements such as cultural background, genetic
structure, or temperament, it's not a good metaphor.  Life's
problem (which the young confuse with what they consider a
search for identity) is to locate the true *parameters*, things
that can be changed (education might be one) and might lead
to a more rounded life.  *Parameters* are not fixed limits but dimensions
which can be changed by the perpetrator.

>For whatso'er we perpetrate,
>
>We do but row, we're steered by fate.
>
>—Samuel Butler, *Hudibras*


#### EPISTOLA {Eva Edmands}

Using the dictionary for aid in translation from a foreign
language to English or vice versa can have its pitfalls especially
if one picks the first definition.

A German acquaintance of ours found himself in a
drafty hotel room in England.  Not trusting his English conversational
skill in order to ask for a blanket, he decided to
write a note to the manager.  Using his German-English dictionary,
he looked up the words he was unsure of: *DRAFT* (in
German *Zug*) and found the English equivalent: *TRAIN*.
Next, he looked up *BLANKET* (*Decke*) and found *CEILING*
and finally *TO MOVE OUT* (*ausziehen*) *UNDRESS*.

Some time later, the startled hotel manager found a note
which read: *THERE IS A TERRIBLE TRAIN IN MY
ROOM AND IF YOU DON'T GIVE ME ANOTHER CEILING,
I'LL UNDRESS*.

*[Eva Edmands, Bronx, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Kathryn A. Wright}

In re Clair Schulz's piece on names of musical groups
[IV, 2] *Taj Mahal* is (in this instance)— a person.  It has
never been the name of a group, Mr. Schulz's protests to the
contrary.  Taj took that name for himself (for the *sound* of it
more than for any other reason) when he first began working
as a musician in college in the early 1960s.  The groups he has
worked with have always been known by another name, e.g.,
*Taj Mahal and the Electras* (in college); *Taj Mahal and the
Pelham Hill Logjammers* (on the folk circuit, early 1960s);
*Taj Mahal and the International Rhythm Band* (currently);
etc.  Rather like (from Mr. Schulz's list) *Booker T. and the M.
G.s* (which, by the way, stands for 'Memphis Group' and has
nothing to do with the automobile), or *Country Joe and the
Fish*, or *Gerry and the Pacemakers*.

*[Kathryn A. Wright, Vernon, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ray M. Peterson}

Anent G. Bocca's observations re public signs, here are
two items that have amused me and, I hope, will find risible
readers of VERBATIM.

As a veteran Long Island R.R. commuter, I was long intrigued
by an admonition in the car reading: &ldquo;No spitting.  It's
against the law.&rdquo;

Expectoration abstinence illegal?

At a drive-in food store in town with two service driveways,
one in front and one in back, the customer, upon approaching
by the entry road, is faced by a sign reading:
&ldquo;PLEASE.  Use both driveways.&rdquo;

Literal compliance envisages a splitting image—a cartoonist's
delight—of the left wheel up the front driveway and
the right wheel up the back driveway (like Chas. Addams's
ski tracks straddling a tree!).

*[Ray M. Peterson, Port Washington, New York]*


### OBITER DICTA: *Plus ca change, plus ca change*

As regular readers of VERBATIM are aware, comment is
made from time to time in these pages regarding the ineluctable
fact that language changes and that many of today's prejudices
against such changes prove hollow tomorrow, just as
yesterday's seem odd today.

An old book has come my way, *12,000 Words Often
Mispronounced*, W. H. P. Phyfe, G. P. Putnam's Sons.  (I
know it must be old: first, it is dated 1908; second, it's a
760-page book, albeit small in format, that costs $1.25.)  It is
interesting because it demonstrates that changes in pronunciation
of common words have taken place during the same
period in which many changes of usage have occurred, yet
people have paid them scant attention.  Many of the words
listed are proper names and obscure items, but a large
number—too large to list here completely—are very ordinary.
Here is a sampling: [The pronunciation system has
been simplified for convenience.]

>ab-d&#92;?&#92;-men *not* a&#92;?&#92;-d&omacr;-men
>
>ab-stry&omacr;&omacr;s *not* ab-str&omacr;&omacr;s
>
>ac-cl&#92;?&#92;-m&amacr;t *not* a&#92;?&#92;-clim-&amacr;t
>
>&amacr;-kurn *or* &amacr;-kern (for *acorn*)
>
>A-d&omacr;&#92;?&#92;-nis *not* A-do&#92;?&#92;-is
>
>&amacr;-&#92;?&#92;-re-al (for *aerial*)
>
>&#92;?&#92;-er-&omacr;-n&ocirc;t *or* &amacr;-r&omacr;-n&ocirc;t (included just to show it isn't a
new word—1908!)
>
>a&#92;?&#92;-ri-cult-y&omacr;&omacr;r
>
>a&#92;?&#92;-k&emacr;-mist
>
>a&#92;?&#92;-cove *or* al-c&omacr;v&#92;?&#92;
>
>a&#92;?&#92;-j&emacr;-br&#92;?&#92;...and so on.

The book is sprinkled through with comments, admon
tions, and the results of a composite survey of *Webster's International,
Century, Standard*, and *Worcester's* dictionaries.

>*alkali*—a&#92;?&#92;-k&#92;?&#92;-l&#92;?&#92; *or* a&lacute;-k&#92;?&#92;-l&#92;?&#92;: Lexicographers generally
>
>say-l&#92;?&#92;, and most people say -*l&#92;?&#92;*.
>
>*allegro*—&#92;?&#92;l-l&#92;?&#92;-gr&omacr;: Most dictionaries have anglicized
this word, and pronounce it &#92;?&#92;l-l&#92;?&#92;-gro.  Webster,
however, gives both pronunciations.
>
>*almond*—&#92;?&#92;-m&ubreve;nd: The pronunciation &abreve;&#92;?&#92;-&ubreve;nd, though
without dictionary authority, is almost universal.
>
>Do not say &abreve;&#92;?&#92;-m&ubreve;nd.
>
>*and*—&abreve;nd: This word is generally slurred over in rapid
speech, and degenerates into &&#92;ubreve;n.
>
>*any*—&ecaron;n-&&#92;?&#92;: Formerly pronounced &#92;?&#92;-n&#92;?&#92;.
>
>*apron*—&#92;?&#92;-p&ubreve;rn *or* &#92;?&#92;-pr&ubreve;n: Lexicographers generally
prefer the first pronunciation; popular usage favors
the second.
>
>*Arab*—&abreve;&#92;?&#92;-&abreve;b: Worcester gives &#92;?&#92;-r&abreve;b as a secondary
pronunciation.
>
>*asparagus*—&abreve;s-p&abreve;&#92;?&#92;-a-g&ubreve;s: &ldquo;This word was formerly
pronounced *sparrow-grass*; but this pronunciation is
now confined exclusively to uneducated people.&rdquo;—
Webster.
>
>*asphalt*—&abreve;s-f&abreve;l&#92;?&#92; *not* &abreve;&#92;?&#92;-falt: This is an abbreviation of
the word *asphaltum* (&abreve;s-f&abreve;&#92;?&#92;-t&ubreve;m), and retains the accent of the *full* form.
>
>*beneath*—b&emacr;-n&emacr;t&#92;?&#92; (as in *thy*) *or* b&emacr;-n&emacr;th (as in *thigh*):
>
>The first pronunciation is preferred by careful
speakers.

...and so on.

How quaint!, you may say.  Yet, &#92;?&#92;-r&breve;b is surely considered
today, as it was during WWII, a denigrating pronunciation.

To those die-hards, who insist that &ldquo;No one spoke
English the way my father did,&rdquo; we can reply only, &ldquo;You are
*so* right!&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Thomas L. Bernard}

The item in Kay Haugaard's article about her son's
mistaken deduction of the meaning of the word *treasure* [V,2]
reminded me of a conversation with my younger son, when
he was about six.  We were discussing the word *weary*, and it
turned out that he thought the meaning of the word was
&ldquo;short.&rdquo;  This deduction came from his familiarity with the
show *Man of La Mancha*, and the line from the song, &ldquo;to try,
though your arms be too weary, to reach the unreachable
star.&rdquo;

*[Michael I. Sobel, Rockville Centre, New York]*

[We are particularly interested in more examples of this kind—
words whose meanings have been misconstrued from completely
regular contexts that could not be considered ambiguous.

— L.U.]


#### EPISTOLA {Alan J. Glossner}

My family and I enjoyed your word game that appeared
in VERBATIM [V,3].  We offer the following:

>1\.  *mystics*       
>2\.  *accountants*   
>3\.  *actors*        
>4\.  *gardeners*     
>5\.  *tailors*                                    
>6\.  *politicians*                                
>7\.  *professors*    
>8\.  *chefs*         
>9\.  *criminals*     
>10\.  *philosophers*
>11\.  *musicians*
>12\.  *detectives*
>13\.  *sailors*
>14\.  *mountain climbers*
>15\.  *telephone operators*
>16\.  *teachers*
>17\.  *writers*
>18\.  *meditators*

>1\.  *disenhanted*    
>2\.  *divested*       
>3\.  *departed*       
>4\.  *uprooted*       
>5\.  *defrayed*       
>6\.  *disclaimed*     
>7\.  *declassified*   
>8\.  *degreased*      
>9\.  *demeaned*       
>10\.  *distracted*
>11\.  *denoted*
>12\.  *dissolved*
>13\.  *deported*
>14\.  *detached*
>15\.  *disconnected*
>16\.  *degraded*
>17\.  *disspelled*
>18\.  *disturbed*

Thank you for hours of fun.

*[Alan J. Glossner, Fairport, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Eleanor Bell}

...so that you may enjoy mine as I did yours.

>1\.  *fatties*             
>2\.  *people with spring fever*         
>3\.  *milliners*           
>4\.  *poker players*       
>5\.  *sheep*               
>6\.  *baseball players*    
>7\.  *fishermen*           
>8\.  *mattress testers*    
>9\.  *students*            
>10\.  *game show contestants*
>11\.  *official scorers*   
>12\.  *ranchers*           
>13\.  *Ronald McDonald*
>14\.  *nymphomaniacs*
>15\.  *purse snatchers*
>16\.  *ship captains*
>17\.  *auto mechanics*
>18\.  *librarians*
>19\.  *Superman*
>20\.  *gunmen*
>21\.  *priests*
>22\.  *attorneys*
>23\.  *feminists*
>24\.  *private eyes*
>25\.  *members of the Light Brigade*
>26\.  *constipated people*

>1\. *detonated*           
>2\. *dismayed*            
>3\. decapitated*         
>4\. *discarded*           
>5\. *distended*           
>6\. *debased*             
>7\. *debated*             
>8\. *debunked*            
>9\. *degraded*            
>10\.  *displayed*          
>11\.  *demarcated*         
>12\.  *deranged*           
>13\.  *disenfranchised*    
>14\.  *demanded*
>15\.  *dispersed*
>16\.  *deported*
>17\.  *departed*
>18\.  *Dewey decimated*
>19\.  *dismantled*
>20\.  *demolished*
>21\.  *decreed*
>22\.  *distorted*
>23\.  *deliberated*
>24\.  *detailed*
>25\.  *discharged*
>26\.  *deterred*

*[Eleanor Bell, Topeka, Kansas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Thomas L. Bernard}

I thoroughly enjoyed Geoffrey Bocca's article &ldquo;If It Isn't
In Writing....&rdquo;  Over the years I have come across a number
of such examples which have left me either amused or confused
or both.

Two examples to illustrate Mr. Bocca's point are to be
found in a recent copy of *Reader's Digest* [July, 1978] where
one can read:

>Notice in students' cafeteria:
>
>&ldquo;Lunch will be served from
11:30 until the middle of
October.&rdquo;
>
>On a door in an automobile plant:
>
>&ldquo;Emergency exit only—
not to be used under any
circumstances.&rdquo;

A hilarious instance quoted in *Modern-Maturity* [May,
1977] refers to the sign on the University Bulletin Board
which read: &ldquo;Shoes are required to eat in the cafeteria.&rdquo;  Some
wit had penciled in underneath: &ldquo;Socks may eat anywhere
they want to.&rdquo;

Bob Kinney, the humorist, has pointed out [*Parade*,
Sept. 3, 1978] that those banks that finance houses, etc.,
which advertise &ldquo;Auto loans&rdquo; won't loan cars to anyone, and
even deny being in the business of loaning autos.  He also objects
to the fact that &ldquo;No Turns&rdquo; signs are common on turnpikes;
why, he asks, did they bother to call it a turnpike?

In this same vein is the announcement put up on the
prison bulletin board which read &ldquo;Illiterate?  Sign up now for
free help.&rdquo;  I wonder if the sponsors managed to figure out
why there was so little reaction to their well-intentioned effort.
A European friend of mine was arrested once for passing
vehicles and changing lanes while going through a New York
City tunnel; he claimed this was absolutely necessary in order
for him to obey the sign that read &ldquo;Maintain 35 m.p.h.&rdquo;
Other foreign drivers I have known have, in bewilderment,
brought their cars to a halt in front of the &ldquo;Do Not Pass&rdquo;
signs.

A notice that has caught my eye in the past is the arresting
piece of information one finds written in certain hotels to
the effect that &ldquo;Your day ends at noon.&rdquo;  Recently, I came
across the fact that in the wards of a hospital in Florida one
may read the clear admonition that &ldquo;Patients are not to attempt
to get into bed without the attending nurse.&rdquo;  To my
mind, however, the classic case which most impresses (and
astonishes) foreign visitors is the wording on tags of pillows,
cushions, seat covers, etc., which sternly cautions: &ldquo;Under
penalty of law this tag is not to be removed.&rdquo;  Most recently,
I've noticed this wording has been extended to include
&ldquo;...except by the consumer.&rdquo;

*[Thomas L. Bernard, Springfield, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {James J. Kilpatrick}

I was positively enchanted to note in your Winter issue
[V, 3] the comment from Philip Howard that the United
States *are* the linguistic melting-pot of our age.  Hooray for
the third person plural!

Some years ago, as a Southern editor fueled on the juices
of John C. Calhoun, I once sought to establish the plural construction
in the editorial columns of the *Richmond News
Leader*.  I argued with some eloquence that the Constitution
itself makes it clear beyond peradventure that the United
States *are*.  In Article I, Section 9, we find that no title of
nobility shall be granted by the United States, and no person
holding any office of profit or trust &ldquo;under them&rdquo; shall accept
any present, etc.  In Article III, Section 3, we see that treason
against the United States shall consist only in levying war
&ldquo;against them,&rdquo; or in adhering to &ldquo;their&rdquo; enemies.

The plural construction is consistent with the Constitution's
treatment of the houses of Congress.  The House of
Representatives shall choose &ldquo;their&rdquo; Speaker.  In the Senate,
the Vice President shall have no vote &ldquo;unless they be equally
divided.&rdquo;  A census is to be ordered by Congress &ldquo;in such manner
as they shall by law direct.&rdquo;

Our friends abroad have it right.  In Italy, the *Stati Uniti
sono*; in France *les Etats-Unis sont*; in Spain *los Estados
Unidos est&aacute;n*, and in Germany *die Vereinigten Staaten sind*.
It took our own American genius to neuterize the House, the
Senate, and the Congress, and to convert the plural States to a
singular noun.  I doubt that Mr. Howard's felicitous usage
will catch on, but it's nice to see it all the same.

*[James J. Kilpatrick, Woodville, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Sue Hyde}

If I have read his contribution carefully, Andrew E. Norman
[V, 1] has, surprisingly, omitted one of the most colorful
and expressive &ldquo;tosspots&rdquo; of all, viz. *rotgut* 'an adulterated or
unwholesome liquor,' and a phenomenon which your real-world
tosspot is just as likely to encounter as its physiological
and etymological corollary (in colloquial British English at
least): *gutrot* 'bellyache.'  Another item which may interest
Mr. Norman is *cut-glass* used attributively as in &ldquo;cut-glass accent&rdquo;
to mean 'impeccably and imperiously upper-class,
posh, &ldquo;conspicuously RP,&rdquo; ' the underlying idea being that of
the piercing, strident voice with a cutting edge to it.  Dylan
Thomas has a character called Lord Cut-Glass in *Under Milk
Wood*.

A second point while I have your ear (or eye) concerns
Martin H. Slobodkin's letter [IV, 2] and J. Gombinski's reply
thereto [IV, 4].  No German (or German dictionary) of my acquaintance
says *Treppenw&ouml;rter*.  The German term is *Treppenwitz*,
which is probably a loan-translation of the French
term, which, *pace* both contributors, is *l'esprit de l'escalier*,
coined by Diderot in that form.  Both terms refer to the faculty
of 'staircase wit' rather than to concrete instances of its
operation.  The latter are designated in Yiddish by the form
*trepverter* which may be more current in America than its
German parent and hence the source of Mr. Slobodkin's misinformation.
Saul Bellow's Herzog uses the Yiddish word
(and also the French phrase) to describe the status of the notes
he writes while he is *delivering* his adult-education lectures in
a New York night school (see Penguin edition, pp. 9 and 332).

Finally, I wonder if you, or other readers, have any
thoughts or even hard information on the following.  It has
always struck me as self-evident that the English word *syllabub*
(also spelt *sillabub*) 'a drink or dish made of milk or
cream, curdled by the admixture of wine, cider, or other
acid, and often sweetened or flavored' is a corruption (involving
metathesis) of the Italian *zabaglione*, which is after all a
pretty similar concoction.  Both the *OED* and *Webster*,
however, declare the origin of the English word to be unknown.

*[Peter H. Marsden, University of Aachen]*

[In our family, we call 'bellyache' *tummyrot.  —Ed*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Sue Hyde}

In reference to &ldquo;Defile Your Records&rdquo; [V, 3]: An electrician
may be discharged, as well as delighted.  And I discounted
your mathematician at first glance.  Some more are
obvious: the horseman who is derided, the tree surgeon who
debarked, the foundation digger who is debased, the podiatrist
who is defeated.  A poster painter can be designed, a sports
star displayed, an orchestra conductor disconcerted, an archer
deranged, and an air-conditioning repairman deducted.

A girl in pigtails can easily be depleted, a single woman
dismissed.  But how unfortunate when Rover is detailed, or
the breeder's top stud desired.  A late sleeper should be debunked,
that incompetent waiter deserved, and weathermen
predicting heavy winds disgusted.  Also joining the unemployment
ranks are the dissuaded leatherworker, the devoted politician,
and many despised CIA employees.

The local judge caused quite a stir when he defined a
traffic violator, distorted a lawyer, described the court clerk,
and deliberated a free man.  A halted battle leaves soldiers
defrayed.  Ladies in mink can be deferred.  An orphan left on
his own, then adopted, has been defended; a certain Ontario
Indian tribe, losing its identity, is decreed.

The optometrist called on to remove a beam from a patient's
eye was demoted when he failed.  The Olympic diver
upon whom we depended jumped into the shallow end instead;
when he justified the jump later, he was deified (&ldquo;if
I'd&rdquo;).  A rescued item at a garage sale is disjunct.

Anyone now in a bad mood from overexposure to puns
needs to be defunct.

*[Sue Hyde, Jacksonville, Florida]*


#### EPISTOLA {Patrick H. Hodgkin}

I trust I will not be accused of displaying your game if I
point out that ball players can be debased, choral directors
can be disconcerted, leather workers dissuaded, motel operators
dislodged, big time spenders dispersed, nominees disappointed,
evangelists distracted, and politicians devoted—
especially if the voters have been discounted.  Indeed some
people can be dealt with in several ways.  Not only can a lawyer
be debriefed, he can also be distorted; and a hospital patient
can be distended by being discommoded.  A publican
can be disclosed or disbarred, or even dispirited or disjointed.

You might have pointed out, however, that many of the
characters you draw attention to can be reinstated.  It undoubtedly
occurred to many of your readers, for example,
that if a prostitute could be delayed, she could and probably
would just as certainly be relayed; and similarly, of course, a
deposed model could be reposed, and we hope that meanwhile
she had not been denuded.  The delighted electrician
could be revolted, the mourner engraved, and the choral
director whom I mentioned above could be enchanted or required.
If the deflowering of the florist caused him to sell out,
he could be restored.

*[Patrick H. Hodgkin, Culver, Indiana]*


#### EPISTOLA {C.V.S. Roosevelt}

VERBATIM [V, 3] brought back fond memories
of the game we used to play many years ago while waiting for
one's Scrabble opponent to make a move.  Our game had no
name, and all I can offer to supplement your list follows:

>1\.  *sufferers*           
>2\.  *chiropodists*        
>3\.  *actors*              
>4\.  *bridgeplayers*       
>5\.  *cesspool cleaners*   
>6\.  *club men*            
>7\.  *bellringers*         
>8\.  *choir singers*       
>9\.  *Mae West*            
>10\.  *conductor*          
>11\.  *writers*            
>12\.  *baseball players*   
>13\.  *bank presidents*    
>14\.  *school teachers*    
>15\.  *lumberjacks*        
>16\.  *steeplejacks*       
>17\.  *tailors*            
>18\.  *Al Capone*  
>19\.  *ranch hands*  
>20\.  *song writers*  
>21\.  *alcoholics*  
>22\.  *alcoholic parrots*  
>23\.  *lexicographers*  
>24\.  *mailmen*  
>25\.  *Victor Borge*  
>26\.  *hurricane hunters*  
>27\.  *wheelwrights*  
>28\.  *hog callers*  
>29\.  *politicians*  
>30\.  *prospectors*  
>31\.  *psychiatrists*  
>32\.  *Viennese bakers*  
>33\.  *nudists*  
>34\.  *chefs or cowboys*

>1\. *unpiled*             
>2\. *defeated*            
>3\. *displayed*           
>4\. *discarded*           
>5\. *deterred*            
>6\. *dismembered*         
>7\. *extolled*            
>8\. *disenchanted*        
>9\. *disfigured*          
>10\.  *disconcerted*       
>11\.  *described*          
>12\.  *debased*            
>13\.  *discredited*        
>14\.  *outclassed*         
>15\.  *debarked*           
>16\.  *expired*            
>17\.  *unstitched*         
>18\.  *demobilized*  
>19\.  *debunked*  
>20\.  *decomposed*  
>21\.  *unsaturated*  
>22\.  *polyunsaturated*  
>23\.  *dispelled*  
>24\.  *unzipped*  
>25\.  *disdained*  
>26\.  *disgusted*  
>27\.  *unspoken*  
>28\.  *disgruntled*  
>29\.  *devoted*  
>30\.  *exclaimed*  
>31\.  *uncouched*  
>32\.  *distorted*  
>33\.  *recovered*  
>34\.  *deranged*  

Finally you have the secretary who swallowed her
salary.  She was, of course, expatiated.

*[C.V.S. Roosevelt, Washington, D.C.]*


#### EPISTOLA {Andr&eacute; F. Rhoads}

Have been having a ball with your &ldquo;defrocked&rdquo; and
&ldquo;disbarred&rdquo; types and their ilk.  How about these:

>1\.  *feudal barons*     
>2\.  *lab technicians*   
>3\.  *house wreckers*    
>4\.  *vampires*          
>5\.  *wine dealers*      
>6\.  *peeping Toms*      
>7\.  *slave owners*  
>8\.  *pot smokers*  
>9\.  *saxophonists*  
>10\.  *white bears*  
>11\.  *artists' models*  
>12\.  *U.S. Senators*

>1\.  *demoted*             
>2\.  *detested*            
>3\.  *deballed*          
>4\. *deveined*          
>5\. *deported*          
>6\. *defenestrated*     
>7\.  *denigrated*  
>8\.  *disjointed*  
>9\.  *dehorned*  
>10\.  *depolarized*  
>11\.  *denuded*  
>12\.  *decapitalized*

*[Andr&eacute; F. Rhoads, United Dairy Industry Assn. Rosemont, Illinois]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

At the next table in a restaurant at breakfast: &ldquo;May I
have a croissant [kroi s&#92;?&#92;nt]?


#### EPISTOLA {Peter Tauber}

Geoffrey Bocca's [&ldquo;If It Isn't In Writing...&rdquo; [V, 1] probably
could not have flushed more correspondents out of the
closet if he had written an ad in an underground journal saying
&ldquo;Adventurous young woman seeks grammarian interested
in....&rdquo;  Fortunately, though the I-Spy fetish he wrote of also
appeals to a plentiful and letter-writing beast, our obsession
is, while not without its joys, entirely legal.

Indeed, signs of advice from established authority often
present the most delicious delights.  (An insight into this
mechanism comes, obliquely, from essayist and *New Yorker*
editor Roger Angell who wrote, of Richard Nixon's earliest
autobiographical efforts, that there was a vast joy and untapped
comic resource to be found in the wholly literal
mind.)

Surely, many have snickered at the &ldquo;Quiet—School
Zone&rdquo; traffic sign on New York's East 23rd Street, which
creates a space of stern silence for... the New York School
for the Deaf, then felt remorse at so doing; similarly, &ldquo;Slow
Children, at Play&rdquo; always gave a guilty giggle to those so
prone.

My own taste runs to those signs which, with great particularity,
inform one of the various illegalities one must refrain
from committing, many of which even the most conscientious
criminal might have overlooked.  My favorite hangs
over the service window of my Post Office.  Bullet-proof glass
and iron bars speak of a well-merited defensiveness, but this
sign's paranoia is intriguingly specific and suggestive: &ldquo;It is a
Federal Crime to assault a U.S. Postal employee.&rdquo;

Which is to say, to paraphrase an old milk company
slogan, &ldquo;You can lick our stamps but you can't beat our postmen.&rdquo;

*[Peter Tauber, Los Angeles, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Mrs. E.F. von Wettberg}

I believe readers will share my enjoyment of a &ldquo;Thankyou&rdquo;
note I received from a friend, for whom I recently
entered a subscription to VERBATIM: &ldquo;Looking forward to
getting our Words-worth.&rdquo;

*[Mrs. E.F. von Wettberg, Jr., Wilmington, Delaware]*


#### EPISTOLA {Michael C. Shapiro}

Jag Mohan's otherwise interesting article &ldquo;Hindi Filmi
English is Coming&rdquo; [V, 4], contains a glaring error that cannot
be allowed to stand uncorrected.  Mr. Mohan asserts that
&ldquo;...all Indian languages are related to the English language
for they all belong to the Indo-European family of
languages.&rdquo;  This is simply untrue.  The languages of India,
leaving aside a small number of tongues whose genetic origins
are uncertain, are of four basic types: (1) the Indo-Aryan,
languages historically descended from Sanskrit, and including
Hindi, Bengali, Urdu, Gujarati, Punjabi, among
others; (2) the Dravidian, a group of languages widely spoken
in South India and including Tamil, Tleugu, Malayalam,
and Kannada; (3) the Munda, tribal languages spoken in central
and eastern India; and (4) the Tibeto-Burman, a large
group of languages spoken across a vast area of the
Himalayas.  Mr. Mohan's statement is thus true only of the
Indo-Aryan languages, most certainly not of all Indian
languages.

*[Michael C. Shapiro, University of Washington]*

[Similarly from L.J. McCaulley, *Gainesville, Florida*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Gordon Williams}

To follow up on Mr. Edward's article &ldquo;Again and Ageyn
and Agane&rdquo; [V, 3], I suppose that someone besides me has
noticed that Isaac Watts, in writing hymn numbered 542 in
the 1940 Episcopal hymn book, must have been influenced by
some good ol' boy from Southern Georgia to have rhymed
*head* with *made*.

*[Gordon Williams, Washington, D.C.]*


#### EPISTOLA {George P. Brockway}

In re Richard Toeman's contribution [V, 3], which I
first heard in the 1920s, along with &ldquo;A B, C D Goldfish?&rdquo;  In
Yugoslavia there is a breakfast dish called *emendeks*.  You
can't order &ldquo;em&rdquo; or &ldquo;eks&rdquo; separately, at least by those names,
but *emendeks* is just what you'd expect it to be.

And in re Laurence Urdang's contribution [ibid.], my
favorite French song is &ldquo;O&ugrave;, O ou, est mon petit chien all&eacute;?&rdquo;

Which reminds me of a joke I made up in my first day in
French class: What does a Frenchman say on being hit in the
stomach with an egg?  I'll let you supply the answer.

*[George P. Brockway, W.W. Norton &amp; Company]*


#### EPISTOLA {Julio Fern&aacute;ndez Paredes}

This is my contribution to &ldquo;Menu Barbarisms.&rdquo;

A restaurant in Tegucigalpa, the capital city of Honduras,
serves *tiboom steck* 'T-bone steak' and *pis Melba*
'peach Melba.'

Please let me say how much I enjoy each issue of VERBATIM.
*[Julio Fern&aacute;ndez Paredes, San Pedro Sula, Honduras]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Good money makes the French doll affectionate.  (5, 6)  
11\. Close as the race for food and drink.  (3, 3, 4)  
12\. Nothing but cold.  (4)  
14\. The saucy rub the wrong way and cause disorder.  (7)  
15\. From lyric to epic.  (6)  
18\. Buy right.  The choice is yours.  (6)  
10\. Uganda not in line with East or West?  Maybe!  (9, 6)  
20\. A whirling dervish?  (7)   
24\. Jog the wrong way.  (4)  
25\. Gone bald and in the pits about it?  (10)  
27\. Bring gruel in to the deprived.  (15)  
28\. Nature pulls, by permutation, toward perfection.  (2, 4, 5)

**Down**

2\. Once plump, for instance, not now.  (7)  
3\. Hear a foreign country takes an unfriendly stand.  (10)  
4\. Building toward the last tale of *The Decameron*?  (3, 5)  
5\. It's futile to figure on something in code.  (2, 4)  
6\. Feel a new spirit being spread around.  (4)  
7\. Fun city?  It's enough to make you laugh!  (5)  
8\. Take it off, in a cheap joint down the street.  (6)  
9\. Singing loud and clear when getting the bill.  (7)  
13\. Good score over all when Christmas comes around?  A diversion without equal.  (2, 8)  
16\. Outline of a shady travel agent deal.  (7)  
17\. Lays devious plans in covens.  (8)  
19\. Read it as a spate of invective.  (6)  
21\. Big role for a nice guy.  (7)  
22\. The horse Leo's backing around Roosevelt Raceway.  (6)  
23\. A poem of electrifying power?  (5)  
26\. Delivered without charge.  (4)  

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 Answers

**Across**

1\. Le-gal tender  
10\. UNALIGNED NATION (anagram of UGANDA NOT IN LINE)  
11\. Nip and tuck  
12\. Zero  
14\. PERT-urb  
15\. P-o-E-t-IC  
18\. Option  
20\. Rotator  
24\. TORT  
25\. Down-fallen  
27\. UNDERPRIVILEGED (anagram of GRUEL IN to the DEPRIVED)  
28\. NE PLUS ULTRA (anagram of NATURE PULLS)  

**Down**

2\. Ex-ample  
3\. Alien(n)ation  
4\. Ten-story  
5\. NO DICE  
6\. fe-EL A N-ew spirit  
7\. Fun-N.Y.  
8\. DIVE-st  
9\. In-voice  
13\. NO-par-all-EL  
16\. Con-tour  
17\. CON-ni-VES  
29\. TI-rade  
21\. O-b-L-ig-ER  
22\. So-RR-eL  
23\. An-ode  
26\. Free  

### READERS' QUERIES

>*Readers are invited to respond directly to those who have sent
in questions*.

I collect housestaff slang.  This includes words or phrases
used by hospital staff (usually medical and surgical house
officers) to describe types of patients, drugs, diseases, events,
etc.  I'd appreciate receiving lists or individual items, and I'd
like to know of any articles on the subject.  [Matthew Schneiderman,
M.D./3445 Colville Place/Encino, CA 91436.]

For an article on solecisms, gaffes, spoonerisms,
&ldquo;perles,&rdquo; peculiar excuses, mistakes in translation and spelling,
and other inadvertent puns by students of French at all
levels (with a brief description of circumstances if possible),
as well as tongue twisters, humorous rhymes and sayings,
word games, puzzles, and &ldquo;contrepeteries&rdquo; for more advanced
students of French, I would welcome contributions.
Acknowledgment will, of course, be made.  [Prof. Lillian
Bulwa/Northeastern University/360 Huntington Avenue/
Boston, M A 02115]

Does any reader know the origin of TIMEHRI, the
name of the semiannual publication of the Royal Agricultural
&amp; Commercial Society of British Guiana?  Reply to: Stowell
Rounds, 4849 North Via Entrada, Tucson, Arizona 85718.

In some parts of the U.S., an informal sale of personal
property is called a *yard sale*, in other parts, a *garage sale* or a
*tag sale*.  We would be grateful to readers who send us [VERBATIM,
Box 668, Essex, CT 06426] any other names they have
encountered in English, giving the area where the terms have
been heard.

(We are not considering *rummage sale* or *jumble sale* if those
are descriptive of fund raising activities for churches or other
organizations by sales of donated merchandise.)



[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v6n1_Summer_1979)