--- 
title: "VOL VI, No 2 [Autumn 1979]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## &ldquo;Inward Seethings&rdquo;: On Euphemism
*Jeff Miller, Toronto, Canada*

&ldquo;Indeed,&rdquo; Hamlet tells his mother of Polonius, whom
he has just stabbed to death, &ldquo;this counsellor/Is now
most still, most secret and most grave,/Who was in life a foolish
prating knave.&rdquo;  It is the suggestive, sometimes prurient,
power of euphemism that lends itself so serviceably to the
poet on one hand, and to the busybody, huckster, or sniggerer
on the other.  Where in one instance euphemism can be more
evocative than plain speaking, in another it is made mercenary,
*provocative*, the stock-in-trade of &ldquo;diplomacy.&rdquo;  And as
with cake, too much of having it either way, of saying what
you mean by not saying it, can be inimical:

>KING:   Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?  
>HAM.:   At supper.  
>KING:   At supper!  Where?  
>HAM.:   Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at him....

Many of us feel ridiculous to equivocate about ourselves
as a fact of nature, about our bodies and their functions, afflictions,
and stirrings, yet this is where most euphemistic
energy is expended.  When euphemism seems most absurd—
over-delicate, or naive, or mincing—we sometimes overcompensate
or become glib: Polonius is personified literally as
The Diet of Worms; and—to follow the trend generically—
according to an ad transcribed by Coleridge in his notebooks,
a variety of nineteenth-century &ldquo;patent&rdquo; worm medicine (useless
to poor Polonius, even if it had been available to him) relieves
the son of &ldquo;The Lord Chief Baron [of] a Load, which
cannot without impropriety be described, but which appeared
the Nest of these pernicious animals.&rdquo;  As euphemism,
these clearly outdo themselves to the opposite extreme (&ldquo;dysphemism,&rdquo;
as also in &ldquo;greasy spoon&rdquo; or &ldquo;cancer stick&rdquo;).  It's a
pity, anyway, the Lord Chief Baron's son doesn't give his personal
endorsement in the ad, if only in the interests of nobler
metaphor.

Queasiness in a similar vein, speaking at least of propriety
and metaphor, finds its way even into Biblical scholarship,
where euphemism is often at its most artful.  In Marvin Pope's
exhaustive scholarly study of *The Song of Songs*, the Bride's
vivid description of her passion for the Bridegroom as &ldquo;my
bowels were moved for him&rdquo;—striking in its proprietous King
James context (5:4)—is rendered &ldquo;my inwards seethed for
him.&rdquo;  Lest a reader think Mr. Pope, himself, squeamish by
comparison, he explains that the Hebrew word for &ldquo;seethe,&rdquo;
*hmy*,

>denotes commotion and stir, with particular
reference to noises, growling of dogs or bears, murmur
of doves, groans of distress, murmuring in
prayer, the sounds of lyre or flute, the roar of the
sea, the noise of the city streets, the boisterous
behavior of an inebriated man or woman.  As applied
to the insides, the guts, or bowels, as the seat of the
emotions, biblical expression is literally very near to
the current locution &ldquo;to get or have one's bowels in a
uproar.&rdquo;

By contrast, more euphemistic versions than either Mr.
Pope's or the King James pale, to put it mildly.  The *American
Translation* (1931), *Revised Standard Version* (1946, 1952),
*New American Bible* (1970), and *Jewish Publication Society
Version* (1969) all take a stab at &ldquo;boweldlerizing&rdquo; the offending
organ into a heart that yearns, thrills, trembles, and stirs,
respectively.  This kind of redaction often provokes the snigger
it deserves but is meant to discourage—as in the *Othello*
edited by the perhaps aptly named Mr. Gentleman, a contemporary
of Coleridge's and Dr. Bowdler's who italicized
rather than excised the &ldquo;obscenities,&rdquo; thereby allowing
scholars to study but ladies (presumably ones with blood of
the steeliest blue) to skip them:

>IAGO: Zounds, sir, y'are robbed!  For shame, put on your gown!  
>
>Your heart is burst; you have lost half your soul.  
>
>*Even now, now, very now, an old black ram*  
>*Is tupping your white ewe*.  Arise, arise!

But in these readings at least the metaphorical sense is not
obliterated for the careful reader.[^a1]
And as Mr. Pope reminds us, even though the King James uses the same &ldquo;earthy
language&rdquo; for Isaiah's fear of God's anger (&ldquo;Wherefor my
bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward
parts for Kir-haresh&rdquo;) and even to suggest the depth of God's
love as it does here to suggest the Bride's (&ldquo;Is Ephraim My
dear son?...  I cherish his memory still.  Therefore My guts
stir for him; I will surely pity him&rdquo;), this &ldquo;would not now be considered felicitous, although the Rev. Dr. Sibs in 1648, for
his sermons on chas. 4-6 of the Canticle, took his title from
this passage: *Bowels Opened*.&rdquo;

For what literal-minded context in which &ldquo;bowels&rdquo; or
&ldquo;guts&rdquo; *would* be &ldquo;felicitous&rdquo; today, we need only turn to Plate
VI in Pope's book, where we find a facsimile of the title page
of Reverend Dr. Sibs's sermon (&ldquo;BOWELS OPENED, or, A

Discovery of the Neere and Deere Love, Union, and Communion
betwixt Christ and the Church, and consequently
betwixt Him and every beleeving soule&rdquo;), from a copy in the
&ldquo;Medical Library of Yale University classified as 'historical,'
apparently on the assumption that the concern is relief of constipation.&rdquo;

The language of much modern advertising is, of course,
a more self-conscious extension of the kind Coleridge recorded
in his notebooks.  Government and skepticism (&ldquo;the chastity of
the intellect,&rdquo; says Santayana) bred of more widely available
education and information simply require that advertisers
be more euphemistically inventive: Marian, the tactfully
perspicacious and no-nonsense librarian, removes her glasses
and assures us that &ldquo;Lots of folks need help now and
then&rdquo;—even you and me, Elmo.  But this approaches nudging
and winking again.  Euphemism in advertising, like its
creators, has for its survival evolved on a subtler level—into
the euphemism of implication.  Drinking a certain beer or
soda associates us with a whole panoply of gods and goddesses—all
manner of he-men, good-lookers, and nymphs whose
only unhappiness is a temporary dearth of the advertiser's
product.  Certain cars associate us with these people, too, but
also imply a more encompassing happiness and success.  The
trend is most fully and subtly expressed in ads for a particular
scotch which profile &ldquo;successful&rdquo; middle and upper-middle
class people who profess to drink the brand—the implication
being the old medicine-show one, however prettied up,
that the scotch can somehow figure in one's good fortune.  A
recent installment features an award-winning &ldquo;energetic and
extraordinarily capable&rdquo; psychologist whose &ldquo;enviable combination
of enthusiasm and intellectual ability makes him a
classic 'accomplisher,' &rdquo; presumably not only in his profession
(where evidently he makes Freud look like a peanut farmer),
but at his hobbies of &ldquo;photography, poetry, jogging,&rdquo; too.
How explain, then, the observation here attributed to this
world-beater that &ldquo;The integration of all sciences should
facilitate the potential that one day man will 'know thyself' &rdquo;?
How trust an 86.8 proof elixir that does nothing for even
award-winning psychologists' thydentity crises?

Another even subtler form of euphemism has become
pervasive in modern American literature, as in modern life:
euphemism by attitude.  I suppose this is in part what Northrop
Frye means by &ldquo;the ironic mode&rdquo; of thought, and William
Empson by &ldquo;ambiguity of feeling&rdquo;; it has something to
do, at least, with the *eiron* or &ldquo;self-deprecating&rdquo; (Frye's word)
figure as hero, and, as well, an inclination to treat seriously of
things all the while harboring a vague fear or ambivalence
that such treatment will prove facile or dull-visioned when
made public.  I notice this ambivalence quite often (perhaps
because I read them quite often) in John Updike, Peter De
Vries, and Nabokov.  These authors, in writing of matters
that are evidently quite close to their hearts, often equivocate
through clowning or—in Nabokov's case, at least—willful
obscurity.  (Perhaps Pynchon is an even better example of this
latter tendency.)  Mr. Updike's most recent novel, for instance,
a wonderful piece of writing called *The Coup*, puts
forward very passionate arguments against the kind of materialism
that suppresses anything transcendental and fundamentally
passionate about life; but the &ldquo;hero&rdquo; who pens these
arguments is, if not a buffoon, at least a &ldquo;material fool&rdquo;
whose sensitivity is at every turn mocked.  The overall sense
given in this type of literature is that of reticence, a crying
lack of any commonly held certainty or belief (compare, for
example, to irony in Dickens), an increased and painful
awareness of contingency in a world about which &ldquo;advanced
thought&rdquo; continues to imply we can never make flat, definitive
statements.

Or, as De Vries puts it: &ldquo;Anyone informed that the universe
is expanding and contracting in pulsations of eighty billion
years has a right to ask, 'What's in it for me?' &rdquo;  That De
Vries is an extreme case—pushes irony almost to slapstick—
perhaps explains why he isn't accorded &ldquo;major author&rdquo; status.
This is the paradox of this kind of euphemism: if you push it
too far, people will take you at your word, at your inclination
not to be thought serious.  But often, in the most hilarious contexts,
you can almost hear De Vries pounding his writing
table.  There is in *Mrs. Wallop*, for example, a spoof on &ldquo;intellectual
gatherings&rdquo; (at which among the topics of discussion is
a &ldquo;novel of the more-multilevel-than-thou school&rdquo;) where
springs up an almost passionate obloquy against television in
favor of literature—certainly something much on the mind of
one, De Vries himself, who gets his living by the latter.  Television,
we are told,

>cannot make us *see* Jeeves entering the drawing
room, 'a procession of one.'  It cannot make us see the
woman in *Dorian Gray* whose dresses always looked
as though they had been designed in a rage and put
on in a tempest...or the woman in Henry James
who appeared to have developed her character as she
had her figure, by riding cross-country....  Never,
never can television make us see the character in
Ring Lardner who served 'what he thought was good
scotch, though he may have been deceived by some
flavor lurking in his beard.'...

and so on for over a page.  In *The Mackerel Plaza*, a wild
comic flailing at, among other moden sophistries, &ldquo;liberalized&rdquo;
religion, there is another passage that stands out as almost
a cry and attacks a type of equivocation approaching
that of De Vries's own literary style.  &ldquo; 'Let us not congratulate
ourselves,' &rdquo; the Reverend Andrew Mackerel admonishes his
parishoners, who are scandalized by his rumored sexual behavior
(&ldquo;The instant I entered the church I saw how far my
reputation had fallen.  The place was jammed.&rdquo;),

>on the reasonable mind that sees both sides of every
question.  Civilized flexibility is a fine thing, and in a
sense the aim of education, but there is a point here,
as everywhere, where the law of diminishing returns
sets in.  Tepid liberalism that never lashes out at
anything, intellects too stocked with information to
draw conclusions, educations scrimped and saved for,
that one may dawdle in the green bowers of non-commitment—these
lack something possessed by the
honest bigot.  That there is a time to throw stones is a
principle I try to follow in my daily life, occasionally
to my peril.

More and more, we all seem to feel this sense of peril in
contingency, in &ldquo;knowing too much but not enough,&rdquo; in taking
a stand amid the continual progression-but-progression-to-what?
of the world, and our literature reflects it.  Where
there is comedy in Mackerel's self-righteous use of a sermon in
defense of his purported behavior, there is also the quite serious
problem that he can't reconcile his Christian calling with
his mixed love and outrage for the sensual world.  His &ldquo;peril&rdquo;
in this instance, he subsequently explains to the congregation,
touching his vividly blackened eye, has been that while out
&ldquo; 'strolling the streets of Chickenfoot' &rdquo; (in profound sexual
frustration)

>I saw one of those open-air revivalists who always
rub me the wrong way (and)...stopped to give
him a piece of my mind.  A not altogether sober bystander
intervened, a fist fight followed, and then a
policeman appeared who carted us both off to the
local clink.  You may imagine that your overheated
Saul of Tarsus cooled off pretty fast at this point.

Then, lest we take all this anti-liberalism too seriously, pin
De Vries down to something resolute—even in a context that
seems to beg for it—we are set up for the kill:

>In fact, it was worse than that.  I felt a perfect ass.

And then,

>Here Mackerel paused and gazed down at the floor
below the pulpit, as though his thinking had stalled.
Somewhere some mechanism seemed to have
jammed.  He smiled abstractedly and added: &ldquo;Like
the Englishman who reached down the lady's back
for her pearls.&rdquo;

***

[^a1]: At least there are no theological canards, in this regard, like the one
about Dr. Bowdler's own editorial difficulties over *Othello*.  The story
goes that he was so completely at a loss to render the play &ldquo;unmixed
with anything that could raise a blush on the cheek of modesty,&rdquo; he
was driven to pure inspiration.  When he came upon &ldquo;Desdemona
plays the strumpet in bed&rdquo; (where he is supposed to have found this
line, I don't know), he simply dropped the &ldquo;s&rdquo; from the offending
word, disposing of sexual allusion not only for the moment, but
establishing an entirely new, less embarrassing, but equally stirring
motivation for the play's entire action.

## Is Is Is
*Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University*

I recall being taught, as a child, never to say *The reason
is because*...but rather *The reason is that*...; and it always
grates on my nerves to hear, as we all often do, the traditionally
incorrect construction.  Recently, however, I have become
aware of a widespread anomaly in even the correct usage,
and one that grates no less.  I refer to the expression *The
reason is, is that*..., with a gratuitous repetition of the verb,
always with an emphasis on the first *is* and a slight pause before
the second.  It is no regional or cultural idiosyncracy.  I
hear it everywhere—radio, television, daily conversation, sophisticated
academic discourse—and in the mouths of
speakers from every stratum of the linguistic community.  Apparently
this seemingly meaningless little stammer has ingrained
itself into our speech patterns.  I am even aware of
several variations: *The thing is, is that..., The problem is, is
that*..., etc.  But clearly it cannot be explained away as a
mere inadvertence.  I even heard it used recently on a radio
talk show in a past tense, where its bizarre illogicality struck
me with full force: *the reason was, is that*....  Happily, I
have yet to see it in print.

My only immediate explanation for this curious aberration
is (,is) that the speaker has, buried in the recesses of his
mind, the grammatically correct pattern &ldquo;What the reason is,
is that...,&rdquo; and that even with the elimination of the *what*
the rest of the pattern remains.

## Preposition Pollution
*Barbara R. DuBois, Los Alamos, New Mexico*

Foreigners trying to learn English often have more trouble
with our prepositions than with any other feature.  But I
see and hear so many awkward uses of prepositions lately that
I think we all have more trouble with them than with any
other feature—and more trouble than we used to.  All kinds of
new anomalies appear: sometimes merely the idiomatically
awkward preposition is used, such as &ldquo;comply to&rdquo;; sometimes
a preposition is used where none is needed, as in &ldquo;This program
affords for employee self-improvement&rdquo;; and sometimes
a preposition is used with a word when an entirely different
word without preposition would be better: &ldquo;Manufacturers
consider styling paramount to safety&rdquo; should end with &ldquo;paramount&rdquo;
or should change to &ldquo;consider styling more important
than safety.&rdquo;  Some writers don't appreciate the power of a
preposition: *allow for* does not mean 'allow.'  If we *allow* an
applicant's tardiness, we are more permissive than when we
*allow for* tardiness, meaning that we take it into account,
probably resentfully.

Misunderstood clich&eacute;s are responsible for much preposition
awkwardness.  &ldquo;We must not dwell over the past&rdquo; is
almost as funny as &ldquo;We took them into tow.&rdquo;  I heard a politician
say that he wanted to be able to &ldquo;look at people in the
eye.&rdquo;  My favorite example is from an administrator who
wrote, &ldquo;By in large, students should be able to live with the
new policy.&rdquo;

The shortest prepositions cause the most trouble.  Here
are some examples collected from television, newspapers,
textbooks, and business letters using *for* awkwardly: &ldquo;All
generals are advocates for military aid.&rdquo;  &ldquo;We will forward
the manual upon receipt for your check.&rdquo;  &ldquo;What is your concern
for the project?&rdquo; means 'What is your worry about the
project?'  when the writer more likely means 'What is your
concern with the project?' that is, 'What do you have to do
with it?'  &ldquo;Friends sympathize for you in your troubles&rdquo; needs
*with; for* goes with *sympathy.  Affinity* does not use *for* but
*with*, since *affinity* means 'kinship' not *affection* or *inclination*.
&ldquo;Such a threat is an invitation for rejection&rdquo; needs *to*.
&ldquo;They agree in principle for creating a new program&rdquo; needs
*on* or an infinitive.  &ldquo;Cutting the police budget will leave the
citizens open for more crime&rdquo; needs *to*.  &ldquo;Pretend that you are
an employee for the company,&rdquo; says a textbook writing assignment;
*of* is idiomatic.

Another short preposition used awkwardly is *of*: &ldquo;We
must alert citizens of the danger.&rdquo;  We may *warn* them *of* the
danger, but we *alert* them *to* it.  &ldquo;We have set a limit of new
proposals&rdquo; needs *on* or *to*.  &ldquo;We are not as grateful of our
health as we should be&rdquo; needs *for*, although *appreciative*
takes *of*.  &ldquo;They charged them of negligence&rdquo; needs *with*,
although *accused* uses *of*.  &ldquo;Sincere interest is needed of the
student&rdquo; needs *from*, although *required* takes *of*.  &ldquo;He cannot
disguise his antipathy of the military junta in that country&rdquo;
needs *toward*, although *dislike* or *hatred* takes *of*.  I suspect
that the writer or speaker has both words in mind and carelessly
combines one word with the preposition belonging to
the other.

A third short but troublesome preposition is *to*: &ldquo;The
students demonstrated in protest to the decision&rdquo;; *against* is
idiomatic and even logical.  &ldquo;The constituents held a banquet
in honor to the senator&rdquo;; *in homage* takes *to*, but *in honor*
needs *of*.  &ldquo;Pessimism is popular to many people today&rdquo; needs
*with* as does &ldquo;*More* is not necessarily synonymous to *better*.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Their remarks gave evidence to their intelligence&rdquo; needs *of*.
&ldquo;The weather may delay your arrival to your destination&rdquo;
needs *at*.  A startling discovery is an awkward *to* that is not a
preposition but an infinitive marker where a preposition is
needed: &ldquo;They insist to go along&rdquo; should be &ldquo;They insist on
going along,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The annual clinic is aimed to aid horticulturists&rdquo;
should use &ldquo;aimed at helping.&rdquo;

Some words give difficulty because they use different
prepositions for different meanings.  *Immune*, for example, is
a troublemaker since it has become popular in figurative use.
It takes *to* when we discuss disease, and so we can talk about
&ldquo;immunity to jet lag.&rdquo;  But when we discuss taxes or fines, we
use *from*: &ldquo;Kings and queens are immune from taxation&rdquo; and
&ldquo;diplomats are immune from prosecution.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Non-Indians Immune
to Tribal Court&rdquo; makes the headline say that the court
is like a disease.

Many words cause trouble because they use different
prepositions in different constructions.  &ldquo;They made a mistake
in [or by] turning right&rdquo; changes if the article changes: &ldquo;They
made the mistake of turning right.&rdquo;  We may have *a craving
for affection*, but we do not *crave for affection*: we omit the
preposition when we change part of speech.  &ldquo;The decision to
split the family temporarily was a matter for professional survival
and challenge,&rdquo; said a professor of English.  It could be a
matter for discussion, but it's a matter *of* professional survival.

*Purpose* gives much trouble: &ldquo;What is your purpose for
communicating?&rdquo;  asks one textbook preface.  *For* goes with
*reason*, but *in* goes with *purpose: reason for communicating*
and *purpose in communicating*.  In another construction, *purpose*
uses *of*: &ldquo;What is the purpose of the communication?&rdquo;

*Opposite* is one of the most bothersome preposition
users.  We may omit a preposition altogether in &ldquo;Your view is
opposite mine&rdquo; or we may use *to*, but if we add *the*, we must
change to &ldquo;Your view is the opposite of mine.&rdquo;  If we have
more complication, we may use *from*: &ldquo;Your room is in the
opposite wing of the building from mine.&rdquo;  People who try the
unidiomatic *than* might rearrange as follows: &ldquo;Our rooms are
in opposite wings of the building.&rdquo;

The most troublesome word of all, because it's so popular,
is *fascination.  Fascinated* doesn't cause much trouble, because
*with* or *by* works, but some writers do choose *in*, which
belongs rather with *interested*: we are *fascinated by antiques*
or *interested in them*.  But *fascination* leads to catastrophe.  I
keep hearing and reading that people have a *fascination for
antiques*, meaning that 'antiques are crazy about people.'

If you share my pique, fight preposition pollution.  Don't
let people express a *predilection with*; don't let them *look
upon you for advice*; don't let them have an *attitude over the
project* or *unpack the contents on this package*.  Complain
when the sports reporter asks the famous athlete whether he
*is a target by the police*.  Above all, don't let *rising costs stand
in your way from achieving your goal*, even if life does *reek
with politics* and even if the earth does become *barren from
vegetation*.

### Notes Found in Bottles 
*Deborah Wing*

*Location of find*: The North Atlantic  
*Inscription*: &ldquo;Take the cash and let the credit go....

—Samuel Insull&rdquo;

## Theological Bafflegab or How to Unsay It
*Rev. Walter Niebrzydowski, Cathedral Preparatory Seminary, New York City*

&ldquo;Multiphasic Jabs Against Bafflegab&rdquo;[^b1]:
is the title of an article recently carried by *The N.Y. Times*.  Its author, Fred
M. Hechinger, documents the &ldquo;fog of obfuscation&rdquo; caused by
the &ldquo;Jargonization of America.&rdquo;  He cites examples of current
gobbledygook as used in the professions of medicine, social
sciences, and linguistics.  Since he failed, however, to include
theology in his list, permit me to add this supplement to his
catalogue.

As an overture to my &ldquo;Verbal Cacophony in B-flat Major,&rdquo;
here is a brief history of sophisticated crutch words of recent
vintage.  (A crutch, by the way, is a word that is frequently
misspelled, often mispronounced, and invariably
misused because it is usually misunderstood.) &ldquo;Quintessential&rdquo;
was able to dislodge &ldquo;archetype&rdquo; as King of the Crutch.
Although &ldquo;Quintessential&rdquo; is still being used (and, therefore,
abused), it has become quite &ldquo;relevant&rdquo; to discern &ldquo;paradigm&rdquo;
on the &ldquo;horizon.&rdquo;  Since it is the mark of intelligent discourse
to define the area under discussion, &ldquo;paradigm&rdquo;
entered into illicit union with &ldquo;perimeter&rdquo; to produce &ldquo;parameter.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Parameter&rdquo; has soared to the top of the charts as the
currently-reigning hit on the &ldquo;Crutch Parade.&rdquo;

Crutch words are solitary chimneys belching smoke into
the semantic sky.  &ldquo;Jargon,&rdquo; however, refers to whole sentences
and paragraphs which marshal even simple words into
its relentless enterprise of polluting the verbal atmosphere.
The &ldquo;quintessential paradigm&rdquo; of jargon in the field of theology
has recently appeared in America's most illustrious theological
journal.  From the title alone the reader is warned
about the impending onslaught gathering on the horizon.

The article is called &ldquo;Christian Apophatic and Kataphatic
Mysticisms.&rdquo;[^b2]
To be fair, I admit that *apophatic* and
*kataphatic* are not crutch words, but legitimate members of a
specific terminology that any science needs as tools of the
trade.  Nor do I have any quibble with using foreign phrases
which are also *bona fide* members of scientific terminology.
So, I am not too disturbed by this sample: The *Exercises* tacitly
presuppose, therefore, the metaphysical dynamics of the
act of faith, wherein the *fides quae* is tasted and reveals its
meaning because of the *fides qua* in whose light it is seen.&rdquo;[^b3]
This sentence from the article, however, is a mere *hors
d'oeuvre* compared to the pi&egrave;ce de r&eacute;sistance, which immediately
follows:

>Just as a person examining a psychological illustration
of Figure/Ground perceives a changing Figure/
Ground before his eyes, during the consolation without
previous cause the specific Christian mystery becomes
Ground or horizon through transparency, and
what was previously Ground or horizon (supernaturally-elevated
and Christ-anointed transcendence) becomes
Figure by directly dominating consciousness in
a quasi-intuitional felt-knowledge in which the exercitant
becomes pure openness and receptivity to his
homeward-tending love.

I challenge any philological Rube Goldberg to diagram
that sentence!  I am sure that the author's meaning would
have been clearer in German, although that language doesn't
even bother to use such humble device as slashes, hyphens,
and spaces to produce verbal juggernauts. 

The article I have quoted deals partially with the classic
*The Cloud of Unknowing*.  The author has succeeded in showing
how the smokescreen of jargon can wrap the &ldquo;Cloud of
Unknowing&rdquo; with a &ldquo;fog of unsaying.&rdquo;

I have engaged in the text-producing generation (writing)
of this article, so that you, the text-processing analyst
(reader), may protect yourself against the multiphasic bafflegab
of cirumlocutory obfuscation.

***

[^b1]: N.Y. Times*, December 26, 1978, p. C5.

[^b2]: *Theological Studies*, December, 1978.

[^b3]: *Ibid*., p. 421.

[^b4]: The Bonn Government's efforts to compile a *Grunddeutsch*, or Basic
German, have been reported in the *N.Y. Times*, Sept. 29, 1978.

## How Do You DARE?

*The Dictionary of American Regional English (DARE),
a continuous project of the American Dialect Society for
many years, is devoted to the documentation of words and expressions
used in American English.  Although the project has
employed (and continues to employ) many field workers,
there are occasional gaps in the evidence collected for attested
usage and occurrence of the thousands of lexical and grammatical
citations.  VERBATIM readers can help by answering
the queries we plan to publish from time to time.  You can also
help by sending contributions of financial support*.

*All correspondence regarding DARE should be sent
directly to:*

>*Professor Frederick G. Cassidy*
>
>*Director—Editor D.A.R.E.*
>
>*6125 Helen C. White Hall*
>
>*University of Wisconsin*
>
>*Madison, WI 53706*

*Please mention VERBATIM when you write.  Any information
you can contribute will be acknowledged in DARE*.

In providing the requested information, please document (1)
*where* the word was or is in use, (2) *when*, (3) by *what kind* of
persons, (4) in *what* circumstances, and (5) the *meaning*.

From farm publications in the upper Midwest we find
that the long-established *silage* (winter feed stored in a silo)
has produced analogical progeny: *haylage, oatlage, cornlage*.
No doubt there are others we have not harvested.  Are these
actually farmers' words, or something invented by the farm
journalists, the silo salesmen, or somebody else?  Also, they're
expectable in the dairy belt.  Are they used anywhere else?

What words do you have for a very hot day?  One of our
favorites hails from central-western Tennessee: it's a *corntwister*.
And if this kind of weather continues for quite a
spell, *corn-twister* may mean a drought.  Also, from southeastern
Wisconsin, &ldquo;*It's a day for a carp roast*.&rdquo;  (No similes,
please—they are innumerable.)

Some things from the past ought, on their merits, to continue
in use—for example (from 1912) to *corple out* a piece of
pie, which means to take it out clumsily, breaking and messing
it up in the process.  Is this still in use, or remembered anywhere?
It strikes us as the kind of word in which the sound
suits the action perfectly.

In the high old times when Bourbon County, Ky., was
being surveyed (around 1800) the surveyors took conveniently
placed trees as &ldquo;corners&rdquo; from which to make their measurements.
The greatest favorite was the &ldquo;sugar tree&rdquo; (maple),
next to that buckeye, then hickory, various kinds of ash,
honey locust, oak, hackberry, walnut, and so on.  *Bettywood*
is recorded thirteen times between 1798 and 1817, but in no
case is an alternative name or other identification given.  This
has been one of our most teasing problems.  Our botanical
consultants are baffled.  Is any reader interested in the history
of surveying—or the history of botany, for that matter?  Or
Bourbon County, Kentucky?  Who is Bettywood; what is she?

A formula for politely refusing more food at dinner, in
these casual days no longer practiced, was reported as used by
elderly people in northern Alabama, southern Wisconsin,
and New Brunswick, Canada.  The hostess asks, &ldquo;Will you
have some more&mdash;?'  And the guest replies, &ldquo;No thank you,
my sufficiency is fully serancified.  Any more would be s&uacute;perfl&uacute;ous.&rdquo;
Other spellings are *cironchified, surronchified*, and
*suffoncified*, which does not make it any easier to work out
the etymology!  There is some evidence pointing to Britain—
perhaps specifically to Scotland—but I have found nothing in
dictionaries to attach it to.  Also, the Alabama correspondent
insists that it was quite serious in actual use, even though it
may have been humorized in the memory of younger people.

We want evidence on staying at a party or other meeting
*till the last dog is hung*.  That means till the very end, of
course, but why hang the dogs?  We have a theory but won't
tip our hand at this time.  Any reader with something like
hard evidence, please offer it.

From the second half of the nineteenth century come
two meanings of *dollar store*: one, a store where relatively inexpensive
goods are sold, and two, some kind of illegal business—gambling,
prostitution—what?  We'd like very much to
track this one down.  The area of use is not clear.

We have chiefly from the Southeast, and chiefly from
Blacks, the phrase &ldquo;there's a *dead cat on the line*,&rdquo; meaning
exactly the same as Marcellus's &ldquo;Something is rotten in the
state of Denmark.&rdquo;  But our metaphor is not clear.  Are we to
visualize a cat, a catfish, or something else?  And on what kind
of line?  The possibilities are numerous.  Evidence from the
past, if obtainable, may solve this.

Children have a way of grasping another's arm with
both hands, then twisting in opposite directions.  It hurts!
This is known in southern California as giving an *Indian
burn*; in eastern Wisconsin and Utah it's a *snake bite*.  Where
else are these terms used, and what others are there for this
form of torture?

The night before Halloween is *mischief night* when teenagers
(mostly) go about performing acts of mild vandalism.  It
is also called *cabbage night* (CT, NJ, NY, WI), *gate night*
(OH, PA), *goosie night* (neNJ), *tick-tack night* (wcNJ), and
less often (also in NJ as mapped by R. F. Foster) *mystery
night* and *picket night*.  Is this &ldquo;celebration&rdquo; kept up elsewhere,
and if so, under what name?  A census from readers of
VERBATIM could make an interesting nationwide map.  Explanation
of the names would also be welcome.

*A letter from home*, we find, is something, often something
edible, sent to a person who has moved away.  For example,
a Chicago Black receives a watermelon and exclaims,
&ldquo;That's a letter from home!&rdquo;  What other objects or situations
elicit this phrase?

One of our sources says that *burr clover (Medicago hispida)*
is also called in the Southwest *jackass clover*.  We have
our doubts; *jackass clover* is normally applied to *Wislizenia
refracta*, quite a different plant.  But people do confuse or
transfer plant names.  What's the evidence on this one?


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Devereux}

I was most interested in Sterling Eisiminger's &ldquo;Colorful
Language&rdquo; [VI, 1], for the simple reason that he cited several
examples from Turkish.  It is seldom indeed that I come across
any English-language writer who cites linguistic examples
taken from Turkish, which seems to be largely an unknown
language except in certain academic circles.  I think that a few
comments on his Turkish examples are not inappropriate and
might be of some interest to VERBATIM readers.

His first example is *kizilbas*, which he defines as 'red
woman.'  That could conceivably be a valid definition, albeit
a rather forced one.  *Kizilbas* (lit: 'red head') is a term
originally used for a member of a certain Shiite dervish sect or
a member of a specific military class in the army of Shah
Ismail (d. 1524) of Persia.  In both cases, the term was purely
descriptive and derived from the red turbans worn by the
people concerned.  Because of the dissolute habits of the
*Kizilbaslar*, the term eventually became applicable to any
person of loose moral habits, male or female.  Thus, by no
stretch of the imagination can the use of *kizil* in *kizilbas* be
construed to mean that *kizil* has any inherent meaning of
amorousness in Turkish, as Eisiminger asserts.  This is not to
say that *kizil* does not have non-color connotations.  To cite
only two examples: *kizil deli* (lit: *red madman*), meaning
'raving maniac,' and *kizil kiyamet* (lit: 'red uproar'), meaning
'fearful uproar' or 'terrible tumult.'

Eisiminger's second example is *saricizmeli*, which he
defines as 'yellow.'  Actually it means 'yellow-booted' or
'someone wearing yellow boots.'  The word is encountered,
almost without excepton, in the phrase *saricizmeli Mehmed
A&gcirc;a* (lit: 'yellow-booted Mehmed Agha').  [*Mehmed Agha*
used to be the Turkish equivalent of the British *Tommy
Atkins* and the American *G.I. Joe*.]  In Turkish it is used as a
term of derision applied to an utterly unknown character or,
as Eisiminger puts it, a 'nobody.'

Eisiminger's third example is *ye&scedil;illenmek*, which he
defines as 'to be green.'  Actually it means 'to become green';
'to be green' is *ye&scedil;il olmak*.  He correctly gives its extended
meaning as 'to be sexually aroused.'

Eisiminger comments in his article that in most languages
*white* generally has positive connotations and *black*
negative ones.  This is true also in Turkish.  For example, *y&uuml;z
aki* (lit: 'white of face') and *y&uuml;z karasi* (lit: 'black of face')
mean, respectively, 'honor' and 'dishonor.'  The terms can
also be used adjectively: *aky&uuml;zl&uuml; 'honorable'* and *karay&uuml;zl&uuml;*
'dishonorable,' 'disgraceful.'  The use of *kara* 'black' in Turkish
idioms to convey a negative connotation is especially common,
for example: *kara haber* 'black news' meaning news of
disaster or death; *kara ki&scedil;* (lit: 'black winter'), meaning severe
winter or depth of winter; *kara yazi* (lit: 'black writing'),
meaning evil fate or ill luck.  Some Turkish verbs also reflect
this usage, for example, *aklatmak* (lit: 'to make white') and
*aklanmak* 'to be whitened' are used to mean, respectively, 'to
acquit' or 'rehabilitate' and 'to be acquitted.'  As another example:
*akla karayi se&ccedil;mek* (lit: 'to separate the white from
the black') is used to mean 'to distinguish between good and
evil' or 'to distinguish between the easy and the difficult.'

To return to Eisiminger's article, I would like to make
one final comment.  He writes: &ldquo;To be *essere al verde* 'in the
green' in Italian is 'to be in the (English) red,' that is, in
debt.&rdquo;  I must dispute that definition and, on the basis of eight
years' residence in Italy, assert that the phrase actually means
&ldquo;to be broke, to be penniless or to be at the end of one's
resources.&rdquo;  *The Cambridge Italian Dictionary* (Cambridge,
1962), p. 856, supports me in that contention.

*[Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {P.K. Saha}

Sterling Eisiminger's &ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo; [VI, 1] contains
fascinating information, but the translations/interpretations
of the Bengali phrases cited are not accurate enough.  As
a native speaker of Bengali, I would suggest changes as indicated
below:

1.  *Sharshe phul dekha* means (literally) 'to see mustard
flowers.'  Mustard flowers are, of course, yellow; so Mr.
Eisiminger's 'to see yellow' is not misleading.  However, his
interpretation (that the idiom means &ldquo;to lapse into unconsciousness&rdquo;)
is questionable.  *Sharshe phul dekha* is the equivalent
of English *to see stars*.  One may &ldquo;see stars&rdquo; upon being
stunned by a blow without necessarily lapsing into unconsciousness.

2.  *rage nil* is definitely not 'scared blue.'  *Rag* means
*anger* in Bengali, not fear.  The -*e* is a suffix that is roughly the
equivalent of the English preposition &ldquo;in&rdquo; (or &ldquo;with&rdquo;).  So
&ldquo;enraged blue&rdquo; or &ldquo;blue with anger&rdquo; would be the appropriate
translation.

3.  *rage lal* is not 'yellow and red' as claimed by Mr.
Eisiminger.  Since *lal* means *red* in Bengali, the logic of (2) indicates
that the phrase should be translated as &ldquo;enraged red&rdquo;
or &ldquo;red with anger.&rdquo;  Curiously enough, in this second use of
*rage* Mr. Eisiminger does note that *rag* means *anger*.  In the
earlier example he took it to mean *fear*.  The other important
point is that since there is no reference to the color yellow in
this phrase (and red is the only color involved), one cannot
use *rage lal* as an example of compound colors.  The paragraph
in which Mr. Eisiminger uses this phrase happens to be
devoted to compound colors and so this example simply does
not belong with the examples of compound colors.

*[P.K. Saha, Case Western Reserve University Cleveland, Ohio]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alison Finch}

I believe the runic *futharc* contained a letter having the
sound 'th' which lingered in medieval manuscript for some
centuries after the otherwise total conquest by the Mediterranean
alphabet.  This very useful letter was similar in appearance
to the *y* of the alphabet, and it remains with us in
England to this day in the legend &ldquo;Ye Olde Englisshe Tea
Shoppe.&rdquo;

Tea drinking was, of course, only introduced into this
country in 1645, by the crafty Dutch, who probably already
had a premonition of the loss of New Amsterdam and hoped
to cause us a spot of bother, eventually, at Boston.

By the way, I notice that Sir John Suckling (1609-42)
spells *again* 'agen' but rhymes it with 'in.'  How awkward can
you get!  However, this pronunciation seems to remain in such
expressions as &ldquo;agin (meaning 'against') the Government&rdquo;—
which is what a great many of us seem to be at the moment.

*[Alison Finch, Woodford Green, Essex]*

## Namesakes
*Elaine von Bruns, Cambridge, Massachusetts*

Namesakes pay tribute to their inventors and muses by
carrying on their names.  In this game, some of the subjects
have assumed the names of people to whom they have no
relation.  Can you tell the true namesakes from the pretenders?

Examples:

>

SUBJECT                     PARENT               TRUE     FALSE

A) *sachertorte* Frau Sacher            x       —

This delectable offspring of a Viennese innkeeper was raised to pleasure the nobility.

B) *cruller*     Lady Hildegard Crulle &mdash;    x

Cruller's playing the court lady; she gets a rise out of being frosted and powdered.

| SUBJECT           | PARENT                                               | TRUE    | FALSE   |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | ------- | ------- |
| *graham* cracker  | Sylvester Graham                                     | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *saxophone*       | Antoine J. (also known as Adolph) Sax                | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *trombone*        | Gerda Trumba                                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *davenport*       | M.G. Davenport                                       | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *hammock*         | Hammock R. Schlemmer                                 | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *hansom*          | Joseph A. Hansom                                     | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *victoria*        | Queen Victoria                                       | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *schooner*        | Captain Nathaniel P. Schoon                          | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *watt*            | James Watt                                           | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *macadam*         | John L. MacAdam                                      | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *macadamia nut*   | John Macadam                                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *filbert*         | Saint Philibert                                      | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *bacon*           | Francis Bacon, Viscount St. Albans                   | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *silhouette*      | Etienne de Silhouette                                | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *daguerreo-type*  | M. Daguerre                                          | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *duplex*          | Marie Duplessis, &ldquo;Lady of the Camellias&rdquo; | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *Listerine*       | Baron Joseph Lister of Lyme Regis                    | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *belladonna*      | A Beauteous Lady                                     | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *boycott*         | Captain Charles C. Boycott                           | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *cardigan*        | James Thomas Brudennell                              | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *raglan*          | Fitzroy J.G. Somerset, Baron Raglan                  | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *mackintosh*      | Charles Mackintosh                                   | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *abbey*           | Edward Austin Abbey                                  | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *derby*           | Edward Stanley, 12th Earl of Derby                   | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *derrick*         | Derrick the Hangman                                  | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *guillotine*      | Dr. Joseph Guillotin                                 | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *frankfurter*     | Felix Frankfurter                                    | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *sandwich*        | John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich                   | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *marzipan*        | Giacomo Marzipani Marquess of Fondi                  | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *zeppelin*        | Count Ferdinand Von Zeppelin                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *calliope*        | Goddess Kalliope                                     | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *juke* box        | Barnard K. Juke                                      | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *poinsettia*      | Ambassador Joel Poinsett                             | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *zinnia*          | Johann G. Zinn                                       | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *aster*           | Mary Astor                                           | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *begonia*         | Michel Begon                                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *gardenia*        | Alexander Garden                                     | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *sweet william*   | William Taft                                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *crapper*         | Thomas Crapper                                       | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *martinet*        | Saint Martin                                         | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *marionette*      | The Virgin Mary                                      | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *simonize*        | Baron Von Simolin                                    | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *jelly* roll      | Jelly Roll Morton                                    | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *pumper-nickel*   | Nicholas Pumper or Nicholas the Blockhead            | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *anadama (bread)* | Anna's damning husband                               | &mdash; | &mdash; |
| *spackle*         | Count Spacula                                        | &mdash; | &mdash; |

</quote>

*Scoring*: Perfect score = 100.  Deduct 2 points for each incorrect
answer.  Answers will be found on pp. 857-60.

*Namesakes*

Answers to the quiz on pp. 855-56.

>

1.  *graham cracker*: Sylvester Graham        —             True  
    Reverend Sylvester Graham was an ascetic who advocated a diet devoid of sweets; his cracker namesake rebels by supporting jam sessions.
2.  *saxophone*: Antoine J. (also known as         —        True  
    Adolph) Sax
    *Saxophone* was born when Antoine J. decided to blow his own horn.
3.  *trombone*: Gerda Trumba                     —          False  
    *Trombone* plays himself down by taking the name of a
    nobody.
4.  *davenport*: M.G. Davenport                 —           True  
    *Davenport's* creator built him up just to let us down.
5.  *hammock*: Hammock R. Schlemmer                 —       False  
    Just because he's a swinger, *hammock* thinks he can pass
    himself off as a child of this trendy New York store.
6.  *hansom*: Joseph A. Hansom                    —         True  
    *Hansom* owes its elegance of carriage to its architectinventor.
7.  *victoria*: Queen Victoria                  —           True  
    The Queen passed many happy hours with Albert in her
    canopied carriage namesake.
8.  *schooner*: Capt. Nathaniel P. Schoon        —          False  
    *Schooner's* name comes from *scoon* or 'skim upon
    water,' but he thinks he sounds racier as the son of a
    skipper.
9.  *watt*: James Watt                —                     True  
    Watt's just one measure of his papa's achievement.
10. *macadam*: John L. MacAdam           —                  True  
    *Macadam* is the son of John who pulverized pebbles into
    roads and paved the way for the world's first easy
    riders.
11. *macadamia nut*: John Macadam           —               True  
    These classy nuts were bred by another John Macadam,
    this one an Australian chemist with good taste.
12. *filbert*: Saint Philibert               —              True  
    *Filbert* is named for Abbot Philibert whose feast day,
    August 22, falls when the nuts do.
13. *bacon*: Francis Bacon, Viscount St. Albans    —        False  
    *Bacon* likes to ham it up as a philosopher's son, but
    there's no relationship between fatty and the lord who
    believed in bare-boned facts.
14. *silhouette:* Etienne de Silhouette       —             True  
    *Silhouette* was named after this finance minister because
    it's as stingy with decoration as the minister was
    with expenditure.
15. *daguerreotype:* M. Daguerre           —                True  
    Another artful namesake, *daguerreotype* was the legitimate
    offspring of this 19th-century Parisian painter,
    but he could have been taken for just about anybody.
16. *duplex:* Marie Duplessis, &ldquo;Lady of the Camellias&rdquo; —  False  
    *Duplex* wants to play Camille, but she's more accommodating
    to Dicks and Harrys than to poets and princes.
18. *Listerine:* Baron Joseph Lister of Lyme Regis   —      True  
    *Listerine's* the brainchild of a surgeon, but despite his antiseptic
    upbringing, people seldom brag of having him in
    their homes.
19. *belladonna:* A Beauteous Lady             —            True  
    The poisonous *belladonna* is named for an anonymous
    Italian beauty—perhaps the lethal Lucretia?
20. *boycott:* Captain Charles C. Boycott        —          True  
    *Boycott* is named for the landlord who was the first vic-
    tim of this strategy begun by the Irish Land League.
21. *Cardigan:* James Thomas Brudenell,        —            True  
    7th Earl of Cardigan
    *Cardigan* provided both a cover and an easy out when his
    Dad commanded in the Light Brigade.
22. *raglan:* Fitzroy J. H. Somerset, Baron Raglan    —     True  
    The Baron, another Light Brigader, gave his name to the
    *raglans* which protected his arms.
23. *mackintosh:* Charles Mackintosh            —           True  
    It took a Scotsman to keep the English as dry as their gin.
24. *abbey:* Edward Austin Abbey              —             False  
    *Abbey*, whose life is cloistered, wishes he were a part of
    the bohemian life, such as led by this expatriot American
    artist.
25. *derby:* Edward Stanley, 12th Earl of Derby      —      True  
    *Derby* considers it no handicap to be a thoroughbred race
    founded by sporty Earl Stanley.
26. *derrick:* Derrick the Hangman          —               True  
    *Derrick* kept his Dad's name but took up a more constructive
    line of work.
27. *guillotine:* Dr. Joseph Guillotin           —          True  
    Less uplifting is *guillotine*, which followed the profession
    of his patron by becoming a specialist in amputation.
28. *frankfurter:* Felix Frankfurter           —            False  
    A dogged attempt to raise his station by claiming relation
    to a supreme court judge.
29. *sandwich:* John Montagu, 4th Earl          —           True  
    of Sandwich
    The Earl invented *sandwiches* so he could eat without
    leaving the whist table and so he could continue to con-
    centrate on his hand instead of on his knife and fork.
30. *marzipan:* Giacomo Marzipani,             —            False  
    Marquess of Fondi
    *Marzipan's* really not so far off when he calls himself noble;
    his name originally meant &ldquo;sitting king.&rdquo;
31. *zeppelin:* Count Ferdinand Von Zeppelin      —         True  
    *Zeppelin* may have bombed out, but he still floats on air
    when he remembers his patrician papa.
32. *calliope:* Goddess Kalliope                —           True  
    *Calliope* lets out all stops in praise of her mother, the
    Muse of Eloquence.
33. *juke box:* Bernard K. Juke              —              False  
    *Juke box's* name means 'horrible noises'; how outrageous
    of him to pretend to human parentage!
34. *poinsettia:* Ambassador Joel Poinsett      —           True  
    This Carmen of shrubs so charmed the U.S. Ambassador
    to Mexico that he bestowed his name upon her.
35. *zinnia:* Johann G. Zinn                —               True  
    *Zinnia*, which blooms in many beds, is the flowerchild of
    botanist Zinn.
36. *aster:* Mary Astor                    —                False  
    *Aster's* got a Mayflower pedigree but would rather be
    known as the daughter of a star.
37. *begonia:* Michel Begon                —                True  
    &ldquo;Be gone!&rdquo; cried *Begonia*, when crossed, but once in
    bloom she was glad to acknowledge her creator, a French
    botanist and governor of Santo Domingo.
38. *gardenia:* Alexander Garden               —            True  
    *Gardenia's* a snob; she's sure her father founded flowerland.
39. *sweet william:* William Taft           —               False  
    Sweet William would rather be in the limelight as a president's
    son than stuck away in some provincial garden.
40. *crapper:* Thomas Crapper             —                 True  
    A humble fellow, *crapper's* glad his Dad raised him to
    seat humanity.
41. *martinet:* Saint Martin           —                    False  
    Sure he'd rather call himself after a saint; his father,
    General Martinet, one of Louis XIV's drillmasters, was a
    dastardly disciplinarian.
42. *marionette:* The Virgin Mary          —                True  
    *Marionette* pulled strings to begin her career in the role of
    a diminutive Madonna.
43. *simonize:* Baron Von Simolin          —                True  
    *Simonize* waxes lyric about his baronial pater.
44. *jelly roll:* Jelly Roll Morton             —           False  
    This curvy sweety wants a jazzy daddy.
45. *pumpernickel:* Nicholas Pumper or         —            True  
    Nicholas the Blockhead
    People called Baker Pumper a dolt till his namesake
    made it big on the deli circuit.
46. *anadama* (bread): Anna's damning husband      —        True  
    &ldquo;Anna!  Damn her!&rdquo;  swore her husband, when he found
    the bread box bare; his improvisation, however, deserves
    our blessing.
47. *spackle:* Count Spacula                —               False  
    *Spackle* fills holes while Dracula drills them; no wonder
    he pretends to be counted as highly.


#### EPISTOLA {Robert W. Wilkerson}

E. J. Moncada, in &ldquo;Traduttore Traditore&rdquo; [V,4], shows
the first intelligent definitions of medical terms that I have
ever seen, but he also shows a certain lack of knowledge of
poker.

*Phoresis* he defines as 'not as good as a full house.'
*Phoresis* is better than a full house though not as good as a
straight flush.

*[Robert W. Wilkerson, Chester, Connecticut]*

[Similarly from G. J. Grieshaber, *Cincinnati, Ohio*, and
Gerardo Joffe, *San Francisco, California*.]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard*

It must be a sign of the times.  We seem to have stopped
believing in Utopia and to need a word for its exact opposite.
At any rate, in British political discourse there has recently
been discovered a Disunited Nations of Dystopias and Cacotopias,
meaning places or systems of government where
everything is for the worst in the worst of all possible worlds:
Nasty Nowheres, in fact, or possibly Democratic Kampucheas.
Beware of governments that feel it necessary to describe themselves
formally as democratic in their titles: they protest too
much.  Perhaps on this side of the diluted oil-pond we are becoming
more pessimistic or even more realistic.  An example
of the new use is: &ldquo;The modern classics—Aldous Huxley's
*Brave New World* and George Orwell's *Nineteen Eighty
Four*—are Dystopias.  They describe not a world we should
like to live in, but one we must be sure to avoid.&rdquo;  A Dystopia
or Cacotopia is applied to visions of hell on earth like 1984
and Anthony Burgess's Tucland.

These new vogue terms of rhetoric are politically interesting
because of the need we evidently feel for such words in
the tool-box of British English.  They are linguistically interesting
because of their charmingly eccentric derivation.
Dystopia and Cacotopia are evidently children of *Utopia*, derived
from the misapprehension that Sir Thomas More's
imaginary island republic was Eu-topia (Everything-in-the-garden-is-lovely-place)
rather than Ou-topia (No-place, that
is Nowhere or Never Never Land).  Until now etymologists
have judged that it was the latter.  For one thing Ou-topia is
impeccably derived from its Greek parent.  Eu-topia is a barbarism,
because it uses the adverb *eu* 'well' to qualify a noun,
*topos* 'place.'  The correct Greek for such a place would be
*Agathotopia* or *Kalotopia*.  In the same way the correct Greek
for its opposite is *Cacotopia*, not *Dystopia*, since *dys-* is an inseparable
prefix meaning the opposite of *eu*, and chiefly used
adverbially.  *Dys-* is like our *un-* or *mis-*, and always has the
notion of 'hard, bad, or unlucky,' destroying the good sense of
a word and increasing the bad.  If an Ancient Greek wanted
to qualify the noun *topos* he would have used the adjectival
(*Cacotopia*) rather than the adverbial prefix (*Dystopia*).

However, we English-speakers have never felt bound to
follow the semantic or grammatical rules of the languages
from which we borrow.  We breed barbarous Centaur words
such as *quadraphonics* from Latin sires out of Greek dams—
and perfectly good words they are.  The &ldquo;correct&rdquo; alternatives—*tessaraphonics*
or *quadrivocals*—are unattractive.  We
rear hybrids, such as the ragingly fashionable *dysfunction*,
which is mere pretentious varium lectum for *malfunction*.
And we abuse Greek adverbs to qualify nouns, as in
*euphoria*; though I suspect that this may be correctly derived
from the older English word *euphory*, in which *eu* is properly
used to qualify a verb.

In fact both *Dystopia* and *Cacotopia* are quite respectably
elderly arrivals into British English.  Since the nineteenth
century, they have been intermittently used by English
writers for imaginary places or conditions in which everything
is as as bad as possible.  *Dystopia* is rather the more common;
*Cacotopia* is the older.  As you might have guessed, each
seems to have been introduced into the language by a
political philosopher.  Jeremy Bentham wrote as early as
1818: &ldquo;As a match for Utopia (or the imagined seat of the best
government), suppose a Cacotopia (or the imagined seat of
the worst government) discovered and described.&rdquo;  John
Stuart Mill declaimed in a speech to the House of Commons
in 1868: &ldquo;It is, perhaps, too complimentary to call them Utopians,
they ought rather to be called Dystopians, or Cacotopians.
What is commonly called Utopian is something too
good to be practicable; but what they appear to favour is too
bad to be practicable.&rdquo;

The interestingly faecal variant *Cacatopia* for *Cacotopia*
appeared in almost the last issue of *The Times*.  (May Lord
Thomson's vanished organ reappear soon—civilized life is unviable,
as we trendies say these days, without it).  *Cacatopia*
with three *a'*s has no connexion with the Greek *kakos*.  Its
derivation is obviously from the French *caca* (whose meaning
can be found in any decent French dictionary) and the Greek
*topos*.  Broadly and loosely this macaronic (or is it mock
ironic?) hybrid means 'a place that is in a ghastly mess, or
Shitland.'  At times during the past year hardened and shameless
pessimists have been driven to thinking of modern Britain
as *Cacatopia* made real.

German sages seem especially inclined to think of Utopia
as a *Eu* rather than an *Ou* place.  A memorial notice to the
late Ernst Bloch in *The* late *Times* pointed out that according
to Bloch &ldquo;Utopia is not 'nowhere.'  It is that indispensable
tomorrow, the practicable ideal at which we aim.&rdquo;  The German
theologian Jurgen Moltmann has written of the necessity
of devising &ldquo;concrete Utopias,&rdquo; i.e., plans for the reform of
society.

The ambiguity between *Ou* and *Eu* (Nowhere and Lovelywhere)
is actually useful and pretty, rather than a mere
misunderstanding of More's Utopia, where Communism is
the general law, a national system of education is extended to
men and women alike, and the freest toleration of religion is
recognized.  How different, how very different from life
under Henry VIII!

The pun has long been recognized.  An author of 1610
wrote in a dedication to a translation of St. Augustine's *City
of God:* &ldquo;Then of a devised country scarce on earth, now of a
desired City sure in heaven; then of Utopia, now of Eutopia.&rdquo;
It can be argued that Thomas Mre himself gives authority for
the coinages *Dystopia* and *Cacotopia*, since he represents the
island of Utopia as saying: &ldquo;The ancients called me Utopia or
Nowhere because of my isolation.  At present, however, I am
a rival of Plato's Republic, perhaps even a victor over it.  The
reason is that what he has delineated in words I alone have
exhibited in men and resources and laws of surpassing excellence.
Deservedly ought I to be called by the name of
Eutopia or Happy Land.&rdquo;  Welcome aboard the good ship
British English, *Dystopia* and *Cacotopia*.  We need you.


### OBITER DICTA: *Ad Lib*

In the old days, being a good conversationalist was an
asset that ensured frequent invitations to vernissages, soir&eacute;es,
th&eacute;s dansants, lev&eacute;es, and other sophisticated-sounding social
events.  With the departure of yore and the advent of radio,
television, hi-fi, and other canned, frozen, and otherwise
packaged &ldquo;entertainment,&rdquo; it is not difficult to understand
how the art of conversation may have become obsolete.  Notwithstanding,
Madison Avenue has recently embarked on an
approach in television commercials that pretends to simulate
&ldquo;real life&rdquo; by the staging of &ldquo;dramatizations.&rdquo;  The trouble is
that a few years ago, probably in response to some FCC ruling,
certain &ldquo;situations&rdquo; (I don't know what else to call them)
had to be labeled &ldquo;A DRAMATIZATION&rdquo; on the screen.  Perhaps
that requirement was restricted to showing men in white
coats with stethoscopes, pretending to be doctors.

Today, however, the &ldquo;situations&rdquo; are not so labeled, and
every other commercial is structured as a dramatic encounter.
They are patently so inane (I hope) that we are not supposed
to believe them, but I worry about the more gullible
among us.  Typically, &ldquo;conversations&rdquo; are held in supermarkets,
taxicabs, bathrooms, laundries, boudoirs, gym lockers,
and other places that real people frequent or visit now and
then.  Women, sometimes men, and occasionally children are
in the dramatis personae.  The astonishing thing is that Mad
Ave would have us believe that a cross-section of our population
stands about discussing (and often arguing over) detergents,
cat and dog foods, hair colorings, shampoos, deodorants,
paper towels, toilet paper, sanitary napkins, and other
merchandise.  Some oaf is always squeezing the Charmin; an
abrasive mother insists that Aim *does* contain fluoride and
that Billy is brushing longer because he likes the taste; a
rather demure young thing confides in another d.y.t. that
Stay-Free Maxi Pads are what she needs (in front of millions
of viewers—What does her mother think!); families are interviewed
about their laundry and (inevitably) decide that they
prefer it clean; wives offer (usually wrong) opinions about
whether their husbands would express a preference for soft
&ldquo;bathroom tissue&rdquo; (who needs sandpapery toilet paper?) or
for Stove Top Stuffing over potatoes, and so on.

If all that isn't enough, we are told that we ought to
drink Harvey's Bristol Cream Sherry because it's &ldquo;respectable&rdquo;
(&ldquo;It's downright upright&rdquo; say the ads, but you won't be
if you drink too much of it).  &ldquo;Chevy Citation has room for 30
bags of groceries and two adults&rdquo;: any adult who would buy
30 bags of groceries at once must be quite adolescent, very
wealthy, or awfully hungry.  One that is a misnomer is the
Potscrubber dishwasher, since *scrub* means to 'rub hard' with
or against something while washing, and everyone knows
that no such activity is going on inside a dishwasher even if
one can't see inside when the door is closed.  &ldquo;Dash outcleans
all leading liquids&rdquo;: the key word is, of course, *leading*,
leading us to understand that many off-brands, probably
cheaper, outclean Dash.

But my favorite is Omega.  About 30 years ago, *The New
Yorker*, in &ldquo;Talk of the Town,&rdquo; ran a piece by someone who
complained about advertisers' enunciation.  One example I recall
was of Piels beer, in which the writer had great difficulty
understanding the penultimate line.  For him it sounded like,
&ldquo;Nasty bandit that's my name.  /Piel's light beer of Broadway
fame.&rdquo;  Omega (the car, not the watch) is currently using a
slogan that sounds to me like, &ldquo;The small car just threw up.&rdquo;

## Concerning Aspersions
*Russell DaSilva, The Harvard Law School*

In the romance of the English language, the shortest episode
by far will be devoted to *aspersions*.  *Aspersion* is a pitiful
word.  It is of undistinguished melody; it noticeably lacks
grace; and it suffers from a paucity of uses.  *Aspersions*, in
fact, may be the most useless of all verbal weapons.  You cannot
think an *aspersion*.  You cannot make one, inflame one, or
trigger one.  Indeed, there is virtually nothing that one can
ever do with an *aspersion* except *cast* it.

Consider the *doubt*, that noblest of all human faculties.
In addition to being *cast*, a *doubt* may be *had, harbored, cultivated,
voiced*, and eventually even *dispelled*.  The careful
speaker will notice that he can *remove all doubt, let there be
no doubt*, or simply go *without a doubt*.  A *Thomas* can even
append *doubt* to his name.  But the *aspersion* can do nothing
but be *cast*.

The underutilization of the *aspersion* is an unjust and invidious
discrimination, for its brethren exhibit a multiplicity
of virtuous and imaginative uses.  A *grudge*, for example, may
be *borne*, but one never bears an *aspersion*.  An *inference* may
be *drawn*, but an *aspersion* never can be.  Unlike an *innuendo*,
an *aspersion* cannot be *dropped*; unlike an *insult*, an *aspersion*
cannot be *hurled*.  No, an aspersion must be *cast*, or be
nothing at all.

It is every person's prerogative, yea duty, to invent new
uses for this much-neglected species of disaffection.  A few
suggestions follow:

>1.  I have an *aspersion* to big dogs.
>
>2.  Take two *aspersions* and go to bed.
>
>3.  This vacuum-cleaner is broken; it has no *aspersion*.
>
>4.  I enjoy such *aspersions* as swimming and tennis.
>
>5.  Her *aspersion* is to be a clinical psychologist.
>
>6.  In the hall was *aspersion* rug.

## Mantic Mania
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

Since the dawn of recorded history, and probably even
before then, man has been curious about the future and has
explored countless ways to penetrate its mysteries.  Most frequently
he has looked to the heavens and the movement of the
heavenly bodies, thus giving rise to the &ldquo;science&rdquo; of astrology
(as well as to its lesser known sister &ldquo;science,&rdquo; genethlialogy).
Despite its preeminence and antiquity, however, astrology
has never had a monopoly on man's mantic efforts.  Other
paths of inquiry have led to the practice of, for example, *cleromancy,
sciomancy, crystallomancy, alphitomancy*, and
*spodomancy*, to name only a few.

Investigation reveals, in fact, that at one time or another,
man has indulged in a great variety of different types of divination
that involved an equal number of objects, or methods,
or both.  The objects and methods used seem most impractical
to the modern pragmatic and scientific-oriented mind as a
means of forecasting the future.  Yet, each has been used as a
basis for a pythonic system practiced sufficiently in time or
geographic area that some anthropologist, historian, or lexicographer
has felt obliged to confer on it a distinctive name
or, perhaps more accurately, to record the distinctive term
used for such system.

The names of divination systems comprise in English a
relatively large and distinctive group of words ending in
-*mancy*, a combining form meaning 'divination.'  But since
nothing in the English language is ever without exceptions,
two cautionary observations are in order.  First, not all words
ending in -*mancy* are names of divination systems; *aldermancy*
and *psychomancy* are good examples.  Secondly, there are
a number of divination systems whose names end in something
other than -*mancy*.  *Astrology* and *genethlialogy* have
already been mentioned.  Others include, for example, *chirognomy,
chiroscopy, haruspicy* (or *haruspication*), *hieroscopy,
horoscopy, keraunoscopy, omoplatoscopy, orniscopy*
and *palmistry*.

Another aspect of mantic terminology that perhaps merits
mentioning is that it includes a considerable number of synonyms.
For example, *chiromancy, chirognomy, chirosophy*,
and *palmistry* are all words to describe the same mantic
system.  Other sets of synonyms include, in addition to the
aforementioned *haruspicy* and *haruspication: caloptromancy*
and *enoptromancy; spodomancy* and *tephramancy* (or *tephromancy);
alectryomancy* and *alectoromancy; astromancy* and
*sideromancy; crystallomancy* and *gastromancy; hieromancy*
and *hieroscopy; necromancy* and *sciomancy; ornithomancy*
and *orniscopy*; and *scapulimancy* and *omoplatoscopy*.  The
other side of the coin is represented by *gastromancy*, which is
not only a synonym for *crystallomancy* but also the term for
divination by ventriloquism.

Since readers of VERBATIM can reasonably be assumed to
have more than ordinary interest in words, they are invited to
test their knowledge of mantic terminology by matching up
the following list of names of 20 mantic systems with the companion
list of the objects/methods used therefor.  Answers will
be found below.

| NAME OF SYSTEM  | THING ANALYZED/OBSERVED OR MODE OF DIVINATION                                                    |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| *alectryomancy* | livers of sacrificial animals                                                                    |
| *anthropomancy* | arrows drawn at random from a quiver or other holder                                             |
| *axinomancy*    | clouds                                                                                           |
| *belomancy*     | rooster selecting grains of food placed on letters of the alphabet                               |
| *capnomancy*    | dreams                                                                                           |
| *halomancy*     | entrails of sacrificed victims                                                                   |
| *haruspicy*     | feces                                                                                            |
| *hepatoscopy*   | fingernails or claws                                                                             |
| *lecanomancy*   | fire or forms appearing in fire                                                                  |
| *myomancy*      | flight or other characteristics of birds                                                         |
| *nephelomancy*  | human entrails                                                                                   |
| *oneiromancy*   | lines or passages of a book                                                                      |
| *onychomancy*   | movement supposedly toward a guilty person or piece of agate or jet placed upon a heated ax-head |
| *ornithomancy*  | movements of mice                                                                                |
| *pedomancy*     | salt                                                                                             |
| *pyromancy*     | shoulder blades, usually blotched or cracked by fire                                             |
| *scapulimancy*  | smoke, when victims sacrificed by fire                                                           |
| *scatomancy*    | soles of the feet                                                                                |
| *sideromancy*   | straws burning on hot iron                                                                       |
| *stichomancy*   | water in a basin                                                                                 |

1.(4)                  
2.(11)               
3.(13)               
4.(2)                   
5.(17)  
6.(15)  
7.(6)  
8.(1)  
9.(20)  
10.(14)  
11.(3) 
12.(5)  
13.(8)  
14.(10)  
15.(18)  
16.(9)  
17.(16)  
18.(7)  
19.(19)  
20.(12)


#### EPISTOLA {David Gallop}

Noel Perrin [V,2] explains the absence of a verb 'to
greenlight' by saying that verbs created in the twentieth century,
without exception, conjugate regularly, whereas 'light'
still conjugates in its original form: 'Subconsciously we know
that if we make &ldquo;greenlight&rdquo; a verb, we are going to wind up
with a past tense of either greenlighted or greenlit, and both
sound wrong.'

Can this explanation be correct?

(1)  'Light' has alternative past tenses 'lighted' or 'lit.'  So
why should we not form a past tense 'greenlighted' conforming
with the supposed rule for new verbs?  Compare the past
tenses of 'to moonlight,' 'to highlight' and 'to spotlight.'

(2)  It is untrue that all verbs created in the twentieth
century 'without exception' conjugate regularly.  'Baby-sit'
makes 'baby-sat.'  Thirty years ago that would probably have
sounded wrong, but a subconscious aversion to it did not prevent
'baby-sit' from being created.

*[David Gallop, Peterborough, Ontario]*


#### EPISTOLA {Arthur A. Hale}

You refer [V, 4] to Napoleon Hill as having referred to
a non-sizzling steak.  It is entirely possible that he had indeed
made such a reference since a positive thinking contemporary
of his made the phrase famous.  It was &ldquo;Sell the sizzle, not the
steak&rdquo; and the man that originally popularized it was Elmer
Wheeler.  One of Mr. Wheeler's books (published by Prentice-Hall)
is *How to Make Your Sales Sizzle In 17 Days*, and it
may very well have been the one that initially popularized
the phrase.

Thanks for your interesting mental &ldquo;chin-ups&rdquo;—VERBATIM
is certainly a pleasure to receive.

*[Arthur A. Hale, Encyclopaedia Britannica]*

## Juncture: Where It Sat
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

Many linguists have, with or without a surgeon's license,
operated in the past with the term *juncture*; at present such
linguists appear to have a dim future.  Nevertheless, whether
the name of the phenomenon makes any great sense or not, its
existence can hardly be denied.  In English it helps make possible
the distinction between

>*my keys* and *Mikey's*  
>*John and Pete's mother* and *John and Pete smother*  
>*the candlesticks* and *the candle sticks*  
>*trumpet* and *trump it*  
>*Riley* and *wrily*  
>*giant size* and *giant's eyes*

and (the favorite stock-in-trade) *nitrate* and *night rate*.

The actual phonetic nature of juncture can consist of several
minor features.  In *night rate* the first *t* is clearly different
from the first *t* in nitrate, for example.  In *Riley* and *wrily* the
vowel sounds (actually diphthongs) of the first syllables are
different from each other.  There are also concomitant variations
in pitch, in stress, in intonation, and perhaps in tension.
Very old-fashioned linguists spoke of &ldquo;open juncture&rdquo; (*my* +
*keys*) versus &ldquo;close juncture&rdquo; (*Mikey's*).  Professor C. F. Hockett
used &ldquo;sharp transition&rdquo; and &ldquo;muddy transition&rdquo; for open and
close juncture respectively.

The following examples come to mind, most of them actually
having been heard, although one or two are the product
of a wild imagination:

>*Michael row the boat ashore* (he will?)  
>*I'll leave 'n' say goodbye* (I'll even...)  
>*She's now in the low weighties*(low 80's)  
>*He's a relic of the dock cages* (Dark Ages)  
>*The arrival of a rival in the Middle Least*  
>*The cost of futilities is too high these days*  
>*Miss Steak of 1976* (the hypothetical local  
queen of the Butcher's Union answered to that title)

A neighbor of mine went to a performance of *The Omen
of the God*.  Other disjunctured titles that come to mind are:

>*Hawk'll Bury Finn*  
>*Allover Twist*  
>*Venue Come to the Andover Perfect Day*  
>*Back an alien revelry* (Bacchanalian...)  
>*Bar dye* (barred *i*)  
>*Bone ash/Beau Nash/bow gnash*  
>A lot of ice/a lotta vice  
>He enjoyed a sport snooze during the sports news.  
>*Day is Dying in the West*.  (Dey is?)  
>*These speeches/peaches kill me*.  
>My life's tory  
>My life's pan  
>My life's candle  
>Avoid Tudor wise  
>*How are you?  Dantesque!*  (Don't ask!)  
>*Don Q!  (You're welcome—a rum reply*.)  
>*The proposition that tall men are created equal*.  
>*The malicious militias on both sides*.  
>*Boilers re-cored*.  (and Beatles record?)  
>*On Brotherhood Day we welcome a brother hood*.  
>*A broad in America*  
>*Monica Vauley Sir Veighs* (Monarch of all...)  

Herb Oscar Anderson (on radio station WOR, New York
City) is called by his colleagues several times a day, &ldquo;Her Bosker
Anderson.&rdquo;  Finally, one cannot resist imparting an unabashed
transglottal monstrosity overheard in Washington
Square Park: *Ombra your own foo!*—apparently as a reply to
Handel's *Largo: Ombra mai fu*.


### OBITER DICTA: *An Herd or A Nerd?*

It would appear that Americans have lately been afflicted
by a touch of Cockneyitis.  Otherwise, how can we explain
the increasing affectation of *an* before words that begin
with an *h* (or should that be &ldquo;a *h*&rdquo;?).  In recent years, we have
recorded such examples as *an hospital, an hotel, an harmonious
chord*, etc.  However, combinations like **an hotplate*, **an
house*, and **an whore* are noticeably absent.  Could you imagine
&ldquo;An House is Not an Home&rdquo;?

Since the &ldquo;rules&rdquo; of *an* specify that it is used before words
whose pronunciation begins with anything but a consonant
(including *h, l, r, w, y*), the appearance of it preceding *h*
must be chalked up to affectation.  There are some words, like
*herb*, in which the *h* is pronounced in British English but not
in American (where it is almost a mark of illiteracy, as a spelling
pronunciation—a neat contradiction), but they are rare.

Comments from readers are welcome.

## Say, You Have a Point There, I Guess
*Donald R. Morris, The Houston Post*

I've just finished reviewing a novel by an Englishman,
who will remain nameless.  It wasn't a bad novel, except for
the two Americans in it.  You could tell they were Americans,
because they began just about every sentence with &ldquo;Say,&rdquo; or
&ldquo;I guess.&rdquo;

We all know, of course, that there are enormous differences
in vocabulary, spelling, idiom, accent, and grammar
between American and British English, and equally great
regional and class variations within both, but there is a
dearth of material on the misconceptions reasonably intelligent
and literate Englishmen and Americans hold about how
others speak their language.

The number of American writers given to indicating
British origins by having their characters use &ldquo;I say!&rdquo; is far exceeded
by the number of Englishmen who seem to think all
Americans start the majority of their sentences with &ldquo;Say,&rdquo; or
&ldquo;I guess.&rdquo;  This is, at least partially, a simple literary convention,
but it is a device that has been worked to death by
authors from Percival Christopher Wren to Nevil Shute, who
was not noted for his tin ear.

Americans do indeed use these expressions to open
sentences, but they have extraordinarily precise nuances.

As an opener, *Say*, is a mild apology.  It may be used for
opening a conversation with a total stranger, as in &ldquo;Say, have
you got a light?&rdquo;  In this case it is more often than not slurred
and serves almost as a prefix for the following word.  In the
course of a going conversation it apologizes for an abrupt but
necessary change of subject—&ldquo;Say, what time is it, anyway?&rdquo;
It is, in short, a bridging device.  As an intensifier—&ldquo;Say! that
was some game!&rdquo;—it would appear to have lost most of
whatever currency it may once have had, except in English
fiction.

*I guess* has even a more limited use.  It indicates grudging
acquiescence, in effect saying &ldquo;I don't really agree or approve,
but will go along for the moment even though I am
not prepared to give a precise reason.&rdquo;  A child wanting to
visit a neighbor shortly before dinner might be told &ldquo;I guess
it's all right.&rdquo;  A person being talked into or out of something
by a logical chain of steps would answer &ldquo;Right?&rdquo; with &ldquo;I
guess so,&rdquo; indicating both concession of the point but resistance
to the overall argument.  Although it would be understood,
the meaning of &ldquo;I have casually decided&rdquo; for &ldquo;I guess&rdquo;
(&ldquo;I guess I'll have dinner now,&rdquo; &ldquo;I guess I'll be going&rdquo;) never
really had much currency in colloquial American English.  It
was, in fact, a literary convention even in written English, indicating
the speaker was a hick or rube.  In that context it can
be found as &ldquo;I reckon&rdquo; or even &ldquo;I calculate,&rdquo; a form invariably
associated with shrewd Yankee farmers.  It is doubtful
if these variations ever had colloquial currency; they
sound like literary clich&eacute;s.  (There was, in fact, an entire
world of American humor which depended initially on
urban-rural stereotypes, then switched to a stereotype in
which the rural type was actually shrewder than the urban
type, and then finally died out.)

Another overworked English literary device is the use of
*sure* for *certainly*, as in &ldquo;I'd sure like to meet him&rdquo; (or even
more deliberately, &ldquo;I sure would like to meet him&rdquo;).  *Sure* is,
indeed, an American colloquialism (it sure is), but it is not used
to the extent or in exactly the fashion in which it appears in
English fiction.  The *sure would* combination, in fact, rarely
appears even colloquially, but does appear in American fiction
as a regionalism, to indicate &ldquo;Western&rdquo; speech!

American writers, of course, have their own conventions
to indicate nationality, some more valid than others.  German
nationality is signaled by *Ach* for an opener, and &ldquo;th&rdquo;
rendered as &ldquo;d,&rdquo; as in &ldquo;Ach!  Dis is de place!&rdquo;  French origins
are indicated by substituting &ldquo;z&rdquo; for &ldquo;th&rdquo; — &ldquo;Zis is ze place.&rdquo;
This is reasonably accurate, because &ldquo;th&rdquo; does not exist in
either German or French, phonetically, and for some odd
reason Germans do render it &ldquo;d&rdquo; and Frenchmen &ldquo;z&rdquo; when
they encounter it in foreign words.  I say odd, because a
number of words do start with the *th* combination in both
languages, but in all cases both languages pronounce it with a
simple aspirated &ldquo;t&rdquo;: one would consequently expect both to
render *the* or *this* as &ldquo;tuh&rdquo; or &ldquo;tiss.&rdquo;  Some of the more
hilarious passages in philological literature appear in French
and German texts on how to pronounce English *th*.  Most
recommend imagining one has a small bit of thread adhering
to the upper side of the tip of the tongue, and attempting to
blow it off.

American (and English) convention also indicates
Chinese origin by substituting &ldquo;l&rdquo; for &ldquo;r&rdquo; (&ldquo;velly solly&rdquo;) and
Japanese by substituting &ldquo;r&rdquo; for &ldquo;l&rdquo; (&ldquo;Ritter Sir Echo, How do
you do, Haro, Haro, Haro-o&rdquo;).  This was not particularly accurate
to begin with, and has almost disappeared due to recent
revulsion at the notion of unnecessary ethnic indications.
(Heaven help an American writer who either denies the
validity of Black Standard English or dares render it
phonetically in fiction.)  The problem with the Oriental
languages stems from the fact that &ldquo;l&rdquo; and &ldquo;r&rdquo; are both liquids
and more closely related phonetically than English speakers
realize.  Chinese does not really have a proper &ldquo;r,&rdquo; while in
Japanese the two verge on (but do not reach) interchangeability.
Japanese, in fact, have much more difficulty with English
&ldquo;ch&rdquo; in certain positions and with English &ldquo;f,&rdquo; since what
passes for &ldquo;f&rdquo; in Japanese is really an explosively aspirated &ldquo;h!&rdquo;
Japanese will go to extraordinary lengths to avoid having to introduce
people with names like &ldquo;Ralph Cheif&rdquo; to others.

Other conventions are used besides phonetic ones.
American writers will frequently change word order to indicate
a foreigner is speaking, but this usually gets out of hand
unless the writer has good control of the language involved.
Foreigners do make mistakes in idiom and word order,
almost invariably because they are translating verbatim from
their native languages.  A number of French adjectives have
different meanings depending on whether they appear before
or after the nouns they modify; Germans tend to put the verb
last and to make heavy use of verbal phrase modifiers.  (Mark
Twain, in an essay on the German language, tells of a reporter
who called his editor to report a fire and finds the
paper has the story set in type before he gets to the verb; his
example of verbal modifiers is along the lines of an &ldquo;across the
street walking, to me known, fur-coat wearing, to the Burgomeister
married, to her friend talking woman.&rdquo;)

In an otherwise superior novel, *Andersonville*, MacKinlay
Kantor portrays the hapless camp commander Wirz, a
German-speaking Swiss, as using broken English, but neither
the phonetics, the vocabulary nor the word order correspond
to the patterns to be expected, nor is Kantor's use consistent.
This flaw, apparently, only bothered readers with a knowledge
of German.
Further national stereotypes can be found in exclamations.
There is a tendency to assign &ldquo;hunh?&rdquo;, &ldquo;eh?&rdquo;, &ldquo;hein?&rdquo;
and &ldquo;ja?&rdquo;  to Americans, English, French, and Germans
respectively, although all four spellings represent almost
precisely the same phonetic value!

A remarkable example of stereotyping appears in the
motion picture, &ldquo;The Desert Fox,&rdquo; in which James Mason
portrays the German general Erwin Rommel.  At that period
(1951, and a sequel in 1953), it was customary to show German
officers speaking English to each other, with a slight accent,
except that universally recognized phrases would be left
in German, such as the snappy, &ldquo;Jawohl, Herr General!&rdquo;  that
accompanied the heel-clicking salutes.  It was my great good
fortune to see &ldquo;The Desert Fox&rdquo; in Bremen, with a German
soundtrack dubbed in.  The audience accepted the show with
good grace—a few snickers were justified now and again.
The English officers, however, now spoke accented German
until they saluted each other, when I was astonished to discover
that what they said to each other was &ldquo;Yasoup!&rdquo;  (There
was also a John Ford Western with a German soundtrack in
which an Indian enters a parley, raises his hand and in a deep
monotone intones &ldquo;Wie geht's.&rdquo;)

Beyond the thickets of national stereotypes lies the quagmire
of social gradations.  This can be muddy even when a
writer stays within his own culture, and turns into quicksand
when he shifts to another.  The spread of such concepts as
universal equality and classlessness has led to acute discomfort
over the dichotomy between the way things are and the
way we would like to think they are, and writers avoid what
was once a plot staple of coupling extreme wealth and poverty
in a love match.

England, even to this day, has retained somewhat more
rigid class lines, although they no longer depend on wealth.
They are marked by linguistic usage—accent, vocabulary,
and idiom as much as subject matter—and English writers
are more at home in sorting out such nuances.  Nevil Shute,
for example, based perhaps a dozen novels on what Americans
would regard as very slight class distinctions.  His
middle-class women were forever betraying their origins to
upper-middle-class men by describing something as &ldquo;ever so
nice.&rdquo;  Another Shute convention to indicate middle-class
origins was a desire to see a motion picture about which
nothing is known except that it is &ldquo;the new Bette Davis
movie.&rdquo;  Shute, in fact, went so far as to introduce an
American super-star of lower-middle-class origins into a
novel (*No Highway*) which—except for the jarring presence
of the super-star—is a small masterpiece of English class distinctions
being played off against each other.  The novel,
retitled *No. Highway in the Sky*, was turned into an equally
successful film, although Shute's reactions to finding his
absent-minded, ineffably British, protagonist portrayed by
Jimmie Stewart and his American super-star by Marlene
Dietrich can only be imagined.  Shute was nothing if not bold:
he once got away with putting an English protagonist not only
into a small Western American town but right into an American
family, and a number of his better novels were set in
Australia.

Australians suffer horribly from English literary attentions.
There is indeed an Australian accent (which most
Americans can't distinguish from what they think is a
&ldquo;British&rdquo; accent), and it drives the English straight up the
walls.  Australians can usually live with Shute's Australians,
however, if only because he obviously admired them greatly
and they are all sympathetic characters.  He limits his administrations
to a few exclamations— &ldquo;Oh my word&rdquo; for everything
from surprise to sarcasm—and to such slang as *crook,
dinky-die, cobber*, and the like.  He leaves the accent alone,
which is probably just as well.

John Masters, in *Bhowani Junction*, brings off a tour de
force.  He tells a story in the first person as seen by four people
of radically different ethnic, social, and educational back-grounds—one
of them a woman.  Two of the men, an upper-class
Indian and an English Colonel, share a British university
education, and they have a private joke of using *pip-pip!,
I say*, and *stiff upper lip* expressions to each other.  A third
character, an Anglo-Indian, has never seen England and is
not university-educated.  He has, however, been raised in a
culture that desperately wishes to distance itself from the indigenous
Indian culture and slavishly apes what it regards as
authentic English dress, behavior, usages, and speech.  The
*pip-pip!* business is actually his natural mode of speech, and
for the life of him he can't understand why the other two use
it and find it humorous.  Even more impressive is the manner
in which this character is developed; he starts as a pathetic
and decidedly unsympathic figure and is gradually turned into
an admirable and heroic protagonist; the subtle play with the
speech forms plays as great a role in this process as the plot
structure.  But Masters, despite his finely attuned ear and
years of residence in America, makes a spectacular failure in
a later novel trying to portray an excruciatingly unreal slangy
American racketeer.  *Ne sutor supra crepidam*.

One of the best English ears belongs to Nicholas Monsarrat.
*The Cruel Sea* presents a ship's company drawn from all
manner of social backgrounds—there is even a convincing
(although not sympathetic) Australian.  This lot is transferred
to the Brooklyn Navy Yard while their corvette is overhauled,
and Monsarrat bounces his characters off a number of Americans
in a hilarious and flawless series of anecdotes.  These
score not only linguistic usages but national characters and
values as well.

At the other end of the scale must be placed the nameless
scripter who attempted to insert a couple of Americans into
the otherwise superb television series based on *The Forsyte
Saga*.  The exquisite horror of the dialogue was compounded
by the casting director, who assigned the parts to a brace of
unutterably English actors.

America is slowly improving, although only a foreigner
born and bred can tell us how far we have gotten out of the
woods.  The worst of the Hollywood stereotypes are fading,
although the Never-Never Lands of British India and African
jungle live on, thanks to the late show, in millions of minds.

But Americans and English working in English are not
the only offenders, as anyone who has ever seen as Italian
Western can testify.  Some such works, by resolutely ignoring
reality, rise above their origins—as Brecht did in *Die
Dreigroschen Roman*, which (in German) was a novel before
it was an opera.  This is one German's invincibly Teutonic notion
of what lower-class Victorian London was really like,
and those interested in cultural goulash might try tracing
back what the English-version &ldquo;Mack the Knife&rdquo; owes to Victorian
England, to Germany—and to John Gay's world.

There is also Sartre's awesomely bad effort to portray class
and race relationships in a small town in the American South.
This isn't a French version of *Uncle Tom's Cabin*—Sartre was
writing about contemporary America in 1946.  Do not, ever attempt
to explain to a Frenchman that *La Putain Respectueuse*
is anything less than a clinically accurate portrayal of The
Way It Really Is, to this very day.  It can't be done.

Pip pip, ta, or ciao, y'all.

### Notes Found in Bottles
*Deborah Wing*

*Location of find:* The Bermuda Triangle

*Inscription:* &ldquo;Same old story; the word gets
out and they flock!

—Judge Crater&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary Of Business And Management*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Dictionary%20Of%20Business%20And%20Management%20Jerry%20M.%20Rosenberg&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20)
Jerry M. Rosenberg, (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 1978), xii + 564pp.

The easiest challenge to any dictionary is to point out
what has been left out; and it is dubious praise to indicate
what has been put in.  Experienced compilers know the agony
attached to headword selection and to comment on the ins
and outs seems ungentlemanly.  But Professor Rosenberg
states in his preface that this reference book is intended for
&ldquo;the experienced person who demands precise information
...and the newcomer, support member, teacher, or student
who seeks general explanations.&rdquo;  Having so defined his target
his book becomes fair game for measuring the results against
the criteria.

Titled *Dictionary of Business and Management*—I
wonder if it shouldn't have been either *Dictionary for
Business and Management* or *Dictionary of Business and
Management Terms*—it contains words like *experiment* and
*fad*, which have here been defined in understandably general
terms because of their remote business connotations and
should have relinquished their space to terms like *distribution
curve, microfiche*, and *nationalization*: all are missing and
each has greater relevance to business.  The possible retort
that &ldquo;you can't include everything&rdquo; would be reasonable had
the unnecessary been excluded.

There is a great deal of useful information derived from
a wide range of business activities.  No attempt has been made
to provide all-encompassing definitions and quite right, too,
since the content is intended for business reference only.  Professor
Rosenberg has wisely not limited entries to single words
but has included two- and three-word phrases that have
established themselves in commercial language.  He has also
incorporated in the alphabetic body an occasional short encyclopedic
entry for agencies or legislative acts that have interest
for the business community.  For instance, there are
brief statements, descriptive rather than narrowly defining,
on such subjects as the *Advertising Council, Equal Pay Act of
1963, Railroad Retirement Act of 1935, Lloyds*, and *National
Mediation Board*.  But then, inexplicably, there is a chronological
Appendix M at the back of the book of &ldquo;Major Business
and Economic Events in the U.S. 1776-1978,&rdquo; which offers
the same kind of information about entirely different acts and
events, but with no indication of the content unless the reader
scans the entire Appendix to learn what has there been included.
Having already included encyclopedic matter in the
main part of the book, why could not the author have incorporated
this Appendix into the A-Z section?

The various other appendices are for the most part well
selected and useful.  They cover equivalent measures, metric
and English conversions, numerals, simple and compound interest
tables, foreign currencies (mistitled &ldquo;Foreign Exchange&rdquo;),
and schools having Graduate Business Study programs.
Appendix L, a listing of quotations in one way or
another concerned with businessmen, business activities, or
business philosophy, is a bit of a curiosity.  It is arranged
alphabetically according to author with a helpful cross-reference
by subject.  But what is it doing in a dictionary?
While much of it is delicious reading, why would someone
looking for information or definitions regard it as useful?
Moreover, the publishers must have been so distracted by the
charm of these quotations that they failed to notice the running
heads disappearing midway through this section and
then reappearing as &ldquo;Appendix M&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;L.&rdquo;

The type selected for setting the book is unnecessarily
large, resulting in a deplorable waste of space that might
otherwise have allowed for a reduced number of pages (with
a commensurate reduction in consumer cost) or an increase in
content (with greater justification for the price).  At $24.95
the book just doesn't seem to be a good value.  That's a pity,
because the opportunity to provide a truly worthwhile reference
book appears to have been missed by a margin slight
enough to provoke regrets.

The subject, however, merits attention, and for that reason
alone I hope that this dictionary finds enough of a market
to carry it to a second edition.  The publisher might then be
well advised to take steps to eliminate the shortcomings.

Gerald J. Morse

*New York, New York*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Linguistics And Bilingual Dictionaries*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Linguistics%20And%20Bilingual%20Dictionaries%20Ali%20M.%20Al-Kasimi&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Ali M. Al-Kasimi, (E.J. Brill, Leiden, 1977), 131pp

The Bureau of Arabization in Morocco deals with urgent
linguistic problems of a kind that most speakers of English are
unacquainted with.  The introduction of new technologies into
the Arab world raises many questions about terminology.

Simultaneous introduction of a piece of machinery into
Algeria and Egypt, for example, can mean that two quite different
Arabic expressions (one derived from French, the other
from English) can come into use having identical reference.
Indeed, the same English or French original can itself give
rise to more than one Arabic expression, some coined by
direct borrowing of the original English or French expression,
others by translation of its parts, and so on.  If Arabic is to
maintain its role as a major vehicle of international communication,
there is clearly a need for some person or organization
to give a lead in selecting certain expressions for preferred
use throughout the Arab world and rejecting others.  It
is a need for a much more prescriptive attitude to language
than is fashionable among English-speaking lexicographers
and linguists.  This is one of the functions of the Bureau of
Arabization, one of whose leading scholars is Dr. Ali Al-Kasimi.

Dr. Al-Kasimi himself studied with Professor Archibald
A. Hill at the University of Texas.  He has thus been exposed to
one of the classical schools of American linguistics.  The range
of his scholarship and reading on the subject of lexicography
is particularly impressive.  He is well placed to assess the
relevance of linguistics to bilingual dictionaries, which he has
done here in a carefully researched, thoughtful, and readable
work.  His views, as a speaker of Arabic, bring a particularly
interesting perspective to bear on matters which many of us
have previously considered only from the point of view of
European languages.  He makes us aware that English (and
French to an even greater degree) is homogeneous when compared
with a language such as Arabic, with its classical
literary dialect and its wealth of vernacular versions.

The first principle of a lexicographer setting out to compile
a new dictionary must be to consider the *people* for
whom he is writing.  Who is going to use the dictionary and
for what purpose?  All other theoretical considerations are
secondary to this one.  It is a practical principle that is to the
forefront throughout Dr. Al-Kasimi's evaluation of the relevance
of linguistics to bilingual lexicography.  He reminds us,
for example, that a sizable bilingual dictionary should help its
users to weed out improper usage and avoid translationisms.
It is not enough for a dictionary to tell us that English *year* is
French *an* or *ann&eacute;e*; ideally, the dictionary should also indicate
the French contexts in which *an* is more appropriate,
those in which *ann&eacute;e* would be preferred by a French
speaker, and those in which they are interchangeable.

Dealing with problems of giving a guide to pronunciation,
Dr. Al-Kasimi's comment on a formula proposed by one
of his former teachers is a model of reasonableness in considering
the practical implications of academic thinking.  Professor
James Sledd has suggested that dictionaries should offer
&ldquo;one highly abstract underlying form from which all other
dialectal pronunciations can be derived by applying the ordered
phonetic rules of a transformational grammar.&rdquo; &ldquo;If
Sledd's doctrine is possible,&rdquo; says Dr. Al-Kasimi, &ldquo;Then...
the dictionary should cite the pronunciation of *a selected
dialect* from which other dialectal variations can be derived
by applying the phonetic rules....&rdquo; (My italics).  Elsewhere,
he says,&ldquo;A lexicographer should do his best to spare the
learner of the foreign language from any unnecessary difficulty.&rdquo;

I would not like to give the impression that Dr. Al-Kasimi's
book is of use only to lexicographers and intending
lexicographers.  There is a section on typological classification
of dictionaries which will be of considerable interest to
librarians; scholars will find a wealth of useful and interesting
examples of vocabulary, semantic, and grammatical
differences from many languages; above all, Dr. Al-Kasimi's
sound common sense will be of use to language teachers
everywhere in considering the roles that a dictionary can play
in language learning.  I cannot do better than to close by
citing Dr. Al-Kasimi's own closing words:

>In short, the selection of a good dictionary is not
sufficient in itself; the user should have the necessary
lexicographical education which enables him to get the
most out of that dictionary.  And it is the duty of the
language teacher to provide his students with that education.

P.W. Hanks

*Aylesbury, Bucks., England*


#### EPISTOLA {J.D. Sadler}

In the article &ldquo;Verbifying in America&rdquo; [V,2], the statement
was made that &ldquo;no American verb ends in *a*.&rdquo;

One might cite *baa, huzza, henna, halloa, conga, polka,
samba*, and *cha-cha*, all of which are listed as verbs by the
*American Heritage Dictionary*.  There are others.

*[J.D. Sadler, Sherman, Texas]*

## A Hodd Hanthology
*A. Adrian Allen, London SE*

*A Linguistic Curiosity Remembered*

Some of Robert A. Fowkes's &ldquo;Missile any of Shots&rdquo; [V,2,9]
called vividly to mind an extraordinary series perpetrated in
all innocence, without a suspicion of contrivance, by an old
retainer who used to be cook, nurse, etc., on my mother's side
of the family, in which she became (small wonder!) something
of an institution.  This personage out-Malapropped
Sheridan's famous character—of whom she surely cannot
have known—in both quantity and quality; the latter being
enhanced by quirks of pronunciation partly personal and
partly, perhaps, derived from the dialect of Bristol, whence
she came.  (Indeed, some of the items are purely phonetic, but
of such richness that I cannot bring myself to omit them.)
Dignified of bearing, and a shade formidable, she was not
given to jocularity or deliberate witticisms of any sort.

Though some exquisite specimens must have sunk forever
into oblivion, I feel bound to rescue for posterity as fair a
sample of these verbal gems as memory permits.  A large majority
of *Vinnyisms* (as they were known, from her pet-name,
with affectionate amusement) were uttered not once but
often, and in my hearing; however, tradition has it that a few
of the most delectable were indeed *hapax legomena*.  One or
two apocrypha may possibly have crept in, but if so, they are
faithful in spirit and flavour to the originals.

Here they are, then, with no attempt at order or analysis,
in all their exuberance of whimsical but unconscious
creativity.  Where an explanatory word seems called for, it is
added in parentheses.

>*wholly and toley* (totally)    
>*the hargin and the 'orp* (organ, harp)  
>*a good light don't need no*    
>*bushel*                        
>*Great Hexpectorations* (the Dickens novel, not strenuous coughing)  
>*a skillington in the hattic*    
>*in the horms of Murphy* (arms of Morpheus)         
>*them wicked hinsinuendos*  
>*pealin' wid lawfcheer*         
>*Delilah Trimmings* (delirium tremens)  
>*donjuan* (dungeon)             
>*halbany* (ebony)               
>*you cotches the homilybust at*  
>*a halterangement* (of plans, etc.)         
>*the Red Loin*  
>*the Divine Hinflatus*  
>&ldquo;*The camels are coming*...&rdquo; (first line of Scots ballad)  
>*graphophone ricards*  
>*serve his right, I says*  
>*Good King Winslow*  
>*hortichucks* (artichokes)      
>*St. Pancreas*  
>*of hall the London shrubs*     
>*grawsp the nettle by the 'arns*  
>*Sydenham is the most*          
>*pantyshinikin* (pantechnicon)  
>*'orriblest*                    
>*pawls and furl* (of a cat)  
>*them haliblawster harnaments is broke-      
>*the Great High Ham knows best*  
>*gestulating and preposterarting*-    
>*margaged up to the tilt* (of a house)                     
>*Hall my heye and Betty*        
>*go it, you cripples, wooden legs is cheap*  
>*Garter* (apropos of nothing particular)  
>*she swep' out in 'igh gudgeon*-    
>*nor brick nor brack nor one*  
>*haperient* (aperitif)          
>*high hotum* (iota)  
>*you bin a' idin' of your*      
>*more worser than Sodom and *Begorrah*  
>*wine hunder a bush* (on sudden revelation of talent)         
>*strike while the hoin's 'ot*

These (with others unrecorded) one might presume to
constitute the entire corpus; but he would be wrong.  Happily,
history has preserved for us a posthumous example—a
parting shot, as it were, almost from the grave.  For among
the effects of this latter-day Mrs. Malaprop was found a piece
of paper inscribed with the message: &ldquo;No flowers, by my kind
request.&rdquo; *Finis coronat opus*!  Further comment would be
anticlimactic.


#### EPISTOLA {Kirkham P. Ford}

Robert A. Fowkes in his observations on *out* [V, 4] commented
on filling *out* a form.  In England, one fills a form *up*.

In Ohio I used to put *in* a garden but in Tennessee, one
puts *out* his garden.  I remarked to my neighbor that a garden
is planted *in* the ground.  He countered that it is put *out*,
because you don't leave it in the house.

I have noticed also that *out of* is gratuitously added to
*leave* in the Negro vernacular, north and south: &ldquo;I lef' out of
there about two o'clock.&rdquo;

*[Kirkham P. Ford, Paris, Tennessee]*

## Is Latin Briefer Than English
*Frederick C. Dyer, Washington, D.C.*

Years ago I read somewhere the remark that Latin was
not briefer than English if one counted syllables instead of
words.  I'd forgotten that until two of my favorite books *After
Babel* (George Steiner: OUP, 1975, p. 306, 436) and *Samuel
Johnson* (W. Jackson Bates: HBJ, 1977, p. 65, 173) repeated
the assumption that Latin is more concise, more compressed
than English.  I counted the words and syllables in the examples
they presented and found that the English versions
had fewer syllables—by far.

Since then I've done the same for Latin terms, phrases,
and quotations that have crossed my desk and the English has
had the fewer syllables every time.  In church one Sunday I
counted in the Pater Noster 103 Latin syllables, 77 English
syllables, though on the page the Latin looks shorter.

For 40 years I have accepted the conventional wisdom
that Latin was the briefer language.  Now that my doubts are
aroused, I even wonder about German, Hawaiian, or any
other language that piles the syllables into words.  Won't they
win the brevity sweepstakes?

It's true that may translations from Latin take more
words in English; but then, as Steiner and many more have
pointed out, *all* translations take more words because the
reader of the second language doesn't have the background of
the reader of the original language.  To translate from modern
English into the Latin of Cicero's time could take many
extra words and paraphrases for terms like *Watergate* and
*SALT II.*

My purpose here is not to convince but to show a prima
facie case for asking:

(1)  Who first raised the point that one should count the
syllables and not the words?  (My source may have been a
journal of education in the fifties or early sixties.)

(2)  Does anyone have hard evidence or irrefutable logic
—not just opinion—in the matter?

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Speaking Of Chinese*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=SPEAKING%20OF%20CHINESE%201978&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
Chang, Raymond, and Chang, Margaret Scrogin, (W.W. Norton, New York, and George J. McLeod, Toronto, 1978), x + 197pp., 3 appendices, bibliography, no index.

*Translation:* &ldquo;... for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap.&rdquo;—Galatians 6:7

The above is not the beginning of an attempt to prove that
the Chinese wrote the Bible.  A literal translation of the Chinese
would be, &ldquo;Plant melon, gain melon&rdquo;; in (P&imacr;ny&imacr;n) transcription,
it would be zh&omacr;ng gu&amacr; d&eacute; gu&amacr;, a Chinese proverb.
If your familiarity with languages is limited to exposure
to those of the Indo-European family, and your knowledge
of, say, Chinese is about as extensive as your mastery of
Swahili or Kechua, you may be interested in learning more
about Chinese from a book I have been reading with great interest,
*Speaking of Chinese*.*  I must say at once that it is not
the purpose of this book to serve either as a grammar or as a
textbook of the Chinese language: it is *about* Chinese and
provides an eye-opening introduction to the study of that language
in an easy-going style.  Its chapters give a clue to the informality
of the treatment: Written Chinese; Spoken Chinese;
It All Started with Dragon Bones: A Short History of the
Chinese Language; Domestic Chinese; Old Wisdom, New
Technology, and the Chinese Language; Chinese Calligraphy.
Appendix 1 gives a Chronological Chart of Chinese
Dynasties, Appendix 3 Birth Years and Characteristics of the
Twelve Annual Signs.  Appendix 2 lists some common radicals
—that is, frequently encountered language roots, not vulgar
revolutionaries.

Although the treatment is informal and easy to read, it is
well-organized and informative.  It also provides the reader
with some insight not only into the way the Chinese language
works but into some of the thought processes that speakers of
such a language must engage in to use it.  Also, it reveals that
the writing system of Chinese is quite remote from the language
itself (in the sense that it relies on several different
classes of pictographic, ideographic, and metaphoric symbols,
unlike alphabetic systems or syllabaries), so that learning
the rudiments of writing Chinese requires, even for the
native speaker, at least a year of daily practice and exercise.
Much of the symbolism in the language is culturally allusive,
so that certain combinations of words or symbols may convey
a meaning that no non-native student of the language could
guess at without a thorough knowledge of the culture.

This situation can be illustrated by the following proverb:
*frontier old man lose horse*, which can be translated as
'The old man living at the frontier lost his horse.'  But its import
is unclear without the following tale:

>When an old man lost his horse, his friends came to
grieve with him.  &ldquo;Don't pity me,&rdquo; he told them, &ldquo;for
this may not be bad fortune.&rdquo;  A few days later, the
horse returned to its stable, followed by several wild
horses.  This time, neighbors came to congratulate
him, but he told them, &ldquo;Don't be overjoyed; this
good fortune may bring calamity.&rdquo;  Soon afterwards,
his only son fell off one of the wild horses, broke his
leg, and became a cripple.  The old man accepted the
disaster calmly, knowing it could be a blessing in
disguise.  After several years, a war broke out.  All
able young men were drafted and sent to their deaths
on the battlefield.  The old man's son, because of his
lame leg, remained at home to care for his father
until death took the old man.  [p.97]

Well-written and interesting, *Speaking of Chinese* is a
good introduction to the language and thought of 800 million
Chinese and helps make them a bit more scrutable.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *17th Edition, The World's Languages, Catalog 1977: General and Special Dictionaries and Grammars*
(Stechert Macmillan, Inc., 1977), xi + 180pp. 10-7/8&rdquo; &times; 8-1/4&rdquo;

[from the publisher, at 866 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022].

*The World's Languages*, lists 3,961 dictionaries and
grammars, which can be ordered from (or through) the publisher.
The main listing is arranged by language, with subheadings
for languages below.  Thus, under &ldquo;English/*Dictionaries*,&rdquo;
the first listing is for *Altenglisches etymologisches
Woerterbuch*, the second for *American Heritage Dictionary
of the English Language* and so on, though *Webster's New
World Dictionary*, the *Random House Dictionary*, and many
others are missing.  The AMS Press reprint of Johnson's *Dictionary*
is there, as are Dixon's *English Idioms*, the Oxford
*Classical Dictionary*, and, all told, 58 works of some diversity.
Therefore, as can be seen, the list is far from complete.  The
next category is &ldquo;English/*Grammars*.&rdquo;  Here are listed such
items as Kenyon's *American Pronunciation* and AMS Press's
reprint of George Philip Krapp's *Pronunciation of Standard
English in America*, with a number of grammars of Old,
Middle, and Modern English, some relatively new, some
quite old, between.  There follow subsections bearing language
designations (Arabic, Burmese, Chinese, etc.) under
which are listed one or more books—grammars, mostly—for
the teaching of English to speakers of the subject language.
Under Arabic, for instance, is listed *Learning English, a
Review Grammar for Speakers of Arabic*.

Sufficient bibliographic information, including ISBN
numbers, is given to identify the books, and prices are given
as well.  Each book has a Stechert Macmillan catalog number.
An alphabetical title index of the dictionaries and grammars
—but not of the encyclopedias and periodicals—covers about
40 pages.

Although no evaluative information is given at all—this
is not a Winchell or Kister—the listing can be put to very
good use by bookshops, libraries, and individuals who are
seeking data not readily available elsewhere.  Also, one may
assume that only books that are in print are listed, for order
forms are provided in the last pages of the catalog.  Although I
am fully aware of the costs of producing the catalog, I still believe
that it would be fair of Stechert Macmillan to offer
credit for the purchase price against a certain size of order;
for, after all, it is a merchandise catalog, notwithstanding its
usefulness.


#### EPISTOLA

Hear me out.  Robert A. Fowkes [V,4] just out-and-out
failed to point out some of the more subtle *outs* in usage today,
particularly when it comes to the difference between *I
can't make it out* and *I can't make out*.  And how about the
lyrical connotation of *freak out*, or the unfortunate player
who *grounds out* and the meat grinder that is *grounding out*.
All this could perhaps lead to one of the biggest people hunts
in history.  Who is &ldquo;Out&rdquo;?

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Madly pursued, overtaken and taken over.  (7)  
5\. Oracle I switched to gave food for thought.  (7)  
9\. Shots from under cover, but it's all in the family.  (10, 5)  
10\. Threatened a thrashing, so the heavy sugar was produced. (6, 4)  
11\. Incredible hero?  Sounds that way!  (4)  
13\. Birds at the discotheque, no doubt.  (9)  
15\. Chances taken by reckless skiers out of the East.  (5)  
16\. Find me in bed with a heavenly body?  What a sight!  (5)  
18\. No stopper, just a procrastinator.  (9)  
21\. Obvious drawback on the political scene.  (4)  
22\. Strange tie, oddly enough, makes a more perfect union.  (10)  
25\. Safe motoring, rarely heard, or just the opposite...  (8, 7)  
26\. ... if the latter, how the stubborn go West.  (7)  
27\. Ulterior motifs?  (7)

**Down**

1\. Impure's the word they receive, during strikes.  (7)  
2\. In a pout, despite being perfect.  (7)  
3\. An inclination for being bent.  (10)  
4\. Big porno sale.  (4, 5)  
5\. Mafia chief goes North, not exactly the cock o' the walk.  (5)  
6\. The weight is up front.  (4)  
7\. They can multiply and add but can they subtract?  (7)  
8\. I make her mine, swathed in furs...(7)  
12\. ... with worldly goods, and the right connections.  (10)  
14\. Sour puss, finished, and barred from the field.  (9)  
16\. Hear what the coward did?  (7)  
17\. Claimer to be a prodigy.  (7)  
19\. ... (7)    
20\. Opts for egress, thus sacrificing ingress.  (7)  
23\. Made up to play Cyrano.  (5)  
24\. Kind of old bag that should turn over a new leaf.  (4)  

***

&ldquo;Aristotle wondered whether a falling tree makes a sound
if nobody is there to see it.&rdquo;  Martin Gottfried, &ldquo;Theater&rdquo;
column in *Saturday Review*, 25 November 1978.  [Benjamin
A. Cohen, Niles, Illinois]

&ldquo;Should more hunters be allowed on state land or maintain
the 1977 quota?  ( ) Yes ( ) No.&rdquo;—Wildlife
Unit, Department of Environmental Protection, State of
Connecticut.  [Daniel James, Ivoryton, Connecticut]

I had some sleeping pills prescribed for me recently.  On
the prescription bottle was pasted a standardized sticker
of warning: MAY CAUSE DROWSINESS.  [John Stanley, Merced,
California]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. USURPED  
5\. Calor-I-e  
9\. Photograph album  
10\. Raised cane  
11\. Lion (lyin')  
13\. Songsters  
15\. RISKS (ski-E-rs)  
16\. Co-ME-t  
18\. POSTPONER  
21\. WARD  
22\. INTEGRATES (anagram of strange tie)  
25\. (W)Reckless driving  
26\. Die-hard  
27\. Designs

**Down**

1\. UMPIRES  
2\. UTOPIAN (anagram of in a pout)  
3\. Propensity  
4\. Dirt cheap  
5\. Capo-N  
6\. Lead  
7\. Rabbits  
8\. (h)ER MINE S(wathed)  
12\. Proper-ties  
14\. SUSP-ended  
16\. Cowered  
17\. MIRACLE  
19\. Nothing  
20\. RESIGNS  
23\. Nosed  
24\. FLEA


#### EPISTOLA {Adrian Room}

It's a brave man who sticks his neck out as far as Noel
Perrin does in &ldquo;Verbifying in America&rdquo; [V,2].  So no
American verb ends in -*a?*  There is no verb *to greenlight?*  No
verb ending in unstressed -*ing?*

Things may be rather different over here—we have the
Atlantic between us, after all—but in British English it is
possible to *polka* in the parlour and *conga* round the concourse,
and a student who fails to appear to be *viva'd* (given
his viva voce, or oral examination) is in danger of being *subpoenaed*
(served as subpoena, or writ commanding his attendance
at a lawcourt).  (Fowler recommends '*d* for both
these, in fact, as he does for all verbs with unusual vowel
terminations.)

*To greenlight*?  Read Frederic Mullally's *Munich Involvement*
(1968) and you will read of a young lady whose
&ldquo;smile green-lighted the innuendo&rdquo; of her invitation
(&ldquo; 'Anything else I can do for you?'&rdquo;).  This quote comes from
the *OED Supplement* which acknowledges *green-light* as a
valid verb.

As for unstressed verbs in -*ing*, well, the *Shorter Oxford
English Dictionary* gives the not uncommon verb to *hamstring*,
which may be cheating but is an unstressed verb ending in -*ing*!
Not that *hamstringing* is as pleasant a pastime as *polkaing*.
And though Americans may never be *viva'd*, I bet they
sometimes get *subpoena'd* and engage in a little celebratory
*congaing*.

I hope Noel Perrin now feels *greenlighted* to use these
verbs.

*[Adrian Room, Stamford, Lincolnshire]*



[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v6n2_Autumn_1979)