--- 
title: "VOL VI, No 3 [Summer, 1984]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## The Bows' Stratagem
*Peter A. Douglas, Albany, New York*

The use of the bow and arrow is among the oldest and
most widely practised of human skills.  Man's proficiency
with this weapon has been ranked with the development
of speech, the discovery of fire and the invention of the
wheel as significant features of cultural advance.  Throughout
its long and honorable history it has served man well and it is
not surprising that the bow has left a lasting mark on our
language.  More than five hundred years after the heyday of
the English archer, his terminology may still be heard in
everyday speech, in proverbial wisdom, and in the imagery of
literature.

The longbow is best remembered for the vital part it
played in the notable English victories against France during
the Hundred Years' War in the 14th and 15th centuries.  We
find that those days of the archer's greatness have been
fossilized in words, phrases, figures of speech, and adages
which remain impressive testimony to those old skills that
controlled the fate of nations.  Some phrases are as archaic as
their origins; but others may still be heard in conversation.

To *brace* a bow is to string it, to draw it tight, and so we are
told to *brace ourselves* or to *brace up*—the man as tense and
prepared for action as the strung bow.  A person whose nerves
are too tense may be referred to as *high(ly) strung*.  From the
Parthian horsemen who shot arrows at their enemies in real or
feigned flight we have a *Parthian shot* or a *Parthian shaft*, a
stinging remark made on departure.  In less aggressive individuals
this is merely a *Parthian glance*.  (This has become,
through assimilation with a more familiar word, a *parting shot*,
etc., in the speech of some.)  In an archery contest the final
shot is called the *upshot*, hence its use to signify the final issue
or conclusion: *the upshot of the matter was*...or *in the upshot*.
Another kind of shot is a *long shot*, a remote chance, an
improbable guess or hazard.  This seems more likely to owe its
origin to the bow rather than the musket, since the hazard was
increased by the physical strength and know-how needed to
direct the shot.  In any event, many archery terms found their
way naturally into the parlance of firearms.

Words derived from the target at which the archers
aimed have also enriched the language.  An archer's target at
one time was a *butt* or a mound of earth, hence a person may
still be said to be a *butt* when he is made the object of jokes,
scorn, or ridicule.  In some cases this ridicule may take the form
of a *barbed shaft*.  Today we still have the *butts* in rifle shooting.
The actual target on the mound of earth was a piece of white
material known as the *blank*, a word which has also been used
figuratively, though probably implying greater accuracy.
Desdemona says to Cassio of Othello:

>As I have spoken for you with all my best  
And I have stood *within the blank of his displeasure*  
For my free speech  (III. iv. 127)

From *blank* we have *point-blank*, the construction possibly
coming from the head or *point* of the arrow being aligned with
the *blank* before loosing, or, more probably, from a verbal
origin as in &ldquo;break-neck&rdquo; or &ldquo;cut-throat.&rdquo;  To point the
arrowhead directly at the blank was necessary when the
archer was very close to the butt; in a *long shot* he would aim
above the target.  From the directness of such a shot, a *point-blank
question* or *point-blank remark* is blunt, plain, and
straightforward.  A successful hit on the target's center is a
*bull's-eye*, a later reference to the middle of the target.  In this
context, a *bull's-eye* is usually not merely the goal, but the goal
realized; to *score a bull* or to *score a bull's eye* is to succeed in
some attempt.  An older phrase, to *hit the needle*, means the
same thing and is a reminder of the wooden peg or needle
which used to mark the center of the blank.  A present-day
archer will *make a gold*, this now being the color of the central
area of his target.  In contrast to a *butt*, a *rover* was a mark
selected at will or at random and not at a constant or fixed
distance from the bowman.  This was shooting *at rovers* which
came to be used figuratively to mean 'without definite aim or
object' or 'at random, haphazard,' chiefly in such phrases as to
*run at rovers* or to *talk at rovers*.  Finally, an archer or his
figurative counterpart who misses the target is said to be *wide
of the mark* or *beside the mark*.  Of course, one can also *hit the
mark*—especially an *easy mark*.

Many phrases still heard are derived from the longbow's
mechanical rival, the crossbow.  This weapon's missile was a
*bolt* and the word is still found in the following phrases and
expressions.  To *shoot one's bolt* is to commit oneself to a course
of action.  The proverb *a fool's bolt is soon shot* reminds us that a
crossbow did not have the rapid rate of fire of a longbow so it
was unwise to shoot prematurely.  However, *a fool's bolt may
sometimes hit the mark*.  The bolt has two qualities which give
rise to different figurative uses—its straightness and its speed.
From the former we have a *bolt of cloth*, a *bolt* as a door
fastening and other straight metal rods such as a *rifle bolt*.  In
*bolt-upright* we see that, as early as Chaucer's day, the stress
shifted from mere straightness to erectness.  From the speed of
the bolt we have a *bolt of lightning* and a *thunderbolt*, the
discharge of lightning seen as a missile cast to earth.  A *bolt
from the blue* is a complete surprise.  In battle an archer might
shoot high in the air so that the enemy's shields would be less
effective.  Such a bolt from the blue (sky) must have carried the
sense of unexpectedness and disaster which we still see today.
The characteristic swiftness of the bolt led the word to be used
verbally, meaning to do something quickly.  To *bolt*, to *bolt off*,
or *bolt away* mean to 'rush or dart off.'  More specifically, they
refer to a horse which breaks from control, as in a *bolting horse*.
To *bolt out* is to blurt out.  A *bolt-hole* or *bolting-hole* is a hole by
which to bolt or escape.  In to *bolt one's food*, to 'gulp it down,'
the image of a fast-moving object has become less concrete.  *At
first bolt* means 'at first go.'

An archer's skill was multifarious and long in the learning;
phrases grew up around his practical skills from many points of
view.  Idiomatic expressions containing references to archery
are abundant, though most have not survived into current
spoken English.  Listed below are some of the picturesque
expressions.

>*have two (or many) strings to one's bow*
>
>'have extra or alternative resources at hand' as an archer
carried reserve strings.  The phrase enjoyed an enduring
popularity in an amorous context.
>
>*draw the longbow*
>
>'exaggerate.'  A *longbowman* was a 'romancer or a liar.'  To
*overshoot the mark* is also to 'exaggerate, go too far.'
>
>*outshoot a man in his own bow*
>
>The modern equivalent would be 'beat a man on his own
ground.'  A bow was a personal article, usually made by the
archer himself and suited to his own requirements.
>
>*have the bent of his bow*
>
>'know his intentions or gauge his &ldquo;calibre.&rdquo;
>
>*by the string rather than the bow*
>
>'by the most direct way.'
>
>*draw a bow at a venture*
>
>'attack without taking proper aim,' hence 'do something at
random or without consideration.'
>
>*draw by one string*
>
>to be in agreement.
>
>*be too much of the bowhand*
>
>'fail in a design'; literally, 'not sufficiently &ldquo;dexterous,&rdquo; '
since the bowhand is usually the left.
>
>*be wide at (on, of) the bowhand*
>
>'be inaccurate, miss one's target.'
>
>*make arrows of all sorts of wood*
>
>'turn one's hand to anything.'
>
>*draw the bow up to the ear*
>
>'put all one's strength or resolve into a commitment.'
>
>*unbend one's bow*
>
>'relax; withdraw a threat.'
>
>*bend one's bow but shoot not*
>
>'threaten but take no action.'
>
>*have an arrow left in one's quiver*
>
>'be not completely without resources or arguments.'
>
>*This bolt never came out of your bag*
>
>is a crossbowman's equivalent of *'This arrow never came out
of your quiver,'* suggesting that someone's words or works
are not his own.
>
>*shoot a second arrow to find the first*
>
>In *The Merchant of Venice* Bassanio says to Antonio:
>
>In my school days, when I had lost one shaft,
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way with more advised watch,
To find the other forth, and by adventuring both,
I oft found both.  (I.i.139)
>
>*make a shaft or a bolt of it*
>
>'be willing to take a risk; to have a go.'
>
>*bend the bow of Ulysses*
>
>'perform a difficult task; only the owner could draw this bow.'

Many pithy sayings associated with archery have been
polished into aphorisms or petrified into proverbs; the following
are a few examples.  *A bolt lost is not a bow broken.  A bow
long bent at last waxeth weak.  Draw not your bow before your
arrow be fixed.  A good archer is not known by his arrows, but
his aim* 'fine feathers do not make fine birds:' *The arrow often
hits the shooter* 'the gunpowder equivalent is hoist by one's
own petard.'  *Of a pig's tail you will never make a good shaft*—
nor a silk purse out of a sow's ear.  A *word spoken is an arrow let
fly.  To unstring the bow will not heal the wound.  It is too late to
unbend the bow when it is broken*—and to shut the stable door
after the horse has bolted.  *Everyman will shoot at the foe but
few will pick up the shafts:* It was common that when an archer
had exhausted his supply of arrows and if the fortunes of the
battle allowed, he would try to retrieve some spent ammunition
for the next encounter, especially when in enemy
territory and without the opportunity to make new shafts.  So,
few can be relied upon to see a matter through to the end
without leaving the tedious or dangerous part to others.  *He
will shoot higher that shoots at the moon than he who shoots at a
dunghill, though he miss the mark*: spoken as encouragement
to noble designs and endeavors.  Sir Philip Sidney wrote a
variation in his *Arcadia* of 1590:

>Who shoots at the mid-day Sunne, though he be sure  
he shall never hit the marke; yet as sure he is he  
shall shoote higher, than who ayms but at a bush.

*He that shoots oft at last shall hit the mark* 'practice makes
perfect,' or 'if at first you don't succeed, try, try again.'  *If the
bow is drawn taut, the arrow will fly fast.  When the arrow is on
the string, it must go.  There is more than one yew bow in
Chester:* Today we might say 'there are plenty more fish in the
sea'; the bowmen of Chester were famous for their skill and
strength.  *I have a good bow up at the castle:* said to someone
who promises to undertake something without the means to
accomplish it, an expression of disbelief, as in &ldquo;I have a good
doublet in France.&rdquo;  *Speak well of archers for your father shot in
a bow:* A reminder not to be ashamed of one's (humble)
parentage or background, for the medieval archers came from
the lowest ranks of society and it was the bow that made the
common man of England such a tough opponent for any
enemy or authority to tackle.  *Many speak of Robin Hood who
never shot in his bow:* In *Troilus and Criseyde* Chaucer wrote:

>...for switch manere folk, I gesse,  
Defamen Love, as nothing of him knowe.
>
>Thei speken, but *thei benten nevere his bowe*.  (II.861)

Today we should probably suggest walking a mile in a person's
shoes.

In addition to this infiltration into the language, there is a
host of beliefs and superstitions associated with the bow and
arrow, and the folklore of many countries contains references
to archery.  The bow is seen, for instance, as an emblem of
sovereignty or as a token of prestige; the arrow or arrowhead
may be a symbol of virility or of death, a love charm or a
talisman against accidents.  Though extinct in the civilized
world as a military weapon, the bow occupied a unique and
remarkable place in history and continues to be popular in
sport and as a weapon of the hunt.  Together the bow and arrow
have pervaded all aspects of human creation—literature,
mythology, art, language.  Their fundamental symbolism is that
of security and survival, not surprisingly so since for thousands
of years man has used this weapon to fill his belly and to
defend his home.  Maurice Thomson wrote in *The Witchery of
Archery*, 1877:

>So long as the new moon returns in heaven a bent,
beautiful bow, so long will the fascination of archery keep
hold of the hearts of men.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Planned Parenthood Looking for Volunteers.&rdquo;  [Headline
in *The Elmira* [Ontario] *Independent*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Suggestions for handling obscene phone calls from New
England Telephone Co.&rdquo;  [Title of a brochure purported (by
*Harvard Magazine*) to be distributed by a phone company.
Both of the preceding submitted by Elisabeth P. Smith, Waterloo, Ontario]

## ANTIPODEAN ENGLISH: *The Dinkum Oil*
*G.W. Turner, University of Adelaide*

Psst!  Like to read some dinkum Australian?  This comes
from no less august a source than the *Times Literary Supplement*
(8 May, 1969, p. 488) and is part of a review of *The
Pocket Oxford Dictionary* back in the days when the fifth
edition had just come out with its supplementary list of
Australian and New Zealand words.  Here is the passage:

>Well, starve the bardies!  Any poor choom who takes
a squiz at the new *Pocket Oxford Dictionary* doesn't have
a Buckley's.  Talk about stonkering the poms; fossick
about in the last thirty pages and you'll want to drop your
bundle.  The O.U.P.'s gone in boots and all and given
the dinkum oil about the way the Aussielanders talk—
some Earl's Court exile must have put the acid on them.
Nothing bodger about it, though, they've curled
the mo and brought out a real boomer when they could
have gone up the booay with all sorts of blues.  So if
you want to get the strength of what we've been saying
and have a bosker hard read slip out one arvo and
lamb down some of your oscar for the revised
*Pocket Oxford* (18s.), the first new edition since 1942.

All the words and expressions in this paragraph are
indeed Australian English, are mostly current, and are taken,
in fact, from the list in the dictionary, but no Australian would
for a moment think this concentrated collection of localisms a
genuine unselfconscious transmission of thought.  It is thought
dressed entirely in badges, a special literary genre for
facetious reviews of regional dictionaries.

It is, however, not only Poms who write reviews of this
kind, or actually use language of this kind, if not quite at this
impossible level of concentration, Australians abroad might,
when they encounter compatriots, nourish their nostalgia
with a concentration of words of home flavour, and even at
home (which, so English is the orientation of our culture, can
seem to be a version of abroad anyway) nationalism may be
asserted with an aggressive infusion of local colour in speech.
The *ocker* style, we would call it now, using a word which
became current too late for inclusion in the 1969 dictionary.

What marks the *Times* reviewer's passage from real
language is its kaleidoscopic irregularity of tone and connotations.
*Starve the bardies*, a meaningless interjection, is
Western Australian (*stone the crows*, itself rather &ldquo;literary&rdquo;
now, being a more likely Eastern-state term), while *up the
booay* is from New Zealand, nearly a quarter of a world away.
*Earl's Court*, about twice as far in the other direction, was for
some years a district of London where so many Australians
rented accommodation that the area acquired the byname
*Kangaroo Valley*, a rare example of &ldquo;Overseas Australian
English.&rdquo;

Some words are not commonly recognized by Australians
as local words, though usually in these cases they will be
colloquial or slang words known to be unlikely to occur in
books.  Probably *arvo* 'afternoon' is in this category along with
*fossick about* (a little old-fashioned now) 'to rummage around,
originally seeking gold,' *blue*, 'error,' *get the strength of*
'understand the essence of,' *boots and all* 'with no holds
barred' (to borrow a metaphor from another sport), *or put the
acid on* 'exert pressure on (someone) to grant a favour.'  Other
expressions are more self-consciously local.  Probably *boomer*
in its transferred sense (a large version of anything, not just a
kangaroo) and *dinkum oil* 'the genuine article' have this
recognizably Australian flavour even at home.

Many Australianisms have dated to varying extent.  *Squiz*
'a look' savours of &ldquo;bygone schoolboy&rdquo; to me while *curl
the mo* 'succeed brilliantly' has an Edwardian flavour to at least
one Australian, even though he knows that all the documentation
for the word is comparatively recent.  This is because of its
association with the twirling moustaches, of course.  It seems,
by the way, to be used more especially in sporting contexts.
*Bosker* 'excellent' had its active life in the first decade of this
century and is marked 'obsolescent' (an understatement if
anything) in the list drawn on by the reviewer.  *Lamb down*
had its heyday on the goldfields over a century ago, and *oscar*
'money' or 'cash' (rhyming slang based on the name of the
actor Oscar Asche who died in 1936) has something of a patina
of age about it now.

Some Australianisms (e.g. *bodger* 'inferior' or *dinkum*
'genuine') have their origin in English dialect, to the surprise
of Australians, though, if words are not Aboriginal or foreign, it
is hardly surprising if their source is to be found in some sort of
English.  *Drop* your *bundle* 'panic,' 'give up' is an idiom arising
from Australian life since it appears that the reference was
originally to the swagman's ('tramp's') swag ('roll of personal
belongings').  Sometimes words (e.g. *stonker* 'baffle,' 'tire out')
are simply of unknown origin.

*Choom* imitates one kind of British pronunciation of a
word itself felt to be British in Australia (especially in the
phrase *new chum*, 'a newcomer from England,' and, by
extension, 'a novice at anything').  To say someone *doesn't have
a Buckley's* is to say 'he has no chance.'  It is not known what
&ldquo;Buckley's chance&rdquo; was originally.  The best suggestion seems
to be that there is some reference to the Melbourne firm
Buckley and Nunn—that 'Buckley's chance' is 'Nunn'; but the
process, suggesting but not quite resembling rhyming slang, is
obscure.

Origins, if unknown to speakers, are generally considered
irrelevant to the tone and life of words as they are used now—
perhaps too readily, since there is perhaps a residual flavour of
dialect about a word like *bodger*, and as the metaphor in *drop
one's bundle* is forgotten the phrase loses vitality and becomes
merely puzzling.

The reader should now be able to prepare a translation of
the reviewer's paragraph for homework.  You might begin
&ldquo;Well, deprive the small white edible grubs of food....&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

A brochure issued by Washington National Insurance
Company offers &ldquo;$100 a day ...even for life!  for covered
injuries during hospitalization.&rdquo;  It would be interesting to see
the actuarial figures describing injuries sustained during
hospitalization.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Notice on some London underground escalators: &ldquo;Dogs
Must Be Carried.&rdquo;  As the story goes, a confused and flustered
old lady, having seen and complied with a sign reading
&ldquo;Tickets Must Be Shown,&rdquo; was terrified that, without a dog,
she would have to climb the stairs.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Notice over the door of a small country hospital, somewhere
in Europe, that is run by the Nursing Sisters of Charity
translates into: &ldquo;We harbor every sort of disease and have no
respect for religion.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Street sign in England: &ldquo;Children Drive Slowly.&rdquo;  (Thank
goodness!)  [The three preceding from A. Adrian Allen, London, England]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard, Thesaurus 1*

Let us now praise notabilities, luminaries, celebrities,
*raras aves*, magnates, worthies, famous men, and our sires,
progenitors, fathers, that procreated, engendered, or, if you
prefer, begat us.  Peter Mark Roget was born 200 years ago
on 18 January 1779.  In extreme old age he became the author
and eponym of that most curious and controversial of reference
books, *Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases,
classified and arranged so as to facilitate the Expression of
Ideas and assist in Literary Composition.*

Roget was not the pioneer of the ingeniously persuasive
metaphor of using thesaurus to mean a treasury or storehouse
of knowledge, which is the language of salesmen of encyclopaedias.
It had been so used in British English since the
sixteenth century.  John Stuart Mill had used it a few years
before the publication of Roget's *Thesaurus*, and may have
given the old lexicomane the idea.

But Roget was a pioneer of dictionaries of synonyms in
English.  Was it a good idea?  Does his book, as its original title
claimed, facilitate the expression of ideas and assist in literary
composition?  Or is it as specious as those courses that claim
they can teach you to write television scripts or novels in
twenty easy lessons?  Fastidious purists such as Benard Levin
claim that to open Roget is a sign of imbecility and an
impediment to literary composition.  One should express
oneself in one's own words that come naturally, not search out
other men's sesquipedalian jaw-breakers for the purpose of
elegant variation or impressing one's audience with spurious
erudition.

That is all very well for people with vocabularies as large,
memories as retentive, and wits as quick as Bernard's.  We
lesser mortals quite often mislay the precise word that we
need, although we know perfectly well that it exists.  That is
where there is a legitimate and invaluable use for Roget.  He is
for recapturing lost words, not discovering new ones.

Roget is useless for discovering new words because he
groups such diverse words as if they were synonyms.  It is as
though a zoo were to put gorillas, chimpanzees, gibbons,
orangutans, and a man and a woman all together in the same
cage, and label it APES.  The man who uses my Roget to find
a synonym let us say for thanking for a 'meal' will come up with
such grotesquely inappropriate variants as: *manducation,
scoff, phytophagy, refection*, and *spread*.  There is no indication
of their differences, or the contexts or tones of English for
which they are appropriate.

There are indeed very few exact synonyms in English.  No
two words are exactly alike.  *Gorse* and *furze* are pretty close,
though linguistic geographers could draw isoglosses to show
that the speaker who says *gorse* comes from a different part of
the United Kingdom from the speaker who says *furze*.  The
man who calls the prickly bush with yellow flowers *whin*
proclaims that he comes from Scotland or the North of
England.  But *impartial, unbiased, unprejudiced*, and *disinterested*
are not quite synonymous, although Roget shuts
them all in the same cage.  A judge trying his own son for
murder should try to be impartial, though he could hardly be
unbiased; he should be unprejudiced, though he could not be
disinterested.  He certainly would not be uninterested in the
verdict, however poor his relations with his son.

New dictionaries of synonyms will give definitions and
examples to explain and illustrate the peculiar properties of
each so-called &ldquo;synonym.&rdquo;  Such a book would be a useful tool
for discovering the precise meaning of new words, as well as
recovering old ones that have slipped one's memory.

Another frequent criticism of Roget is the mazily systematic
classification of categories in which words are arranged,
so that Improvement comes next to Impairment, and
Cleanness follows immediately after Mediocrity.  Newer
thesauruses of synonyms such as Webster's list their words
alphabetically.  This makes looking a word up one operation
instead of two or more.  But in fact Roget's idiosyncratic order
of words is helpful, because it forces the user to work out
precisely what meaning and connotation he is looking for.
Suppose he decides that he wants another word for *hoggish*,
which seems a bit pedantic for his purpose.  He looks it up in
the index, and has to decide whether it is the *porcine, greedy,
filthy*, or *gluttonous* implication of the word that is uppermost
to his purpose.

Longman, who nearly a century before had published
Johnson's *Dictionary of the English Language*, printed only
a thousand copies of the first edition of Roget.  He was soon
reprinting.  *The Westminster Review* welcomed its publication
with the words: &ldquo;Roget will rank with Samuel Johnson as a
literary instrument-maker of the first class,&rdquo; which was laying
it on a bit thick.

Since that first edition, more than 30 million copies of
Roget's *Thesaurus* have been sold in multitudinous editions

on both sides of the Atlantic.  It obviously meets a deeply felt
need or comforts a deep insecurity.  By the time he died, aged
90, Roget, the sage, luminary, longhead, shining light, wizard
of synonyms had seen twenty-five editions of the work that has
come to be inseparably associated with his name as an
eponymous word.  It is a source of much gobbledygook and
verbal gunge.  It can be a useful tool.  But it needs to be used
with caution: as a rifle for shooting down a particular word that
is just the one needed, not as a blunderbuss for scattering
(what's that word for wanting to show off one's supposed
learning?  Pass the Roget.  Ah, yes) erudite variation of
locution, prolixity, and longiloquence.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Words For The Wise*](https://books.google.ca/books/about/Words_for_the_Wise.html?id=jvOcAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y)
Mark Beach, drawings by Bill Gilchrist, (Coast to Coast Books, Portland, Ore., 1979), 124pp.

For no discernible reason, this quite good glossary of a
few hundred academic terms is decorated with facetious
cartoons that belie the serious nature and quality of the
text.  Useful for students who need definitions for terms like
*honors program, experience-based learning*, and *work/study
program*.  Does not attend to educationist jargon, thank
heavens!

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Generative Grammar And Linguistic Competence*](https://www.routledge.com/Generative-Grammar-and-Linguistic-Competence/Matthews/p/book/9781138975071)
P.H. Matthews, (Allen &amp; Unwin, Winchester, Mass., 1979), 112pp.

If you are interested in an understandable and understanding
presentation of Chomsky's approach to linguistics
and if you are up to paying $18.95 for a 112-page book, then
this may be your cup of tea.  If you want to continue to
squander your time and your money, there is a useful (77-book)
bibliography.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Nabokov's Dirty Tricks
*Ray Russell, Beverly Hills, California*

Coded sexual references, often coarse, lurk under the
elegant surface of Vladimir Nabokov's work, and
most of them have gone undetected by academe.  In evidence,
you are invited to examine, first, Exhibit A (for Anal):

Driving from one motel to another like a connect-the-dots
puzzle, the ardent sensualist Clare Quality criss-crosses
the American landscape, one hand on the steering wheel, the
other on the smooth warm thigh of this not-unwilling captive,
the under-aged, over-sexed Dolores Haze, *a.k.a.* Lolita, who
gave her name to Nabokov's most famous novel.  When Quality
signs the motels' guest registers, he chooses fictitious names
designed to taunt his pursuer, the obsessed-unto-madness
Humbert Humbert.

These motel register word games were apparently designed
to taunt Nabokov's critics and commentators, too, and
to puzzle and misdirect them—all for the private amusement
of the author.  Many of these registrations are transparent
literary allusions: &ldquo; 'Ars&egrave;ne Lupin' was obvious to a Frenchman
who remembered the detective stories of his youth,&rdquo; says
French-born Humbert, &ldquo;and one hardly had to be a Coleridgian
to appreciate the trite poke of 'A. Person, Porlock,
England.' &rdquo; (Coleridge's poem, *Kubla Kahn* came to him in a
dream from which he was unfortunately awakened by the visit
of &ldquo;a person on business from Porlock.&rdquo;)

But not all of the allusions in the &ldquo;cryptogrammic paper
chase&rdquo; (Humbert's description) are literary.  When they are
not, when they allude to lore outside the academic range, and
particularly when they are in the area of what the Monty
Python zanies call Naughty Bits, they sometimes trip up
learned annotators—and Nabokov, wherever he may be,
smiles wickedly at their pratfalls.

Referring to one of the motel registrations, Humbert says,
&ldquo;Horribly cruel, forsooth, was 'Will Brown, Dolores, Co.' &rdquo;
I had no trouble decoding that one the very first time I read
*Lolita*—but then I'm not an academic, and perhaps too much
of my youth was misspent among low companions.

Carl R. Proffer, in a lively, concise and fascinating pioneer
work, *Keys to Lolita* (Indiana University Press, 1968),
tried to explain it this way:

>In the preceding chapter, Humbert composes this poem:
>
>>*Saint*, forsooth!  While brown Dolores,  
>>On a patch of sunny green  
>>With Sanchicha reading stories  
>>In a movie magazine—

This is odd, because Quilty had no knowledge of these
verses—so he couldn't have chosen &ldquo;Will Brown&rdquo;
to mock Humbert's &ldquo;While brown.&rdquo;  On the other hand,
brown is the color most often associated with Lolita...
and Quilty would know that.  (One should also keep
in mind the fact that Humbert is quite mad and
may be hallucinating all this.)  But more important is the
fact that Quilty knew the poem Humbert had parodied...
Robert Browning's &ldquo;Soliloquy of the Spanish Cloister&rdquo;...

>Saint, forsooth!  While brown Dolores  
Squats outside the Convent bank...

Prof. Proffer, a brilliant Nabokovian and Russologist,
nonetheless gives the impression, here, of a man stumbling
around in a dark room, trying to find the light switch, falling
over hassocks and knocking down lamps.  He's right about the
Browning parody (which I, shallowly read in Browning's
works, would not have tumbled to), but while spotting that
double-entendre, he misses the triple-entendre.  Alfred
Appel, Jr., is an equally dedicated and diligent Nabokov buff,
and a former student of the master, as well (Cornell, 1954).
And yet, in his monumental book, *The Annotated Lolita*
(McGraw-Hill, 1970), he is on this point no more illuminating
than Proffer:

>Quilty echoes H.H., whose &ldquo;forsooth&rdquo; acknowledges
the &ldquo;coincidence&rdquo;; see 247/1 (&ldquo;*Saint*, forsooth!
While brown Dolores&rdquo;)...

In the interests of scholarship, I therefore wrote to
Proffer:

>You appear to be somewhat dubious of your own
interpretation of &ldquo;Will Brown, Dolores, Colo.&rdquo;  since you
bring up the fact that Quilty could have no knowledge
of Humbert's verses, and you suggest that Humbert,
being after all a madman, may have been hallucinating.  I
think perhaps you miss the point because you may be
unaware that *brown*, as a verb, is gutter lingo for 'the act
of anal intercourse.'  When Quilty writes in the motel
register that he &ldquo;will brown Dolores,&rdquo; he is taunting
Humbert with his intention to sodomize Lolita.
>
>This would seem to be confirmed in the closing pages
of the novel when Humbert refers to Quilty as one &ldquo;who
had sodomized my darling.&rdquo;  How could Humbert
know that, except from &ldquo;Will Brown Dolores&rdquo;? ...  One
more thing that seems to bolster my view: why would
this particular registration be &ldquo;Horribly cruel&rdquo; to
Humbert if his interpretation was the same as yours?  It is
no more cruel than many other of Quilty's mocking
registrations, *if* we disallow the brutality and ugliness
of the anal inference.

A copy of the letter was sent to Appel.  He didn't answer it,
but Proffer did, saying, in part: &ldquo;Thanks for your letter and
explanation—I have had several letters explaining what
*brown* means over the last few years, but yours is the first real
explanation of what is going on in that citation.&rdquo;

That would have been the end of it, but a couple of
months later, while re-reading *Lolita*, I came upon this
passage in Chapter 21:

>...the Palace Sentries, or Scarlet Guards, or Beaver
Eaters, or whatever they are called.

I chuckled inwardly.  Vladimir, you rascal—up to your old
tricks, are you, putting another one over on the squares?

Why, I asked myself, do I catch these things when others
don't?  Am I sex-obsessed, a Dirty Old Man?  Probably, but
if I am, so was Nabokov, and that may be the reason I'm tuned
in to his wavelength.  But there may be another reason.
Nabokov had a devious mind; so do I.  He loved to play tricks on
his readers; *moi aussi*.  He planted obscure clues and private
jokes in his books; same here.  &ldquo;Art at its greatest is fantastically
deceitful and complex,&rdquo; he once said.  No one, God knows, has
ever compared my writing to Nabokov's, either favorably or
unfavorably (I'd gladly settle for unfavorably!), but some
critics and editors have said things about my work that could
also apply to his.  A British anthologist, who had included a
story of mine in his book, wrote in his introduction: &ldquo;It is a
wonderfully flamboyant Chinese puzzle of a story which
rewards close scrutiny by yielding up further mystery upon
mystery.&rdquo;  An editor for Random House, asking for permission
to use a *Paris Review* story of mine in a book, wrote, &ldquo;It took me
more than one reading to nail several subtleties and allusions.&rdquo;
In a review of one of my novels, a newspaper critic said, &ldquo;If you
are surprised by the end of Chapter 39, then you really did not
pay attention to the clues Ray Russell dropped along the way
—or you were misdirected, and that is not too surprising,
because Russell is a master of misdirection.&rdquo;

It takes one, in other words, to know one.  At any rate, I
reached for my copies of the Proffer and Appel books again.
Proffer makes no comment on &ldquo;Beaver Eaters&rdquo;—it slipped right past him.  Appel does, but, as before, he misses the true
point:

>*Beaver Eaters*: a portmanteau of &ldquo;Beefeaters&rdquo; (the
yeoman of the British royal guard) and their
beaver hats.

This time, I wrote directly to Appel, making passing
reference to my earlier letter about *Will Brown* and politely
going on to say, about *Beaver Eaters*, that his note on the
phrase was correct as far as it went, but didn't go far enough.
(Actually, I think it's the Coldstream Guards who wear beaver
hats, not the Beefeaters, but let that pass.) &ldquo;A *beaver eater* is a
'cunnilingist,' &rdquo; I informed him, &ldquo;and our cunning linguist,
Nabokov, knows this very well, I feel sure.&rdquo;  My letter
concluded: &ldquo;It's possible that I just have a dirty mind, and
that Nabokov is innocent of anal and oral references.  But I
doubt it.&rdquo;

Appel replied promptly, saying that he had asked
Nabokov about that very thing, but that &ldquo;the expression was
new to him.&rdquo;  Appel also considered such a reference &ldquo;inappropriate&rdquo;
because &ldquo;until the last decade or so those fellows
[the Beefeaters] were famous for homosexual prostitution.
*Beaver* would be all wrong.&rdquo;  He admitted that &ldquo;it is indeed
tempting to find an allusion behind every bush.&rdquo;

Touch&eacute;, Professor!  &ldquo;Behind every bush.&rdquo;  Not a bad joke
for an academic.  He made no mention at all of *Will Brown*, but
in a P.S. spoke of a scene in the film version of *Lolita*, though
not in the novel, when Lolita's mother, Charlotte Haze
(played by Shelley Winters) praises the tastiness of her cherry
pie, in order to entice the reluctant Humbert (James Mason)
to room-and-board in her house.  Humbert, at the moment,
happens to be looking directly at an underclad Lolita (Sue
Lyon), and he immediately decides to take the room, after all.
&ldquo;What changed your mind?&rdquo;  asks Charlotte, &ldquo;The cherry pie,&rdquo;
replies Humbert.  &ldquo;And Nabokov, not [director Stanley]
Kubrick, wrote this line,&rdquo; Appel asured me, adding &ldquo;*Cherry* is
an expression Nabokov could have heard on the schoolbuses
which he rode for purposes of research; the other expressions
would not have been aired by young teens, but rather their
older brothers in locker rooms—to which Nabokov never
gained (or attempted) entry.&rdquo;

Well, as for the sexual connotation of *beaver* being &ldquo;new&rdquo;
to Nabokov, I have to believe that it was nothing of the kind,
and that the Olympian novelist[^a1]
was having a bit of fun with his earnest annotator by disclaiming all knowledge of the word's
erotic meaning.  In my mind is his contempt for &ldquo;academic mediocrities&rdquo; who think &ldquo;it is possible to unravel the mysteries
of genius&rdquo; (&ldquo;The Structure of *Eugene Onegin*&rdquo;), and while
Appel is certainly no mediocrity, it is not difficult to imagine
Nabokov toying with his former pupil like a sleek, well-fed old
cat with a presumptuous young mouse.  *Beaver* new to him?  To
*Nabokov*??  Are you kidding???  However, the rigors of scholarly
discourse forbade that kind of raucous response, so my
answer went like this:

>It appears that we'll both have to defer to Nabokov's
assertion that he was innocent of double-entendre
in *Beaver Eaters*.  Perhaps I give him too much credit for
an almost limitless, omniscient knowledge of sex lore
and U.S. slang.
>
>But I beg leave to disagree with you about certain
expressions not being available to him on teen-crammed
schoolbuses: I've heard things from teeners that
widened my education considerably and brought a
blush to my cheek....
>
>I've always been under the impression (perhaps
mistaken) that it was the Coldstream Guards who were
notorious for homosexual prostitution, rather than the
medievally-attired beefeaters of gin and Gilbert-&-Sullivan
fame [Yeomen of the Guard, *or, The Merryman
and his Maid*, London, 1888].  But I suppose both groups
might plead guilty to the charge?

Appel did not respond, allowing me the last word.  So
much for the differing viewpoints of gown and town (or
classroom and poolroom) and the distinctive contributions of
each to the Higher Learning.  Perhaps that foxy grandpa,
Nabokov, really had the last word when, in his little book on
Gogol, he spoke of writing that &ldquo;provokes—not laughter and
not tears—but a radiant smile of perfect satisfaction, a purr
of beatitude—and a writer may well be proud of himself if
he can make his readers, or more exactly some of his readers,
smile and purr that way.&rdquo;

***

[^a1]: *Olympian novelist*: a sly reference to the original Olympia Press
edition of *Lolita* (Paris, 2 vol., 1955).  Nice try, guys—close, but no
cigar.  I just meant lofty, godlike, haughty, etc.

## Bartlett's Ain't Got It
*David Steinberg, San Francisco*

Before Richard Malthy, Jr., restaged his Off-Broadway
production of *Ain't Misbehavin*' on Broadway, Maltby
had told a reporter, the show &ldquo;is not an attempt to deal
biographically with Fats Waller's life, but to celebrate Fats's
musical contribution to our lives.&rdquo;  In Maltby's assay, Waller,
who died in 1943, &ldquo;was a national resource.&rdquo;

On Broadway, Maltby's montage of Waller stride pianism,
songs and *shtick* won the 1978 Tony for Best Musical.
The long-running hit introduces Fats's jaunty jazz to persons
who hadn't been born when he died.  For their elders, *Ain't
Misbehavin*' reaffirms Fats's genius.  With Fats's reascendance,
the Book-of-the-Month Club in the Summer of
1979 offered *The Best of Fats Waller* on records, tapes, or
cassettes.

But salutes to Fats won't be complete if we don't reclaim
and hail Fats's ten-word contribution to American usage.  Fats
had told a woman who asked him to explain rthym: &ldquo;Lady, if
you got to ask, you ain't got it.&rdquo;  That exquisite exegesis of the
ineffable, *Bartlett's Familiar Quotations* ain't got.  Instead,
*Bartlett's* got this modulation: &ldquo;If you have to ask what jazz is,
you'll never know,&rdquo; and attributes the variation to another
national resource, Louis &ldquo;Satchmo&rdquo; Armstrong.  Neither Satch
nor Fats ever phrased things *&agrave; la Bartlett's*, mayvins and
musicians point out.  Many swear Fats had blurted: &ldquo;Lady, if
you got to ask, don't fool with it,&rdquo; substituting for &ldquo;fool&rdquo;
another four-letter word beginning with the same consonant.

*Bartlett's* misrendering has for years prompted civilians
to reprise the wrong words and musician.  Jazz missionary
Eddie Condon reprised the right words and musician in his
autobiography, *We Called It Music*, published by Holt in
1947.  Condon, who co-wrote his book with Thomas Sugrue,
noted that jazz musicians revered Fats for his saying as well as
his playing.  When he arrived in Manhattan in the late 1920s,
Condon was thrilled to meet stride piano star Fats Waller, who
was famous for answering, &ldquo;Lady, if you got to ask, you ain't got
it.&rdquo;  Two musicians mentioned by Condon—trombonist Mike
Reilly and cornetist Ed Farley—later improvised *The Music
Goes Round and Round* to answer a woman who asked what swing was.  Round and round went the Reilly-Farley
*impromptu*, becoming one of swing's anthems before World
War II.

After the war, Farley came home to Newark, N.J., and
worked for the Newark Housing Authority in an office on
Market Street opposite *The Newark News*.  At *The News*, I ran
the entertainment desk and covered the lively arts; moonlighted
as editor of *Music Vendor*, trade weekly for jukebox
operators and disc jockeys; twilighted as free-lance writer of
pieced about showbiz.  Farley, who had known Satch and Fats,
assured me Satch never uttered *Bartlett's* garble of Fats's,
&ldquo;Lady, if you got to ask, you ain't got it.&rdquo;  For Farley, for jazz
musicians who followed or preceded him, Newark's nearness
to New York—and separation from Manhattan—made
Newark their haven, hideout, and home.  In Newark, he could
live without being vilified because he had &ldquo;crossed the line&rdquo;
(married a black woman), Mezz Mezzrow, the legendary
clarinetist, revealed in his autobiography, *Really The Blues*.

Walking to *The News* some mornings, I'd swap hellos
with Dave Tough, the Chicago drummer, staggering home
down Mulberry Street.  To get their choppers capped and
grinders fitted, leaders and side men, ride men, flacks, and
thrushes fell by the Newark office of dentist Albie Vernet after
their gigs.  Not only did Albie have a &ldquo;great hand,&rdquo; he'd cap and grind from midnight to dawn.

They'd fall by Fat Harris's Star Bar on Halsey Street
around the corner from the Adams Theatre to dig Don
Lambert's piano improvisations and feed the kitty on his
box.  Backstage at the Adams, Sarah Vaughan told me she lived
on Avon Place near the church where she sang in the choir.
About a half mile from the Star, at 58 Market Street, I'd yack
with Herman Lubinsky, who recorded Charlie Parker on his
Savoy label.  I covered name bands and pop singers at the
Adams and at Frank Daley's Meadowbrook in nearby Cedar
Grove, mecca for returning GIs, WACS, Gyrenes, WAVES
and WRENS converted to swing by *Matinee At Meadowbrook*
broadcasts over Armed Forces Radio.  I supped and cupped
with leaders, pleaders, readers, flacks, jacks, side men and ride
men.  No pro, no hep—that's hep, not hip—civilian ever
quoted *Bartlett's* botch instead of Fats's dictum.

When daylighting, moonlighting, twilighting in Manhattan,
I'd fall by the Turf Restaurant on the 47th Street strand
of the Brill Building (Tin Pan Alley).  There, I'd scarf with song
writers, demo makers, a &amp; r men, cats, gates.  We'd scarf at
Danny's Hideaway, too; at Al and Dick's, or at Gus and Andy's
where you could bug the chartists from *The Billboard*.  To join

seances at the Turf with mystics who wrote &ldquo;liner notes,&rdquo; I'd
parrot the glossolalia based on rigid rules of rhetoric for
writing &ldquo;notes&rdquo; (purple paeans) on &ldquo;liners&rdquo; (album sleeves):
Use no form of *record*; write *platter, disc, side, track, session,
wax, etch, cut, press, groove*, instead.  Identify persons who
record as *artists*, whether they sing, play, lead, or arrange.
Artists get *pacted*, or sign *pacts*—never contracts—with
*labels*, not record companies.  Perennial hits remain *ever-greens*,
never *standards*.

Indoctrinated with expository exactitudes, authors of
liner notes never chanted *Bartlett's* blasphemy.  They cantillated
the gospel according to Fats.

Nick's, the Pied Piper on West Eighth, George's on
Seventh Avenue and other oases left Washington and Sheridan
the only Squares in Greenwich Village.  Up at 144 East
42nd Street, in the Commodore Music Shop, Milt Gabler
collated jazz discography.  Jimmy Ryan's and 52nd Street
swung.

No pro, no true blues proponent challenged on my
daylight, moonlight, or twilight quests paired *Bartlett's*
banality with Satch.

To all, Louis Armstrong personified jazz &ldquo;Start with
Louis,&rdquo; when you pick an All-Star Jazz Combo, Jazz Critic
Leonard Feather said.  Nobody wondered, &ldquo;Louis Who?&rdquo;
Born in 1900, Louis died in 1971, 28 years after Fats.  During
that 28-year stretch, Louis became the best-known jazz artist
in the world.  Jet planes sped &ldquo;Ambassador Satch&rdquo; to Europe
and Africa and across America.  Television brought him into
focus in millions of homes where Fats had been unknown.  On
stereo and hi-fi rigs, jazz lovers could amplify Satch's growling
vocals and soaring trumpet with truer &ldquo;presence&rdquo; and
&ldquo;fidelity&rdquo; than prewar phonographs could grind from Fats's
relatively few 78-rpm shellacs.  The best known jazz artist in
the world, Louis, understandably, might be named author of
any statement about jazz.

Suppose Satch did growl the variation *Bartlett's* has
attributed to him.  We know Fats said, &ldquo;Lady, if you got to ask,
you ain't got it.&rdquo;

And *Bartlett's* ain't got it.

## English in Dutch
*Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium*

Most articles in VERBATIM deal with the way English
speakers handle their language, how they play or
wrestle with it.  Although this probably is what interests
readers most, perhaps an occasional look at the joys and
sorrows English causes in other parts of the world would not
come amiss.  Let us take Holland for example.  Within the
family of official national languages, Dutch is probably the
closest relative of English.  The two have many elements in
common (including a number of delightful *faux amis*), but a
systematic exposition would require the skills of a linguistic
historian.  All I want to do here is to touch upon some aspects of
the large-scale adoption of English vocabulary in recent times.

To be sure, none of these aspects is confined to the Dutch
situation.  After all, each language has its *Franglais*.  Dutch is
just a convenient object of demonstration because the material
is so abundant.

1.  *Principal areas of penetration*.  Words tend to travel
with the goods (and the bads) for which they stand.  Just as
Americans call their sausages *baloney, wurst*, or *salami*, we
import the names of new things and concepts from the
countries where they originated: sport from Britain, science
and technology from the USA.  A great many of the American
contributions stem from after WW II and are therefore concentrated
in such areas as electronics, astronomy, nuclear
physics, and their applications.  America is also our big supplier
of terminology in the field that I would vaguely define as
&ldquo;modern life&rdquo;—to encompass such diverse subjects as certain
styles of music and dance, contemporary politics and warfare,
business management and advertising, film and television
techniques, youth movements, the drug scene, and other
subcultures.

2.  *Uniqueness of the foreign term*.  We Dutch could
certainly not do without words like *clown, jazz, scooter, call
girl, rugby, bestseller, cocktail, sexy, ketchup, chip, napalm,
jeep, container, poster*, or *cruise*.  On the other hand, a term
like *pipe line*, although likely to be understood in most
circles, might be frowned upon as an unnecessary barbarism,
and no Dutch dictionary would deign to mention it.

These examples represent two extreme positions.  Many
English loan words have an in-between status which is less
easy to describe but more interesting to study.  Take *goalkeeper*,
a term for which good Dutch equivalents exist.  &ldquo;Good&rdquo;
means that it is built from conventional national language
elements and therefore easy to pronounce and to inflect, and
that it is equal in descriptive quality.  Examples: *doelman*
'goalman,' *doelwatcher* 'goalguard,' and *doelverdediger* 'goal
defender.'  Somehow, however, these words have never
gained complete acceptance; although everybody understands
them, their active use is mainly limited to purists and to
those journalists who cultivate a certain sports lingo.  Or take
*computer*.  First-rate translations were suggested by men of
great authority early in the fifties before any habits had taken
root.  Some were of even higher descriptive value than the
original, inasmuch as they also covered the noncomputing
functions that this machine now has come to perform.  Again,
all have remained strangers, while the foreign word has
become naturalized.  Quite another case is *black hole*.  The
literal translation *zwart gat* is no less popular than the English
term but has a different psychological effect.  *Black hole* is
intriguing, mysterious, evoking the thrill of cosmic infinity,
whereas *zwart gat* is just a black hole—if you see what I mean.
*Sex* has enjoyed a similar fate.  The Dutch equivalents *sekse*
and *geslacht* are employed in emotionally neutral contexts,
whereas *sex* (sometimes written as &ldquo;*seks*&rdquo;) seems to be the
proper designation for the same thing when it is forbidden or
otherwise exciting.

3.  *Restricted meaning*.  Have you ever noticed that
many foreign words cover a narrower semantic range in the
adopting language than at home?  Think of the highly specific
meaning that French words like *cuisine, chef*, or *chauffeur*
have when used by English speakers.  My English dictionary
offers more than twenty meanings of the noun *flat*, but the
most extensive Dutch dictionary knows only of four.  For the
noun *bar*, the ratio is as high as 30 to 3.  The word *drug* is
applied only to the narcotic or hallucinogenic varieties in
Holland.  Along with these has come a second acceptation of
the noun *kick*—one exclusively a soccer term, as *penalty* is still.
Likewise, *crawl* is only meaningful to swimmers and *spurt* to
athletes and cyclists.  *Shelter* is reserved for a type of tent, and
*feeling* is a psychological category, never a perception or an
opinion.  *Concern* concerns nobody but businessmen, *royalty*
is commonly a commoner's claim, a *dealer* is either an automobile
concessionaire or a drug pedlar, and *meeting* refers to
what the British would call a *demo*, the Americans a (political
or similar) *demonstration.  Stick* stands exclusively for *hockey
stick*, but the diminutive *stickie* for a marijuana cigarette
(side by side with *joint*, *reefer*, etc.).  And we know of only one
*establishment*, namely the Establishment.

As some of these examples suggest, a high degree of
semantic specificity can make attributes redundant.  Indeed,
would you call your personal driver a private chauffeur, as
the French (rightly) do?  To return to the goalkeeper, the
Dutch never use that word.  We just call him *keeper*, and
there is no risk of ambiguity because we simply have no other
keepers in the language.  Anyway, most users do *not* realize
what the primary meaning of *keeper* is.  The average
Dutchman, whether he knows English or not, never stops to
think about the &ldquo;real&rdquo; meaning of those English words of
which he has borrowed only one or two connotations, like
*foxtrot, jitterbug, twist, dragline, hardware, service, bulldozer,
bumper, pin-up, knock-out, punk, compiler, charter, hip*, etc.
The same may be said of numerous English abbreviations
and acronyms, like *radar, quasar, laser, hi-fi, COBOL, OK, LSD,
DNA, UFO, IRA, FBI, CIA, PLO, OPEC*, and the names of practically
the whole *UN* family.  Speaking of meaning, I ought to
mention that some loan words are used senses they never or
rarely have in the lending language.  For instance, *lunchroom*
is a 'tearoom' in Holland, and *camping* a 'campsite.'  We call a
paperback *pocketbook* (*boek* = book) or just *pocket*, even
when it sports such uncharacteristic features as giant size or
deluxe finish (*reuzenpocket, luxepocket*).  And we have
followed the French in using *slip* for 'briefs,' *dancing* for
'dance hall,' and *smoking* for 'dinner jacket.'

4.  *Pronunciation.*  If we pronounce *laser* the English
way, it sounds like the Dutch word *lezer* 'reader,' and that may
give rise to misunderstanding.  On the other hand, if we
pronounce it at face value, it sounds much like one of the less
decorous words of our own language, and we may appear
ridiculous.  No wonder we often hesitate: nobody likes to seem
uncultured, but who wants to sound pedantic?  Ignoring the
English pronunciation is usually considered to be non-U, but
an anti-elitist vogue has lately conferred some super-U status
on this attitude (provided it's evident that you are doing it
knowingly, of course).

One tiny side problem: which English pronunciation?
Words like *privacy* oblige us to choose between British
pri&#92;?&#92;&#92;?&#92;&emacr; and American pra&#92;?&#92;v&#92;?&#92;s&emacr;.  Mind you, a few words
have gone ways of their own: *detective* is invariably
pronounced as if it were of French origin, and most
Amsterdam housewives make the first part of *corned beef*
sound like *cornet* (the trumpet).

5.  *Spelling.*  Strange as it may seem, the spelling of
foreign words can be open to discussion.  The word *tram*
'streetcar' was adopted more than a hundred years ago, and
we still have not quite decided whether it should be written
*tram* or *trem* or how to pronounce the former.  During the
wild 1960s, there was a tendency to stay close to the original
pronunciation while going completely phonetic in spelling.
This craze has yielded gems like *kwis* 'quiz,' *joenit* 'unit,'
*rieleks* 'relax,' and *immetsj* 'image.'  The present decade of
speakers is not so radical, but it certainly is still considered
good usage to harmonize the orthography of foreign words
with their pronunciation by &ldquo;Dutching&rdquo; up their endings and
making other slight alterations.  Hence *compatibel* for 'compatible,'
*puzzel* for 'puzzle,' *kloon* for 'clone,' *boycot* for
'boycott,' *hasj* for 'hash,' *lorrie* for 'lorry.'  There is something
debatable about this whole subject, though.  For instance, one
could argue that *lorrie* 'mine car' has been integrated for so
long that it should not be considered as a respelled foreign
word any longer.  I would go along with that objection, but
then there are those who would criticize some of my other
examples.

This brings us to a question I have carefully avoided so
far: What exactly is a foreign word, or a loan word, or a
barbarism?  There is probably no simple answer to that, but I
can think of several reasons why, whatever the definitions,
the English attitude to this issue would differ from that of the
Dutch.  In the first place, the Dutch language has a relatively
high sign/sound correspondence.  This makes the pronunciation
of a given sequence of letters more or less predictable,
or, conversely, once you have heard a word, you can be
pretty sure how it &ldquo;should&rdquo; be spelled.  The system is by no
means fully consistent, but words that obstensibly do not fit it
reveal themselves as nonnative.  A few Anglicisms (like *trip,
spin, spot, song, run, stunt*) come close enough to circulate
here in mufti, but most do not and thus cannot help
continuously exhibiting an alien badge.  Secondly, certain
letter sequence patterns or letter positions are generally felt
to be un-Dutch, such as *-ck (snack), -ey (jockey), -sh (pusher)*,
final double consonants (*stuff, mess*), and many others.
Consequently, words containing them—and many English
words do—also carry an alien label, even when they cause no
pronunciation problems.  A third factor is psychological.
Small language communities, like small nations, tend to react
more defensively to immigration waves than do the bigger
fellows.  But that is an altogether different subject.

At any rate, the whole notion of foreignness is a relative
and gradual one.  Quite a few foreign words may be treated *en
famille* in certain circles while elsewhere they are deemed
learned, or pedantic, or vulgar, or just &ldquo;strange.&rdquo;  They may
lose their popularity after a certain time (e.g.*in* is no longer in
in the Netherlands), or hover forever at the jargon or slang
level, or penetrate into the general language and become
accepted by dictionary makers.  Incidentally, the assimilation
is easiest in science and technology because there are
standard procedures for the transformation of the Latin and
Greek roots used to coin new terms in these fields (*television/
televisie, ecology/ ecologie, electronics/elektronica, algorithm/
algoritme, sexism/ seksisme*, etc.).  In fact, the language of
science would be almost universal if it were not for those
frolicsome Americans who delight in inventing lighthearted
names for the most serious concepts, like *flip-flop, big bang,
quark, software*, and *debugging*.

The spelling of adopted English words presents the same
kind of problem as their pronunciation: British or American
style?  *Behaviourism* or *behaviorism*, *center* or *centre*?  I began
to realize that this is even an inter-English issue when I met a
British secretary who would normally type *programme* but
would prefer *program* in texts on computer science, the latter
being of American origin.

6.  *Morphological constructions.*  None of the preceding
aspects causes any major problems as long as we look at
loan words as immutable lexical elements.  In real life,
however, nouns have to be pluralized and verbs conjugated,
and we even inflect our adjectives a bit.  (Modern Dutch has
retained rudiments of gender.)  Also, new words have to be
formed through composition or derivation.  That's where the
trouble begins:

(a)  *Inflection.*  Pluralization is a relatively simple matter.
Dutch has two suffixes for the purpose, one of which is
basically identical to its English counterpart (*-s*) and therefore
applied to most words of English origin: *trips, insiders*.
However, for words ending in *-y*, an apostrophe is inserted so
that the plural form looks like an English possessive: *baby's,
lolly's*.  Words ending in a sibilant are frequently pluralized by
means of the Germanic suffix (*-en*): *stewardessen, quizzen,
boxen*.

Conjugation is more intricate.  The infinitives of all Dutch
verbs end in *-n* preceded by a vowel (generally an *e*), and the
regular verb paradigm cannot be properly applied to a word
that does not have this ending.  Foreign verbs have therefore
to be refashioned to fit the pattern.  'To lunch' becomes
*lunchen*; other examples: *lynchen, trainen, testen, boycotten,
runnen, settelen, kidnappen, liften* ('hitchhike'), *bluffen,
sprinten*, and recently also *joggen*.  The trick is even played on
English nouns that are normally not verbalized at home, such
as *hockeyen* ('play hockey'), *tennissen, bridgen, pokeren*
(analogous), *keepen* ('act as a goalkeeper'), *permanenten*
('apply a perm'), *speechen* ('deliver a speech').  Technically
speaking, these reshaped infinitives can always be conjugated,
but the outcome is not always too elegant.

(b) *Composition and derivation.*  In English, nouns are combined into new expressions (a) by joining them (*dogcart*),
(b) by linking them with a hyphen (*dog-ear*), or (c) by just
leaving them as two words (*dog collar*).  The outcome of (a) or
(b) is called a compound; for the outcome of (c) I propose the
term &ldquo;word group&rdquo; (the first self-referring word group, by the way, see VERBATIM IV, 1, 11).  As method (c) does not agree
with Dutch usage, English word groups (*art director, brain
drain, link editor*) stand out as conspicuously alien in Dutch
contexts, even apart from their unfamiliar spelling.  Bearing in
mind that English composites often evolve from (c) to (b) to
(a) anyway, we sometimes attenuate this effect by stealthily
inserting a hyphen (*air-conditioning*) or by writing a hyphenated
word solid (*weekend*) before the *OED* has given the
green light.  But mostly we behave as good borrowers should.
The whole issue may seem trifling, but it has a few annoying
consequences.  In the first place, the combination of an
English word group and a Dutch noun into a threesome causes
problems.  For instance, should one write the combination of
*data base* and *beheer* ('management') as *data base beheer,
databasebeheer, data base-beheer*, or in some other of the
nine possible permutations?  Moreover, this uncertainty is
probably the root of the increasing habit of splitting up
genuine Dutch compounds, especially when the number of
syllables is high.  Authors who should know better are
beginning to prefer *aardrijkskunde onderwijs* to
*aardrijkskundeonderwijs* ('geography teaching') or even
*inkoop afdeling* to *inkoopafdeling* ('purchase department').

The English invasion may be detrimental to some of our
compositional traditions, but it has induced bustling creativity
on the derivation front.  I have already mentioned the formation
of new verbs through adaptation of English roots.  Also,
the suffix *-er* can produce agents of such verbs where they do
not exist in English (*tennisser, bridger, hockeyer, filmer*).  In a
second round, Dutch free forms are sometimes attached to
engender macaronics like *afkicken* ('kick off = 'undergo drug
detoxification treatment'), *uittesten* ('test out' = 'verify by
reference to a checklist'), and *omturnen* ('turn round' = 'make
one change one's mind').

There is one area of derivation where the Dutch are really
on their home ground; that's the formation of diminutives.  The
suffix is basically *-je*, but its modifications are many.  It can,
given an appropriate context, be applied to practically every
concrete noun and sometimes even to other parts of speech.
Its basic function is of course to denote smallness, but it can
also point to the insignificance or the helplessness of the
object in question, express feelings of endearment or commiseration
(but also condescension) in the speaker, or convey
his modesty, admiration, or apology.  It can also refer to one
individual item made of the material in question, e.g. *interlockje*
is a shirt made of such fabric.  Readers may wish to guess
at the semantic nuance implied in each of the following words:
*shirtje, gangstertje, baby'tje, interviewtje, face-liftje, shagje* (or
*sjekkie), drummertje, foldertje, bandje*, and *speechje*.


#### EPISTOLA {William Hereford}

With great interest I read the article [VI, 1] written in
explanation of the expression *GI*.  From my father, who was in
the artillery during World War II, I have a contribution to
make to the debate.

Non-infantry combatants were not ordinarily referred to
as &ldquo;GI's.&rdquo;  It is difficult to imagine Air Force, Navy, or Marine
personnel having that sobriquet.  It is logical, then, to trace the
expression *GI* to the term 'General Infantry' rather than
'Government Issue' or 'galvanized iron.'  Confirmations or
refutations of this would be of interest.

*[William Hereford, Ouagadougou, Upper Volta]*

## Rhyme and Jingle
*Joann Karges, Fort Worth, Texas*

Rhyming reduplicatives occur in English and other
Germanic languages in the oldest of our literatures.[^b1] 
They are found in Old and Middle English, occurring in *Piers
Plowman* and Chaucer, becoming even more prevalent during
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and increasing into
the nineteenth and twentieth.  Some of them are definitely
playful: *handy-dandy (handy-spandy, handy-pandy*),
which was indeed a children's game, and some are reinforcements:
*hurry-scurry* and *helter-skelter*.  Others have variously
interesting origins: *hocus-pocus*, the alleged origin of which is
well known; *willy-nilly*, reflecting a word now otherwise lost to
us; *hob-nob* with its two possible origins[^b2] 
merging to give us the impression of drinking elbow to elbow beside a fireplace;
and *namby-pamby*, the literary contrivance of Henry Carey
(1726).  Many of the hundreds of rhyming reduplicatives have
long since disappeared from current usage, while new ones
are formed and brought into use constantly.  There are, in fact,
a considerable number of words that have been formed during
the twentieth century, some now generally accepted in polite
oral and written speech and others only on the fringe levels: in
youth slang, ethnic cultures, and commerce.

The phenomena of the creation of these words must
include those with a Yiddish association that have come into
being since the 1940s: the *sch*-words, which according to
Flexner indicate &ldquo;dislike, disinterest, mockery, or an attempt
to deflate pomposity.&rdquo;[^b3] 
In these the original word or part of it is repeated with the prefix, forming such compounds as
*moon-schmoon, possible-schmossible, fancy-schmancy*.
Because these are usually spontaneous creations not in
consistent use, I have not included them in my collections.

In offering the following lists of current rhyming reduplicatives,
I should also like to inquire if other readers are familiar
with the following rhyme which we as children adapted to all
kinds of personal names, never in derision but always in goodhumored
fun:

>Anne bom banne, silly Anne go hann,  
Hee-legged, high-legged, bow-legged Anne.  
George bom borge, silly orge go horge,  
Hee-legged, high-legged, bow-legged George.  
>
>Intentional:  
>
>*boogie-woogie*   
>*chuck-a-luck*        
>*eager beaver*  
>*flibberty-gibberty*     
>*flub-dub*          
>*fuddy-duddy*      
>*fuzzy-wuzzy*       
>*gruesome twosome*  
>*handy-dandy*    
>*hanky-panky*    
>*harum-scarum*        
>*heebie-jeebies*     
>*helter-skelter*  
>*hickory, dickory, dock*  
>*higgledy-piggledy*    
>*highty-flighty*     
>*hipper-dipper*       
>*hipperty-skipperty*    
>*hob-nob*        
>*hocus-pocus*     
>*hodge-podge*   
>*hoighty-toity*   
>*hokey-pokey*      
>*honky-tonk(y)*    
>*hot-shot*      
>*hotsy-totsy*   
>*hub-bub*  
>*huff-duff*  
>*huftymagufty*   
>*hugger-mugger*   
>*humdrum*  
>*hurdy-gurdy*  
>*hurly-burly*  
>*hurry-scurry*  
>*itsy-bitsy*  
>*itty-bitty*  
>*lovey-dovey*  
>*mumbo jumbo*  
>*namby-pamby*  
>*nitty-gritty*[^b4]  
>*Pall mall (Pall Mall)*  
>*palsy-walsy*  
>*pee-wee*  
>*pell-mell*  
>*polly-wolly-doodle*  
>*ragtag*  
>*razz-ma-tazz*  
>*razzle-dazzle*  
>*ringey-dingey*  
>*rinky-dinky*[^b5]  
>*roly-poly*  
>*rub-a-dub-dub*  
>*rumble-tumble*  
>*teensy-weensy*  
>*teeny-weeny*  
>*thriller-diller*  
>*tootsy-wootsy*  
>*walkie-talkie*  
>*willy-nilly*  
>*wing-ding (whing-ding)*  
>
>Accidental:  
>
>*blackjack*  
>*grandstand*  
>*kowtow*  
>*nitwit*  
>*payday*  
>*picnic*  
>*Hackensack*  
>*Hong Kong*  
>*Oshkosh*  
>*Hell's bells*  
>*jeepers creepers*  
>
>Contrived:      
>
>*Georgy-porgy*             
>*Handy-Andy*               
>*Henny Penny*              
>*Humpty-Dumpty*            
>*Piggly-Wiggly*            
>And?                       
>*even-Steven*              
>
>Onomatopoeic:   
>
>*bow-wow*              
>*tee-hee*        
>*boo-hoo* 

***

[^b1]: Thun, Nils. *Reduplicative Words in English*.  Uppsala: 1963.

[^b2]: From *hob or nob*, to drink to one another (earlier to *hit or miss*) *OED*;
the *hob* to keep the beer warm by the hearth and the *nob* (table)
where the drink was set by the elbow (Brewer, E.C., *Dictionary of
Phrase and Fable*, New ed. Phila: Lippincott, n.d.).

[^b3]: *Dictionary of American Slang*.  2d supplemented edition. Comp. by
Harold Wentworth and Stuart B. Flexner. New York: Crowell, 1975, p. 606.

[^b4]: Stuart Flexner attributes this to the Black militants of the 1960s and the prevalence of &ldquo;grit-like nits.&rdquo;  (*I Hear America Singing*. Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1976.)

[^b5]: Apparently in use only since World War II.  Origin not explained.


### SIC! SIC! SIC! 

Sign at a neighborhood recreation center in Hawaii: &ldquo;Do
Not Sit On Balls.  Use For Intended Purposes Only.&rdquo;  [Submitted
by Alfred G. Hoel, University of Hawaii, Pearl City]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

After working during the past six months on a part-time
probationary basis, San Diego Unified School District officials
have decided [Chris Timmins] can handle a full-time job
again.  [*San Diego Union*, 24 July 1979, p. B4; submitted by
Barbara Marsh, San Diego]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Beware underground cables.&rdquo;  [Sign at a road works
encountered by David Purchase, Bristol, England]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Menu barbarism in a restaurant in Germany: &ldquo;Cokked
Sausage.&rdquo;  [Also from David Purchase]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Use of radar detecting devices is illegal in Connecticut&rdquo;
[Sign on a highway entering Connecticut from Massachusetts.
Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University, who spotted it,
comments, &ldquo;How sporting of the State Police to inform me that
it's illegal for them to monitor my speed with radar!&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The Congregation Anshei Lebedowe-Radcilowe, at 266
East Broadway in New York City has its &ldquo;manse&rdquo; listed in the
Manhattan telephone directory.  [&ldquo;Presbyterian Jews, no
doubt?&rdquo;  comments Ken Giniger, of New York City, who
submitted this.]

## Fallin' In with the Great-Aunts
*Rebecca Christian, Hi-Nella, New Jersey*

The other day, my Brooklyn-born co-worker characterized
her exasperating boss with the expression, &ldquo;Now that's
a piece of work.&rdquo;

>&ldquo;When were you in Joplin?&rdquo;  I wanted to know,  
&ldquo;Never, thank God.&rdquo;  was the reply.

But it did turn out that one of her friends is a St. Louis
native, and she picked the phrase up from him.  Even with an
Eastern accent, the words had a welcome ring.  Though I grew
up in Iowa, visiting relatives in Missouri taught me to vent my
spleen in down-home style.

To express consternation, I admit I can't decide whether
*to pee or go blind*.  When I've done something clever, I
congratulate myself for having *cut a fat pig in the hip*.  If a
friend abandons me, I console myself that *I am well shet
of him*.

The highlight of my childhood summers was journeying
down to Eldorado Springs, Missouri, for the 20th of July picnic
celebration in the town's tiny central square.  What we were
celebrating, I never knew, but after we partook of the rusty
spring water from a tap in the bowels of the park and gorged
on three-bean salad while Aunt Blanche's weepy chocolate
pie went a-beggin', the fun began.

While the men went off to talk politics and pitch
horseshoes, I would lie on a picnic bench with my head in
one of my great-aunt's broad lap.  Looking up at the stars in
the summer sky, I lay low until the women forgot I was there.
Then I listened to delicious tales of babes born *not quite
right*, men who were *steppin' out*, women who found the
*wifely duty* repugnant, and sinners who got *caught and
churched*.  The language was almost as intriguing as the racy
tidbits floating on the July air.

I was taken with the distinctions between *fallin*' in
(&ldquo;Stevie got to goin' with that Randolph girl and fell in with the
Baptists&rdquo;), *fallin' out* (&ldquo;Great-Grandma and her second husband
had a fallin' out because he wanted her to make all the
pancakes at once and she wanted to make them in shifts,
stoppin' to gobble hers when they were hot&rdquo;), and *fallin' off*
(&ldquo;Erma, your dress is loose.  Did you fall off a little?&rdquo;)

A *fallin' off* was hard to keep straight from a *runnin' off*,
which was diarrhea.  Other descriptions of illness were also

challenging to translate.  *Peaky* meant 'poorly' and 'not up to
snuff,' *puny* was 'confined to bed,' *poorly* meant 'chronically
ill,' and *bad sick* meant it was time to call the undertaker.

*To like to do something* did not always indicate pleasure, as
I learned from the example, &ldquo;He liked to bled to death.&rdquo;  *Shore*
meant 'sure' and was used not only as an affirmative but as
shorthand for 'surely.'  My cousin Sharon, a University of
Missouri homecoming queen, shore did look pretty, and her
mother shore could fry chicken.  It took me a long time to
figure out *Lord Willing* wasn't royalty but kin to crossing your
fingers or knocking on wood, a conditional on which plans
were based.

Since I was as corn fed as one of those curious hogs that
asserted their independence on ice, I was particularly attentive
to descriptions of fat.  From the plainspoken *fleshy* to the
euphemistic *rounded*, I heeded them all.

Great-Grandpa Fowble's ancient mother would croak
about her firstborn, &ldquo;Jenny's fat, but 'tisn't good fat.  It's water
fat.  She always did swell.&rdquo;  Jenny's ankles did look ready to bust
out of the white surgical socks she wore to ward off infection
from a long-ago operation.  I can still picture the fluid
undulating beneath her flesh like the water under the
mattress of a water-bed.  Her mother-in-law's comment always
annoyed Great-Grandma Fowble, who would knead the sickly
yellow of her droopy forearm and hoot, &ldquo;Not me.  I got good,
plain old-fashioned fat.  Good fat!  I'm right fleshy.&rdquo;

The discussion of fat always brought up the topic of
wedding-day weights, with one aunt whose leg alone weighed
85 pounds claiming that statistic for her nuptials.  As a result of
my eavesdropping, I always associate wedding-day weights
with the length of time spent in labor as crucial information in
a woman's curriculum vitae.  The woman who could boast of a
match—the number of pounds registered at the altar equaling
the number of hours spent in labor with the first child—well,
that was a woman indeed.

Even the less sexy conversations had a special twist.
While we Iowans *shopped for material*, our Missouri cousins
*traded for dry goods*.  Their potato salad didn't *spoil*, but
*turned*.  For them *to be set back* was not 'to encounter failure'
but 'to spend a lot of money.'  I can remember being
bewildered when someone asked Uncle Kenneth what he had
to *give* for his Ford.

Uncle Kenneth's dead now—or *gone* as they say in
Eldorado—and I have long since moved from Iowa, the most
joked about state in the U.S.A. to New Joisey, the runner-up.
Recently, though, I had to go back to Kansas City on business.

As soon as I arrived, I snapped on the hotel TV to hear a
newscast drawled in the remembered cadences.  The anchor-man,
whose hair appeared to have been styled with an
eggbeater, was unmistakably from Trenton.  I liked to died.


#### EPISTOLA {Reinhold Aman}

As a longtime reader of *Verbatim* who drops everything
to read the newest issue from cover to cover, I often get the
urge to correct, add to, or comment on, various matters.
Usually I can suppress this urge; the latest issue [V, 4] is too
much to brook.  Here it goes:

Of the twenty boldface terms presented by Mr. Mohan
in &ldquo;Hindi Filmi English,&rdquo; over half have negative connotations
(interesting to maledictologists); luckily, the publishers
of Hindi dictionaries don't have an equivalent of the Texas
State Textbook Commission to cope with: the dictionary
makers would have to delete about 50% of the entries, as a
high percentage of Hindi words has &ldquo;obscene&rdquo; connotations.

K. Hall's &ldquo;Indri!&rdquo;  story recalls an old joke among
linguists.  In that version, the linguist, eliciting words of the
indigenous language he was studying, was told the same
word for &ldquo;tree,&rdquo; &ldquo;rock,&rdquo; &ldquo;sky&rdquo; and whatever else he was
pointing to.  It turned out that the native informant provided
every time the same word, meaning &ldquo;finger.&rdquo;

The &ldquo;green growing lilacs,&rdquo; allegedly the source for the
*gringo*, finally should be snipped off by a *wog*, suffering from
a similarly silly folk etymology (*w*ily *o*riental *g*entleman).  May
both rest in peace!

Ms. Gilman's story about her friend's mixing up
*Matratze* with *Matrose* would have been a bit juicier if the
correct German preposition had been used: one does not
sleep &ldquo;next to&rdquo; the mattress (*neben der Matratze*) but *auf der
Matratze*, &ldquo;on (top of)&rdquo; it.  Students of German who have not
yet &ldquo;reasoned out&rdquo; (take *that*, R. Fowkes), the dative and
accusative cases usually wait *auf der Frau*, instead of *auf die
Frau* ('for the woman').

Dr. Freedman's suggestion of introducing *deflatulate* for
*fart* is a gas!  This euphemism is even ickier than the existing
ones.  He also missed the essential semantic component of *to*

*crepitate*, namely, 'to expell gas *noisily*,' regardless of
whether as a burp or a fart.  What the doctors and we need
are 2 terms: *fart*, for the loud kind, and *fist* (related to *feist*),
for the silent one: short, precise, onomatopoetic words—and
very useful for a proper diagnosis!

Finally, Greg Raven's verbal attack on my fellow editor
and publisher, Mr. Urdang, was too hateful to be effective.
We editors have the same right to our opinions as do
our readers; normally we have to suppress them, to avoid
upsetting intolerant folks.  If—by trying to stem the deterioration
of language, and by producing publications a good cut
above the cheap and sloppy mass-market rags aimed at semi-illiterates,
and by trying to pull people up to our standards
rather than dropping down to their simian levels of education—if
our principles make us elitists, so be it.

If all high school drop-outs were as perceptive and
literate as Mr. Raven showed himself to be (including
&ldquo;scummy cretins&rdquo; and &ldquo;subservient idiots&rdquo;), most of our
present concerns about the state of education and language
would not be necessary.

Curiously, in his very last (sarcastic) line, Mr. Raven
slipped up, showing his latent eliticism: he used *I* rather than
the semi-illiterate language he seems to embrace: *ME:*
(*shaking head*)...

*[Reinhold Aman, Maledicta Press Waukesha, Wisconsin]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jim Goodwin}

Dr. Siwek's article [&ldquo;Body English,&rdquo; VI, 1] was a real treat
for this Classics major.  I always enjoy a good word hunt, but
the good Doctor really showed me how it's done.  I would have
but one addition to make to this comprehensive list.

Most of us know the *tibia* as our shin bone.  To the Roman,
*tibia* meant 'flute.'  Anatomists borrowed this word because the
Roman flute, used at recitals, dinners, funerals, and other
events, was an animal's shin bone.

*[Jim Goodwin, Essex, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Edward C. Pinkerton}

I was surprised that Jay Siwek did not include in &ldquo;Body
English,&rdquo; his catalogue of anatomical terms [VI, 1], the
ubiquitous *muscle* Latin *musculus* 'little mouse,' a metaphor
coined by the speakers of classical Latin.

*[Edward C. Pinkerton, Baltimore, Maryland]*

## Watching All the Guys Go By
*Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University*

The effect of the Women's Movement on contemporary
American English is already a dead horse that needs no
beating.  Our alleged linguistic sexism has spawned its share
of books, articles, and much discussion, ranging over a
multiplicity of phenomena.  Some are quite reasonable, like
the generations-old quest for a neutral third-person pronoun
(&ldquo;Everyone does his?  his/her?  their?  work...&rdquo;).  Many are
absurd, like the spate of burgeoning neologisms, from this or
that asexual *person*-compound (*personhandle, ombudsperson*,
etc.) to the reverse-chauvinistic etymological abomination of
such semi-serious nouns as &ldquo;herstory.&rdquo;

One specific phenomenon, however, I find particularly
intriguing because of the question of semantic shift that it
raises.  I refer to the growing feminization of the traditionally
masculine noun *guy*.  It is more and more common nowadays to
hear a group of females use this term among themselves.
&ldquo;What are you guys doing tonight?&rdquo;  is a perfectly standard
question among college co-eds, for example.  And I admit that,
while not usually a porcine male chauvinist in other respects,
I do find it linguistically jarring.  (Almost as jarring, I might
add, as the often self-conscious use of four-letter words that
come tripping off the tongue of a young lady (woman?  girl?)
bent on proving that she is, indeed, just one of the &ldquo;guys.&rdquo;)

To be sure, the feminine use of *guy* is not a brand-new
phenomenon.  Wentworth and Flexner (*Dictionary of
American Slang*) cite an example from 1944, &ldquo;Where are you
guys going?&rdquo;  used in addressing a man and woman together.  I
suspect, however, that its earlier uses, like that one, were
limited to sexually mixed groups, and that its use in all-female
contexts is, if not wholly unattested in the past, at least far
more common today than ever before.  What may have begun
as a humorous usage—akin to that of older folks addressing
one another as &ldquo;you kids&rdquo;—has, I think, become something of
a sexually aggressive affectation.  The probable etymology of
the word (from the grotesque effigies of Guy Fawkes) makes
this development even less defensible.  But that, I suppose, is
an old-fashioned argument, and not one that would convince
many modern users.

What interests me especially in this feminization of *guy*
is the illogical limitation of its semantic field.  It seems to occur,
in fact, only among acquaintances and then primarily in the
vocative.  The same speakers who blithely use it in referring to
one another—&ldquo;you guys&rdquo; (and, less often, &ldquo;us guys,&rdquo; &ldquo;those
guys&rdquo;)—wouldn't dream of using it to describe a person or
persons outside the group and unknown to its members.  One
would never—at least, not yet—hear them say, for example,
referring to a bevy of female strangers: &ldquo;We just saw a bunch
of guys down at the carwash.&rdquo;  (Except, I imagine, among
militant lesbians.)  In other words, the noun is, at present, still
semantically restricted.

Perhaps, however, it will not always remain so.  Perhaps
what we are witnessing is a semantic shift in the making—
catching it in the act, as it were—always an exciting experience
for language buffs, whatever their social persuasion.
Perhaps, indeed, *guy* is eventually to become as completely
asexual as the now ever-present *person*.  Only time will tell, but
I am one guy who will be watching.  In the meantime, male
chauvinists offended by the usage always have the option to
react, derisively, by beginning to address one another as &ldquo;you
dolls.&rdquo;  But that is one semantic shift I don't think we have to
worry about.


#### EPISTOLA {A. Adrian Allen}

Dr. Jay Siwek [VI, 1] illustrates, in a lively panorama,
the widely-ranging imagery and flights of fancy to which the
early anatomists often found themselves driven in thinking up
names for parts of the body laid bare by their dissections.
However, in the interests of accuracy, critical remarks are
called for on a few of the literal meanings or interpretations
given.

*Esophagus* is a puzzle, and (so spelt) something of a trap
for the would-be etymologist.  The British spelling with *oe-*,
keeping to the Latin rendering of the Greek *oisophagos*, has
the merit of not suggesting a connexion of the first element
with the Latin past-participial stem *eso*- (cf. *esurient, obese*)
from *edere* 'eat.'[^c1]
This first element *oiso*-, whatever its
meaning, cannot possibly be in any way related to the above
and has not been satisfactorily identified.  The idea of eating or
swallowing is, of course, contained in the second element.
Aristotle's explanation, that the esophagus is so called from its
length and narrowness—with reference, presumably, to *oisos*
'a withy'—will hardly do, since, on that view, the two parts of
the compound are not in a proper syntactical relation to each
other, as may be seen by comparison with (e.g.) *sarcophagus*,
literally 'flesh-eater.'

Orchids (the plants) were so called from the testicles
(Greek *orkhis*), not the other way about.  The pudendal nerve
got its name direct from the *pudenda* or 'private parts,' a term
coined by classical Latin authors on the model of the Greek *ta
aidoia*.  Perhaps the best rendering of the semantic content of
these expressions, including the English one, would be
'modesty' rather than 'shame'—though, I suppose, some might
say there was no difference!  *Clitoris* (Greek *kleitoris*, found
only in the medical writers) presents another problem.  No
warrant exists for reading into it a literal meaning 'little hill,'
nor has it a diminutive form.  J. B. Hofmann suggests some
extraneous source, perhaps Semitic; but if truly Greek, it could
derive from the base *klei*- 'to close' plus the agent suffix -*tor*, to
which is added a feminine ending.  The true nature of the
organ would not have been understood by the ancients.

Finally, a *clavicle* (collar-bone) is literally not a 'fork' but a
'small key'—in fact probably some form of peg or pin for use as
or with a bolt—also a 'tendril' (an obscurely derived meaning).
As Cecil Wyld (*Universal Dictionary of English*, 1932) remarks
with reason, &ldquo;the anatomical application of *clavicle* is not very
obvious.&rdquo;

*[A. Adrian Allen, London, England]*

***

[^c1]: As a matter of interest, the word *tooth* and its cognates in many
Indo-European languages (Latin *dens, dent*, etc.) may well have
originated as a noun-participle meaning 'the eating thing,' IE
*edent-, odont*-, etc., the unstressed root vowel falling away at an
early stage except in Greek.  This is not certain but is very plausible.


#### EPISTOLA 

&ldquo;My older daughter, a classicist partially informed but
ingenious, defined *parametritis* as 'the irritation, in old buffers
like you, caused by thinking around the coming metric
system.'  The younger one, a medical student newly out of the
whirlpools of so-called basic science, offered 'The calor, rubor,
and dolor caused by the frequency of occurrence in biochemical
literature of parameters.' &rdquo;—*Lancet* 1967, i, 273.
[The preceding, printed anonymously, was sent in by its
now-revealed author, A. C. Lendrum, Dundee, Scotland.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Censors In The Classroom*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/browse/?b.search=Censors%20In%20The%20Classroom%20Edward%20B.%20Jenkinson#b.s=mostPopular-desc&b.p=1&b.pp=30&b.oos&b.tile)
Edward B. Jenkinson, (Southern Illinois University Press, 1979), xix + 178pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

If you have been reading your newspaper regularly, you
are aware that one of the (several) issues besetting the
teaching of English in American schools is censorship.  But
awareness of the isolated case affecting, say, *A Dictionary
of American Slang* or *Catcher in the Rye* in a particular school
or school district is one thing; the documentation provided by
Jenkinson of hundreds of cases of censorship affecting works
like *Of Mice and Men, The Naked Ape, Black Boy, Slaughterhouse
Five*, &ldquo;The Lottery,&rdquo; *To Kill a Mockingbird, Jaws*, an
issue of *Time* containing an article on swimwear fashions, *The
American Heritage Dictionary, The Doubleday Dictionary,
The Random House College Dictionary*, Revised Edition,
*Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language*,
College Edition, and *Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary*
is another.  One is given to wonder whether anything
but Sally, Dick and Jane is left; but even theirs may be nothing
other than a thinly disguised tale of troilism.  (Or bestiality, if
you take Spot into account.)

Here are the facts behind the prurient prudes (see
VERBATIM III, 4) who look at sex and see a cesspool (and vice
versa): puritanical school boards that consider any hint of
obscenity libidinous; old-maidish principals who think of
novelists as Cyprian degenerates insidiously debauching the
pure minds of their pubescent charges; priggish, frustrated
textbook committees whose concupiscence sees a dissolute
pervert lurking between the covers of every book.  In
Anaheim, California, all of Dickens except *Oliver Twist* and all
of Shakespeare except *Romeo* and *Juliet* and *Hamlet* appeared
on the *Index*.  Prejudice bred of ignorance, protectiveness
born of misguided nice-nellyism may be expected in provincial
ignoramuses; but these censors are the ones responsible
for the education of millions of school children.  In their
naive determination to scour the minds of our youth, they
sterilize thought and imagination by attempting to obscure life
from what they consider to be the prying eyes of our children.

These are the same educators who deny students sex
education, refuse to tell them the &ldquo;facts of life&rdquo; at home, ban
any attempts at &ldquo;self-education,&rdquo; and then express astonishment
at incidents of rape, premarital intercourse, and other
activities they condemn.  Essentially, they deny students
an education and then hold them accountable for their
ignorance.

The incidents documented by Jenkinson do not, in themselves,
surprise the reader: everyone knows that such events
have taken place.  What shocks is the sudden realization that
censorship is so widespread and that so many communities are
affected.

Dismaying, too, is the number of teachers who have been
dismissed in one way or another, usually by not having their
contracts renewed but often on the grounds of some fabricated
charge.  Those are the ones who have refused to defer to
the restrictions imposed on them: it is terrifying to contemplate
the number who ceased to struggle because they
could not afford to exchange security for nobility.

Not all censorship cited in this book is directed at &ldquo;dirty&rdquo;
books; as the author points out, &ldquo;The study of the humanities is
sometimes perceived as being anti-God because students
explore the achievements and problems of man without
always acknowledging God.&rdquo;  (p. xv) An entire chapter (7) is
devoted to &ldquo;Secular Humanism.&rdquo;  In Iran we can see the results
of clericalism: Is it possible that there remains a religion in
modern times that seems to be devoted to the eradication of
&ldquo;infidels&rdquo; through massacre by firing squads?  Of course it is.
But adherents to such a religion are deemed fanatics, and
while most of us know that there are &ldquo;a lot of nuts out there,&rdquo;
we find it hard to believe that they occupy positions of
influence as principals, on school boards, and in other
responsible places.  In their campaigns, censors declare war on
homosexuality and on homosexuals; a Save Our Children
group promulgates a &ldquo;fight to eliminate homosexual literature
from our schools and libraries,&rdquo; suggesting the banning of
works by &ldquo;such homosexuals&rdquo; as Emily Dickinson, Willa
Cather, Tennessee Williams, Oscar Wilde, T. E. Lawrence,
Jean Gen&ecirc;t, Gertrude Stein, Virginia Woolf, Walt Whitman,
Andr&eacute; Gide, Jean Cocteau, Gore Vidal, John Milton, Hans
Christian Andersen, Marcel Proust, Horatio Alger, Jr., Truman
Capote, and Rod McKuen.  Gee whiz!  I never knew that about
Emily, John, Hans, and Horatio!

This could scarcely be termed a rabble-rousing book, for
the rabble have already roused themselves sufficiently to
awake the consternation of those who are seriously concerned
about the direction being taken by many in authority in
America.  Besides, Professor Jenkinson writes in a coldly sober
tone about the inequities and iniquities of censorship.  Be that
as it may, *Censors in the Classroom* is an important book that
made this reader seethe: it may be assumed that some who
read it will use it as a handbook and will be inspired to learn
about censorship in areas not yet imagined by their tiny minds:
Can you imagine some school board member, his blue nose
buried in this book, learning that *Drums Along the Mohawk*
contains a *hell* here and a *damn* there, and then calling for an
extraordinary meeting of the board to vote for the book's
burning?  The imagination is boggled.  Maybe James Fenimore
Cooper was a homosexual.  After all, he was never known to
have spent much time promoting orange juice.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *The Pocket Dictionary Of Legal Words*
John J. Kasaian, (Doubleday &amp; Company, 1979), 179pp.

This (very) little book contains &ldquo;over 2,500 definitions&rdquo;
and might, as the cover blurb suggests, serve the casual user
who has &ldquo;ever stumbled through a contract of lease, or tried
to decipher the 'fine print' on a bill of sale.&rdquo;  It is true that no
great puffery is used to pretend that the book is anything more
than what it is stated to be, but I was dismayed to find *murder*
and *manslaughter* entered but no classifications (first,
second degree, etc.) given.  Under *degrees of murder* there is a
descriptive entry that gives one example but not much
clarification.  A dictionary of such concision cannot be reviewed
on the basis of its inclusions—nor criticized for its
omissions—but, within such a small compass one should be
able to expect consistency.  No small problem is created by the
listing (in Appendix A) of Common-law Crimes, for there are a
few items there that look interesting, yet entries for them are
not in the book: *mistreatment of corpses, escape*, and *contraceptivism*
are three.  Another, *barratry* is given only a
partial definition.  The best thing that can be said is that if the
term sought is not sophisticated in nature you may find a
satisfactory definition in this book.  Then again, you may not,
and I doubt that it will be &ldquo;an essential part of [my] reference
library,...[a] key to what [my] lawyer...is talking about.&rdquo;
I'd have to study law for 20 years to understand what my
lawyer is talking about.  [Doc: If you read this, I didn't mean
it.]

*Laurence Urdang*


#### EPISTOLA {Edgon H. Margo}

With a bow to Sterling Eisiminger and to William Gass,
we have been inspired to collect a compilation of complimentary
[sic] colors, viz.:

>*Sub Lime*              
*Tickled Pink*          
*Dead Beet*             
*Freudian Gilt*         
*Thanks Vermillion*     
*Foreseeable Fuchsia*   
*Original Cinnamon*     
*Anti-Establish Mint*  
*Shirley Temple Black*  
*By Any Other Name Rose*  
*How Now Cow Brown*  
*In Them Thar Hills Gold*  
*Hi-Ho Silver*  
*Im-Peach*

Any additional contributions to this project will be most
welcome.

*[Edgon H. Margo, Reseda, California]*

[*The violets of this attack are unprecedented, but I can tell that
you're well red.  This is a grayed idea, but I can't believe you're
cerise!  There's not much Lorne Green in it for us, but—azure
saying*....]

*Editor*


#### EPISTOLA {Clyde K. Hyder}

&ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo; [VI, 1] mentions that purple is royal
but neglects to add that the royal purple has often stood for
crimson.  *Webster* notes that words in classical Greek and
Hebrew literature translated as *purple* probably refer to the
same color.

The article states, &ldquo;If a Spaniard *darse un verde* 'gives
himself a green,' he is 'amused'; if he *darse un verde con dos
azules* 'gives himself one green and two blues,' he is 'highly
entertained.'  Why *blue* should provide an extra measure of
amusement is unknown.&rdquo;  But blue is so close to green that one
sometimes finds it hard to differentiate.  If one wishes to
emphasize by adding a larger measure without repeating
'green,' what color could one use except blue?

*[Clyde K. Hyder, Lawrence, Kansas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Gerald Kamber}

There are a number of points in &ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo; that
need amplification or correction.  *White collar* does not
connote professionalism as he says (professionalism taken
here to mean membership in a profession such as medicine or
law rather than 'a high degree of competence'), but is defined
by the *American Heritage Dictionary* as: &ldquo;Of or pertaining to
workers, salaried or professional, whose work usually does not
involve manual labor and who are expected to dress with some
degree of formality.  Often regarded as a social class.  Compare
blue collar.&rdquo;

*Mariage blance* and *guerre blanche* are interesting examples
of French usage of the word *blanc* to mean 'qui n'a pas
tous les effets habituels' (*Le Petit Robert*), in other words
'going through the motions.'  But cold war is *guerre froide* and
means, as it does in English, something quite different.

When a Frenchman is *noir*, he is drunk, but unless he is
the prey of *id&eacute;es noires* or has *le cafard* 'the cockroach,' he is
not suffering from the blues.  There is no such French
expression as *reste bleu* 'blue rest'; the expression is verbal: *en
&ecirc;tre, en rester bleu* 'to be flabbergasted.'

After telling us that *red-hot* means 'burning' or 'full of
scandal,' the article expects us to believe that *red-hot mamma*
and *red-light district* derive from &ldquo;anatomical coloration&rdquo;!
*Hot* has always been a way of denoting sexual excitation, *redhot*
denoting a substantial degree of heat, and it is or was
traditional for houses of prostitution to have a red light
outside the door.

In Spanish, *cuento colorado*, rather than 'red,' means
'colored,' although the connotation is identical; and in Italian,
although *rosso d'uovo* is used for 'egg yolk,' *tuorlo* is a more
commonly used term.  *Rire jaune* (and not the archaic or
poetic *ris jaune*) is a 'wry laugh' (not a smile) but not
'maudlin': an ironic and bitter laugh that covers one's
discomfiture.  *Vert histoire [sic]* (since adjectives agree with
nouns in French as to number and gender, and since *histoire*
is feminine, *vert* must be *verte*) is not in any dictionary, but
the common expression is *langue verte* 'off-color slang.'  As for
*viejo verde*, as in all the Romance languages, 'green' here
means 'still vigorous' and not necessarily 'lascivious,' although
a still-vigorous man might well be lascivious.

*Essere al verde* 'to be broke' exists equally in French as
*&ecirc;tre au vert*.  In French, *eminence* takes the acute accent, thus
*&eacute;minence.  Gris* 'slightly drunk' is a lighter gradation of *noir*
'drunk,' and also applies to other types of intoxication.  *Faire
grise mine* &aacute; is *faire grise mine &aacute;*; and *browned-off* would seem
to have scatalogical connotations.  Otherwise, thanks for an
interesting and provocative article.

*[Gerald Kamber, Simsbury, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Harry Cohen}

Anent the critique of *Basic Color Terms: Their Universality
and Evolution*, I am afraid that the authors and the
reviewer have been caught in some of the traps that foreign
languages present.  Dutch *staan blauwbekken* does not mean
'standing in a blue bowl' because it is not derived from *bekken*
'bowl' but from *bek* 'beak.'  The latter word is vulgarly used for
'mouth.'  The phrase means 'to stand around with one's lips
blue from the cold.'  Secondly, German *Braunkohle* does not
mean 'brown cabbage' but 'brown coal,' which seems quite an
appropriate description for 'lignite.'  However, brown cabbage
does exist—it's *Braunkohl*, a baffling name indeed because
it is recorded as a synonym of *Gr&uuml;nkohl* 'green cabbage.'
Then, *Rosenkohl* is not 'rosy cabbage' but 'rose cabbage,' referring
thus to the shape and not the color of Brussels sprouts.

*[Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium]*


#### EPISTOLA {Sylvia Bursztyn}

Mr. Eisiminger states that a green room is &ldquo;the actors'
waiting room painted green to soothe eyes strained by harsh
stage lights.&rdquo;

While this may be so in some cases today, the origin of the
term is unrelated to the color any such room may have been
painted.  As I learned it (though I don't recall the source of the
information), the room where actors met to discuss details of a
production was originally called the &ldquo;agreeing room.&rdquo;  This
became the &ldquo; 'greeing room&rdquo; which became the &ldquo; 'greein'
room&rdquo; which then became the &ldquo;green room.&rdquo;

Of the many green rooms I've been in over the years,
none was painted green.  Any green to be seen was in the
actors' faces, not on the walls.

*[Sylvia Bursztyn, Los Angeles, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {fr. Thomas C. Donlan, O.P.}

In the article, &ldquo;Colorful Language,&rdquo; there is a reference
to the French expression, *&eacute;minence grise*, saying that it refers
to &ldquo;one who exercises power behind the scenes.&rdquo;  There is
more to the phrase than the article indicates.

In 17th-century France, supreme power was held by
Armand Jean du Plessis Cardinal Richelieu.  From the color of
his cardinalitial robes he was referred to as &ldquo;&eacute;minence rouge.&rdquo;
His secretary was Francois Le Clerc du Tremblay, who
became a Capuchin friar and took the name P&eacute;re Joseph.  He
was often very influential over Richelieu.  From the color of his
habit, a sort of gray, he was called &ldquo;&eacute;minence grise.&rdquo;  This was
the origin of the phrase in French.

*[fr. Thomas C. Donlan, O.P., New York, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {W. A. Oliver, M. D.}

I have a few additions to E. E. Rehmus's list of star names
of Arabic origin [V, 3].  Several years ago I took a notion to learn
the names of the major stars in the constellations Great Bear
and Orion.  All of the names in both of these are of Arabic
origin except for *Bellatrix* in Orion.  (Latin, 'The Female
Warrior').  Following are the names not included in Mr.
Rehmus's list:

In the Great Bear:
>
>*Phecda* (sometimes *Phad*) 'The Thigh'
>
>*Megrez (al magraz)* 'The Root of the Tail'
>
>*Alcor (al khawwar)* 'The Weak One'
>
>(This star is binary with *Mizar*, 'The Veil' or
'The Cloak.')
>
>*Alkaid (al caid)* 'The Chief' or 'Governor'

In Orion:

>*Meissa, (al maisan)* 'The Proudly Marching One'
>
>*Al Nitak* 'Belt'
>
>*Mintaka* also 'Belt': Apparently a transliteration
from the same root as *Nitak*.</quote>
>
>*Saiph*, 'The Sword' appeared in Mr. Rehmus's list, but the
full name is *al saif al jabbar*, 'The Sword of the Giant.'  (Cf.
*Kareem Abdul Jabbar* the giant basketball player.)

*[W. A. Oliver, M. D., Napa, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Frederic G. Cassidy}

A new suffix, now in full flow, producing sometimes
outrageous results, is [&#92;?&#92;&#92;?&#92;hal&#92;?&#92;k], spelled -*o/aholic*.  Obviously, it
was chopped off *alcoholic*, in reference to people, and
therefore means &ldquo;*one addicted to*.&rdquo;  So far as my observation
goes, it is attached to monosyllabic or short disyllabic bases
suggesting (often themselves in truncated form) the thing to
which the person is addicted.  *Alcohol* was long ago abbreviated
to *alky* and *alk*, making the dissection of *alcoholic*
easier.  The base must be short—or shortened—so as to
preserve the stress pattern of the parent word *alcoholic:*

The offspring I have seen in print in the past few months
are:

>*workaholic*—   now quite common.  
>*chocoholic*—   &ldquo;addicted&rdquo; to chocolate.  
>*pianoholic*—   playing the piano at all possible times.  
>*credaholic*—   buying excessively on credit.  
>*clipaholic*—   clipping items from newspapers.  
>*gasaholic*—    [a car] consuming too much gasoline.

Can readers add to this list?

*[Frederic G. Cassidy, Dictionary of American Regional English]*


#### EPISTOLA {Charles N. Faerber}

Sterling Eisiminger (&ldquo;Colorful Language,&rdquo;  VI, 1) is
mistaken about the meaning of *redline*, as applied to aircraft.
It is the understanding of every aviator I've ever known
that redlining an aircraft does not mean grounding it.  Rather,
it means pushing the aircraft to or through an important design
limit, usually indicated on a cockpit gauge by a cautionary
red line.  For instance, a pilot in a plane engineered to fly safely
no faster than 300 knots redlines the plane if he flies at 325;
the airspeed indicator needle will pass over a red line painted
on the gauge at 300 knots.

Another aviation term of the same hue that might interest
Eisiminger is *redding out*.  A pilot is in danger of redding out
when an aerial maneuver puts a strong positive-G stress on
his body.  In the execution of a tight outside loop, for example,
centrifugal force may push so much blood into a pilot's
head and upper extremities that he literally &ldquo;sees red&rdquo; because
of flooded and expanded capillaries in the eye.  Too
many positive G's may cause loss of consciousness—a *red-out*.

*[Charles N. Faerber, Woodland Hills, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Oliver Owen}

I enjoyed the piece on the In Out [V, 4].  Mr. Fowkes may
be interested to know that *fathom it out* has been quite
standard usage here for many years.

We do not get *out* over here nearly so much, but no doubt
it is coming.

Enduring idiomaticity is not such a bad criterion, is it?
Most of the examples he gives of repellent *outs* clearly follow
the current fashion of lengthening sentences merely to add
spurious weight.

*[Oliver Owen, Sussex, England]*

### READER'S QUERY

Here's one answer to Peter H. Marsden's query about the
origin of the word syllabub [VI, 1].  It comes from *The
American Heritage Cookbook and Illustrated History of
American Eating and Drinking* (1964).

>Syllabub is closely related to Eggnog.  The name is
derived from wine that came from Sillery in the
Champagne region of France, and from 'bub,' an
Elizabethan slang word for bubbling drink.  Although
Eggnog called for strong liquors, Syllabub has always
been made with wine—some men eschewed this weak
potation, considering it a lady's drink.  Traditionally
a Christmas drink, Syllabub was often made 'under
the cow,' as shown in a recipe from Richard Brigg's
*New Art of Cookery*, published in Philadelphia in 1792,
which instructed that a bowl filled with wine be placed
under a cow, and the cow milked 'till [the Syllabub] has
a fine froth at the top.'

I might add for Mr. Marsden's benefit that the recipe that
follows would not produce a drink resembling the good, rich
*zabaglione*.

[*Claire Vanderplank, Brewster, New York*]


#### EPISTOLA {E.A. Goodland}

It still seems somewhat doubtful if Aphra Behn, author of
the novel *Oroonoko: or, the Royal Slave* was ever herself in
Surinam, though in the novel she says she was; and whether
Oroonoko was a real or fictional character.  One clue I
followed up was that one of the names of the chief
characters—Oroonoko and Imoinda.

Neither are, as far as I am aware, names taken up by
persons of African descent.  Commentators seem to be agreed
that the similarity of the name to that of the river Orinoco in
Venezuela has no significance.  I discovered from the learned
Dr. Babalola of the School of African and Asian Studies,
University of Lagos, that in all probability the name Imoinda is
a corrupt form of the Yoruba personal name &Igrave;M&Oacute;YIND&Agrave; which
means 'baby/child/offspring/person who makes honey drip
onto the family.'  But no explanation of the name *Oroonoko*
was forthcoming.

Recently, as I was reading Michener's book *Chesapeake*,
I noticed the word *Oronoco* applied to a variety of tobacco
recommended for planting in the Choptank area in 1688.  This
word is given an entry in the *Shorter Oxford English Dictionary*
as follows:—&ldquo;*Oronoco, -ooko,* 1706.  [Origin unkn..:
app unconnected with the river Orinoco.]  A variety of tobacco
from Virginia.&rdquo;

I was rather surprised to find the word not given in the
*Random House Dictionary*, nor in *Funk* &amp; *Wagnall's*, nor
yet in *Webster's*, though the last two dictionaries give entries
to the personal name *Oroonoco* or *Oroonoko*.

I asked the first of my American acquaintances here
about the word, and she said yes, she remembered her father
referring to a variety of tobacco by that name.  Maybe there
exists some monograph on tobacco which would throw light
on the origin of the word.  As Aphra Behn's book was published
in 1688, it is rather surprising that the editors of the *SOED*
did not mention the title of her book as being prior to 1706.

I shall be very grateful for any further information
relevant to this matter.

*[E.A. Goodland, Rua Prudente de Morais 441, Olinda, Pernambuco Brazil]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jack Greenberg}

Is it too late to declare war on *hone in*?  It is now used
almost always for *home in*.  For several years I have been
hoping that it would just go away, but unless we put up a fight it
will be in Webster's IVth.  Who will join in the struggle?

*[Jack Greenberg, New York, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Nicholas Leonard}

Have you noticed the increasing use of the words *brill*
and *brills*.  *Brill*, derived from *brilliant* is an adjective (cf. *Fab*
from *fabulous*) and *brills* is an expression of pleasure: 'Oh,
Brills!&rdquo;  My eight-year-old daughter picked up these expressions
at school and I have recently heard them used by BBC
Radio One disc jockeys: &ldquo;An absolutely brill recording!&rdquo;  There
is a popular dishwashing scourer called *Brillo* and this may
partly explain the spread of Brill into the language.

*[Nicholas Leonard, East Sussex, England]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. A man returned to the Associated Press with a hot topper.  (6)  
4\. Scotch and water?  (4,4)  
10\. Lawyer who may add insult to injury.  (9, 6)  
11\. Safe place for the Warsaw Pact?  Get the jump on it!  (4, 5)  
12\. Just for fun, I took one set.  (4)  
14\. Relents when cuddlesome one makes up... (7)  
15\. ...since they're running mates.  (7)  
16\. I'm by the board, so give me jury duty.  (7)  
18\. Bats, in a way, so please forbear.  (7)  
21\. Kind of explosive rock, it burns, too.  (4)  
22\. Title to the vessel?  (9)  
25\. ...they sure rate their wealth under cover.  (8)  
24\. Re: Conmen spreading fiction that their hands are clean...(8, 2, 5)  
26\. Deserter among the dogfaces gets free.  (6)

**Down**

1\. What drama writer got to cage the kids.  (7)  
2\. Is the sun able to obscure clouds of stars?  (7)  
3\. Mad lament about love cast back is bitterly hateful.  (10)  
5\. It's apparent Zeus's wife, making debut, is billed above Iris and her song.  (4, 3, 7)  
6\. Laughing boys?  (4)  
7\. To senesce may change one's inner nature... (7)  
8\. ...so persist, having blithe spirits.  (7)  
9\. Angle in the ring without support.  (1, 7, 6)  
13\. One rider shows the charioteers are out of it.  (5, 5)  
16\. Rip mint for making poor impression.  (7)  
17\. Prison and a harsh cane are enough for punishment.  (7)  
19\. Leading articles on doctrinaire, the freethinker.  (7)  
20\. Pied Piper, between points, assembles the children.  (7)  
23\. The best card case.  (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. PA-nam-a  
5\. Loch Ness  
10\. Ambulance chaser.  
11\. Pole vault  
12\. (f) UN I T (ook).  
14\. NESTLER  
15\. Elopers  
16\. I'M-panel  
18\. ABST-a-in  
21\. Punk (as punk rock)  
22\. Ownership  
24\. INNOCENT OF CRIME (anagram of RE + CONMEN + FICTION)  
25\. TREA-sure  
26\. G-rat-IS

**Down**

1\. Play-pen  
2\. N-eb-U-la-S  
3\. MAL-evol-ENT  
5\. OVER THE RAINBOW (overt Hera in bow)  
6\. He-he  
7\. ESSENCE  
8\. SPRITES  
9\. A neutral corner  
13\. HORSE RACER (anagram when CHARIOTEERS + ARE (R) is out of IT)  
16\. IMPRINT  
17\. PEN-ance  
19\. A-THE-ist  
20\. N-ipper-S (IPPER = PIPER, pied)  
23\. ACES

## Most Obscure Solecism of the Quarter

[*The following item, reprinted in its entirety, is from*
The New Yorker]

>What separates good speakers and  
writers from bad speakers and writers is  
the ability of the former to make a conscious  
choice.  I am, for instance, able to  
speak and write in a variety of styles,  
from very informal to very formal.  I can  
affect an illiterate style if I wish.  The illiterate  
speaker is incapable of saying  
what's on his mind in more than one way.  
Indeed, the good stylist can probably  
think of a dozen different ways in which  
he can say the same thing, while the poor  
stylist has few such resources at his disposal.  
Unfortunately, that doesn't mean  
that I can express myself with great artistry,  
merely that my technique is reasonably  
versatile.  Also, because of the reams  
of text I generate regularly in articles,  
books, and correspondence, I am prone to  
an occasional solecism, though I do try to  
avoid them.  I strive for clarity first, expressiveness  
second.  Long ago I gave up  
any notion of becoming a creative writer:  
as a lexicographer, primarily, I am compelled  
to eschew fiction in my writing.  
>
>Recently, I was told by an editor that,  
as far as he knew, I was the only person  
who writes the way I speak.—*Laurence  
Urdang in Verbatim, The Language  
Quarterly.*

And that's as it should be.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v6n3_Winter_1979_80)