--- 
title: "VOL VI, No 4 [Spring 1980]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## The &ldquo;Wicked&rdquo; Bibles or, Let Him Who is Without Sin Among You Cast the First Line of Type
*Ray Russell, Beverly Hills, California*

Does the Bible condone adultery, or urge us to hate
our wives?  Did Adam and Eve wear pants?  As I discovered
while doing research for my latest novel, it depends
on which Bible you read.

There was an edition that seemed not only to condone
adultery but to *command* it.  That Bible, the handiwork of a
pair of printers named Barker and Lucas, was published in
England in 1631.  It was a handsome volume, as well it
should have been, for Messrs.  B&amp;L were the King's printers.

But it had one little flaw: a three-letter word, *not*, was
missing from the Seventh Commandment, making it read
&ldquo;Thou shalt commit adultery.&rdquo;  The careless printers of the
book that became famous as &ldquo;The Wicked Bible&rdquo; were fined
300 pounds, which effectively put them out of business.

Ten times that amount was the fine imposed on another
firm of printers, during the reign of Charles I, for perpetrating
what has come to be known as &ldquo;The Fool Bible.&rdquo;
Their slip-of-the-typestick occurred in Psalm XIV, which
came out reading, &ldquo;The fool hath said in his heart there is a
God&rdquo;—instead of &ldquo;there is no God.&rdquo;

At Cambridge in 1653 was printed the justly nicknamed
&ldquo;Unrighteous Bible.&rdquo;  It was marred by two bloopers,
both concerning righteousness.  In *I Corinthians*, it
asked the question, &ldquo;Know ye not that the unrighteous shall
inherit the Kingdom of God?&rdquo;  Obviously a *not* is missing
from between *shall* and *inherit*—probably dropped on the
floor by the same gremlins who lost the Barker and Lucas
*not* 22 years before.  As if that weren't bad enough, in this
edition's version of *Romans* may be seen, &ldquo;Neither yield ye
your members as instruments of righteousness unto sin.&rdquo;  Of
course, *unrighteousness* is the correct word.  This proves,
perhaps, that the power of positive thinking can be carried
too far.

Absent negatives appear to be the single most prevalent
kind of error, and they always succeed in completely reversing
the Scriptural meaning.  &ldquo;And there was no more sea,&rdquo;
we are told in *Revelation*—except in a certain 1641 edition
which has, &ldquo;And there was more sea.&rdquo;

It wasn't Jesus who, in the garden of Gethsemane, told
His disciples to &ldquo;Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.&rdquo;  It
was Judas—at least according to an edition of 1611.

Eight thousand copies of one Bible were printed and
bound in Ireland in 1716 before it was discovered that the
command, in *John*, to &ldquo;sin no more,&rdquo; had come out as &ldquo;sin
on more,&rdquo; a directive with somewhat more appeal to chronic
sinners.

&ldquo;The Parable of the Vinegar&rdquo; (instead of &ldquo;Vineyard&rdquo;)
appears in a chapter heading of *Luke* in a 1717 Oxford
printing.  Philip, rather than Peter, is singled out as the
apostle who will deny Jesus, in *Luke* of the 1792 &ldquo;Denial Bible.&rdquo;
Poor *Luke* again gets its lumps in &ldquo;The Forgotten Sins
Bible&rdquo; of 1638, where &ldquo;Her sins, which are many, are forgotten&rdquo;
may be seen, rather than the correct &ldquo;forgiven.&rdquo;  &ldquo;If
any man come to me, and hate not his father and
mother ... yea, and his own wife also....&rdquo;  So begins
another passage in the long-suffering *Luke*, as given in the
so-called &ldquo;Wife-Hater Bible&rdquo; of 1810.  Here, one letter is the
culprit—*w*.  It should be *I*, and the phrase should read &ldquo;and
his own life also....&rdquo;

&ldquo;The Murderers' Bible&rdquo; of 1801 slips in *murderers* for
*murmurers* in a line from *Jude:* &ldquo;These are murmurers,
complainers.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Who hath ears to ear, let him hear&rdquo; is the
way a line in *Matthew* is misrendered in &ldquo;The Ears to Ear
Bible&rdquo; of 1810.  &ldquo;The Discharge Bible&rdquo; of 1806 reads, in
*Timothy*, not &ldquo;I charge thee before God&rdquo; but (you guessed
it) &ldquo;I discharge thee....&rdquo;

Sexual identity has been in question more than once.
*He* is substituted for the correct *she* in what today some
might call &ldquo;The Male Chauvinist Bible,&rdquo; but which is more
commonly and more simply known as &ldquo;The He Bible.&rdquo;  This
was the first of the two editions of the *Authorized Version*,
1611, and its sin was to say, in *Ruth*, &ldquo;And he went into the
city&rdquo; instead of *she*.  Another mix-up of gender happened in
a much more recent edition of 1923 which contained a table
of affinity with the stern admonition, &ldquo;A man may not
marry his grandmother's wife,&rdquo; a feat which *The New
Yorker* might call Neatest Trick of the Week.

An edition organized by Anglican Archbishop Matthew
Parker, and therefore known affectionately as &ldquo;The Bishops'
Bible,&rdquo; made its first appearance in 1568 and was gratifyingly
popular.  Its third edition, however, published in 1572,
didn't fare so well.  Nothing was wrong with the words, but
the decorations left a lot to be desired.  The printer used
highly ornamental initial letters at the beginnings of several
books of this Bible, which would have been a splendid idea
if the letters hadn't been left over from printings of Ovid's
*Metamorphoses* and other classics of pagan literature.  The
greatest offender was the graphically pictorial letter that
met the eye at the beginning of *Hebrews*—a vivid depiction
of the god Zeus, disguised as a swan, offering his amorous
attentions to the lady known as Leda.

Depending upon your point of view, these howlers
might be considered either the work of the Devil, or Freudian
slips—the printer's unconscious advocacy of adultery,
wife-hating, Leda-chasing, or what-have-you.

But by no means all such mistakes result in &ldquo;wicked&rdquo;
texts.  Many are simply amusing.  Take &ldquo;The Camel's Bible,&rdquo;
for instance.  In *Genesis* of this 1823 edition, &ldquo;Rebekah
arose, and her camels&rdquo;—in place of *damsels*.  Or &ldquo;The
Standing Fishes Bible&rdquo; of 1806, which tells us, in *Ezekiel*,
&ldquo;And it shall come to pass that the fishes shall stand upon
it.&rdquo;  As much as one hates to dispel that lively image of our
finny friends standing upright on their tails, it must be
disclosed that the right word is *fishers*.

The second edition of *The Geneva Bible*, 1562, is
known as &ldquo;The Placemaker's Bible,&rdquo; for good reason.  In
*Matthew*, it converts a great utterance into &ldquo;Blessed are the
placemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.&rdquo;
Again, one letter is the villain—a mischievous I which replaced
the first e of *peacemakers*.

The largest number of typos crops up in &ldquo;The Lions Bible&rdquo;
of 1804, so named because, in *I Kings*, it speaks of &ldquo;thy
son that shall come forth out of thy lions,&rdquo; instead of *loins*.
But there are other disaster areas, as well: &ldquo;The murderer
shall surely be put together,&rdquo; rather than *put to death* (from
*Numbers*); and &ldquo;For the flesh lusteth after the Spirit,&rdquo; instead
of *against the Spirit* (from *Galatians*).  And there are
many more.

Eccentric translations, rather than printing errors,
make armfuls of other Bibles worthy of note.  There are, for
example, two &ldquo;Bug Bibles.&rdquo;  Miles Coverdale's Bible of 1535
has earned that creepy sobriquet; and so has the Bible
printed in Antwerp two years later as the translation of a
certain Thomas Matthews, which was probably a pen name
for one John Rogers.  In both editions, a passage in Psalm
XCI is presented as &ldquo;Thou shalt not nede to be afrayed for
eny bugges by night.&rdquo;  In most other English language
Bibles, it's *terror by night*.

Today, the thought of Adam and Eve wearing breeches
may provoke us to laughter, because the word conjures up
images of trousers or pants, complete with pockets and zippers,
cuffs optional.  But in *The Geneva Bible*, mentioned
above, the appropriate passage in Genesis is given as: &ldquo;And
they sowed figge-tree leaves together, and made themselves
breeches.&rdquo;  The same word is used in other early Bibles; and
in all of them, it was almost certainly meant in the sense of
'aprons' or 'loin cloths' (or, possibly, 'lion cloths').

Translations have played havoc with the well-known
*balm in Gilead*, too.  The phrase, which occurs in *Jeremiah*,
is rendered in the 1609 Douai Bible as &ldquo;Is there noe rosin in
Galaad?&rdquo;  Perhaps you prefer treacle over rosin?  Take your
pick: both *The Bishops' Bible* and *Coverdale's Bible* offer
treacle in place of the more generally accepted *balm*.

Those Bibles are legion which tell us that a rich man
will have more trouble entering Heaven than a camel passing
through a needle's eye.  Considering, however, that the
Greek for *camel* (*kam&emacr;lon*) bears a striking resemblance to
the Greek for *rope* (*kamilon*), isn't it likely that the latter,
earthier, better, more realistic, less outlandish image was
lost in translation?

But printers, more often than translators, have been to
blame for bloopers in the Bible, so it's only fair that they
pointed the accusing finger at themselves in an edition published
about 1702.  In this version's Psalm CXIX, David, instead
of complaining that &ldquo;Princes have persecuted me
without a cause,&rdquo; says, &ldquo;Printers have persecuted me....&rdquo;
That edition is now known as (what else?) &ldquo;The Printer's
Bible.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Mystifying announcement (without explanation) heard
each morning on New York City radio stations in April:
&ldquo;Alternate-side-of-the-street parking has been suspended
because of the tugboat strike.&rdquo;  [Darrilyn Desser letter to
*N.Y. Times*, May 6, 1979—sent by Simon Nathan, New
York City]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Fire hit the old gashouse back in April, destroyed the
roof, and more than 100,000 volumes.  And now there is a
move under way by the Waterford Historical Commission
...to restore the damage.&rdquo;  [Barney Fowler in the (Albany,
N.Y.) *Times-Union*, May 30, 1979, p. 16.  Submitted by
Norman F. Gallman, Schroon Lake, New York]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Harper's (August 1979) was moved to comment on the
obscurity of the language used in a report published by the
Carnegie Commission for Public Broadcasting.  The report
reads, in part, &ldquo;The institution we now call public broadcasting
has reached an unprecedented intersection of the
dynamics of American democracy with advanced communications
technology as we are drawn inexorably toward the
configurations of the 21st century....  Public broadcasting,
by involving itself more deeply in the evolving telecommunications
opportunities, could reflect the people's need
for an information context that will not only enhance their
lives but their citizenship as well.&rdquo;  [Submitted by Edward
Coffey, Huntsville, Alabama]

## The Beginning in a Word
*Patricia Bralley, Atlanta, Georgia*

The origins of language lie buried in some pre-Neanderthal
mist.  For centuries, Christians assumed that
Adam spoke Hebrew and that language was a gift from
God.  It's only relatively recently that scholars advanced a
whole array of more &ldquo;logical&rdquo; theories, among others, the
whistle and grunt, the bow-wow, and pooh-pooh, and the
ding-dong.  Now we see our English roots growing from
and fertilized by the likes of Greek, Latin, Anglo-Saxon;
warping and changing with each passing day, each new
child, and each slightly deaf Great-Aunt Matilda.

The Vedic tradition of Sanskrit traces the origin of language
to the cognitions of seers.  It is believed that Sanskrit
was not invented or inherited, its grammar and roots constructed
not by committee, but cognized as part of the manifestation
of Nature.  In meditation, as seers cognized different
forms and processes, words describing and explaining
were simultaneously heard.  Thus, language and form, language
and process, became two sides of the same coin.

Sanskrit claims to be a &ldquo;natural&rdquo; language in which the
structure of speech reflects the structure of the universe, in
which phonology meshes with the physics of creation.  Word
and form are so intimately connected that they may be
called equivalent.  Each word becomes the epitome of onomatopoeia.
In English, even the most careful study of roots
and etymology fails to reveal such total correspondence.  We
may discover that &ldquo;Matilda&rdquo; comes from the Teutonic
meaning &ldquo;Mighty in Battle,&rdquo; but somehow the name bears
little resemblance to the toothless form propped in the
rocker.

The Sanskrit correlation between language and form
allows a great deal of information to be encapsulated into a
word.  Grammatical analysis can tease this information out.
For example, *Agni*, the first word of the *Rig Veda*, usually
translates as 'fire god.'  But sequential analysis of the sounds
of the word allows a deeper understanding to emerge.

The first letter, *A* (pronounced as in &ldquo;ah&rdquo;), is spoken
with the full opening of the mouth.  It presents the concept
of fullness, a transcendental and as yet unmanifest potential
for Creation.  The following three letters: *G* (as in &ldquo;guh&rdquo;), *N*
(as in &ldquo;not&rdquo;), and *I* (as in &ldquo;ease&rdquo;) explain the mechanics of
the unfolding of that potential.  Immediately after *A* comes
*G*, a full stop in the flow of sound.  This represents the placing
of a boundary, a limit, on the previously unbounded
fullness.  The third letter, *N*, negates this stoppage.  It clears
away the boundary and allows *A* to continue forward under
the pull of *I*.  *I* leads, bringing progress and growth.  Thus in
the interplay of the four qualities of *Agni*, scholars locate
the basic mechanics of Creation in three principal areas:
first, a state of unbounded, unmanifest potential; second, a
state of expressed specifics; and third, the means of linkage
between the two.

This Vedic understanding is paralleled by quantum
physics.  Quantum theory shows that all the diverse aspects
of physical creation, all different states of matter and energy
(the *G* of *Agni*) arise from something called the vacuum
state.  The vacuum state is an all-pervading state of the
quantum field without boundaries in time and space.  It
does not possess any particles of energy or matter, but contains
&ldquo;virtual&rdquo; particles which represent all possible states in
unmanifest form.  It is the perfect parallel to the *A* of *Agni*.
Any change of state in a particle involves destruction of the
old via an annihilation operator (the *N*), followed by creation
of a new state from the vacuum via a creator operator
(the *I*).

Through similar combining of language and form, each
of the 64 letters of the Sanskrit alphabet encodes a wealth of
information.  The *Rig Veda* becomes an encyclopedia where
information originally recorded in the &ldquo;seed form&rdquo; of *Agni*
is elaborated by each successive letter, word, hymn, section,
and chapter.  Actually, this seems Nature's chosen method
for the language of life, the genetic code.

The DNA molecule contains all the information for our
growth and evolution through the coupling of language and
molecular form.  The 64 codons, or &ldquo;letters,&rdquo; of the genetic
code are generated through the combining of four nucleotides
into groups of three.  Translation of genetic information
into structural proteins and enzymes is achieved
through the sequential reading of the codons.  This reading
produces a linear assembly which automatically folds into a
biologically active, three-dimensional protein.  In biology,
language and form are as intertwined as any Vedic seer's
&ldquo;natural language.&rdquo;

The *Rig Veda*, just as any particular DNA sequence, is
the written record of only a small portion of what could be
said.  *Veda*, which translates as 'knowledge,' is described as
&ldquo;the self illuminate effulgence of life&rdquo; lying at the juncture
of manifest and unmanifest Creation, and, we may assume,
at the source of language.  Thus when I chanced upon *veda*
in Mario Pei's *The Families of Words*, I couldn't resist seeing
what traditional western etymology brought out.  The
Sanskrit *veda* is the earliest attested derivative of the hypothetical
Indo-European root **w(e) di* 'to see.'

In Greek, **w(e) di* became *ideia;* in Latin, *video* and
*visus;* in Anglo-Saxon, *witan* and *wise;* in Old High German,
*wisen* and *witan*.  It may also appear in the Celtic
*druid*, if the word is taken as *dru uid* 'strong knowledge.'
Descending directly through these roots and in some cases
indirectly through the Old French and Italian, we have today
a whole family of English words with ties to *veda*.  It
includes: *idea, idol, kaleidoscope, idyll, history, video,
providence, prudence, envy, clairvoyant, view, visage, devise,
visible, visionary, vista, wit, twit, wisdom, wisecrack,
wizard*, and *wiseguy*.

## The Exception That Proves the Rule
*Steve Coughlan, Toronto, Ontario*

The most mystifying (and annoying) of the many invalid
arguments that crop up now and then is that of &ldquo;the
exception that proves the rule.&rdquo;  The argument is complete
nonsense, but, if we ignore that for the moment, it is at the
same time brilliant.  Examples in favour of a rule of course
offer it support; by this argument, exceptions also offer support.
Thus, absolutely everything counts as evidence for any
proposition whatsoever that one cares to put forward (&ldquo;All
Mexicans speak Serbo-Croatian,&rdquo; for example), and so any
claim is irrefutable.  The argument is illogical, but inspired.

This is what is mystifying: surely anyone willing to use
such an argument could not have had the wit to invent it.
Conversely, surely anyone capable of creating the argument
would have had the good sense, or at least good taste, not to
employ it.  Where, then, did the expression come from?

What seems most likely to be the explanation is a
theory offered by Richard Grant White in *Words and Their
Uses* (1870) and supported by the *OED*.  It suggests that the
argument is misused today because of mistranslation from
the Latin original, *exceptio probat regulam*.  The error
arises when, in translating *exceptio*, we take it to refer to
the thing that is excepted, when, in fact, it refers to the act
of making an exception.  Thus, the expression is properly
understood to claim that *excepting*, not &ldquo;exceptions,&rdquo; proves
the rule.  Since there must be rules for there to be exceptions
to them, the existence of the latter demonstrates the existence
of the former.

In this form, the argument is more readily acceptable.
If a quality is specifically attributed to one individual, we
naturally assume that that is because the individual is noteworthy
in that regard.  If a sergeant announces to his platoon
&ldquo;MacTavish failed the physical,&rdquo; it would be reasonable
for the other soldiers to assume that they had passed.  If
one said &ldquo;I think this politician is trustworthy,&rdquo; listeners
would understand that the speaker did not have a generally
high regard for politicians.  Normal states of affairs are not
pointed out: thus, if someone or something is singled out, it
must be because it is singular, and a departure from the
norm.

Of course, even this use of the expression is not entirely
logical.  One politician's rectitude may be particularly noteworthy,
but it cannot show that no politicians are honest.
He may be the only exception to the rule, but he is an exception
nonetheless.  Thus, an exception can point to, but
still cannot prove, a rule.

Even this shortcoming, however, can be to some extent
avoided.  There is a longer version of the Latin original,
variously quoted as *exceptio probat regulam de rebus non
exceptis* or *exceptio probat regulam in casibus non exceptis:*
in either case, 'the exception proves the rule in the cases not
excepted.'  Thus, &ldquo;MacTavish failed the physical&rdquo; points not
to the simple rule &ldquo;Everyone passed the physical&rdquo; (obviously
false), but to the complex rule &ldquo;Everyone but MacTavish
passed the physical&rdquo; (probably true).  In other words, except
for the cases explicitly enumerated, the rule holds.

Of course, that is still not a strict rule of logic, and indeed
still leaves itself open to triviality in some instances.
(White Knight to Alice: &ldquo;Everybody that hears me sing it
—either it brings tears to their eyes, or else—&rdquo;; &ldquo;Or else
what?&rdquo;; &ldquo;Or else it doesn't.&rdquo;) However, it does now have a
loose sort of intuitive validity and has at least some value.
Further, the mystery of its origin is solved: the expression
might never actually be used rationally, but at least it is
possible to do so.

## How's That Again?
*J. D. Sadler, Sherman, Texas*

Our topic for today is statements that can be taken two
ways.  There is nothing whatever wrong with them, but
*somebody* is bound to find the other meaning.  We begin
with the apology that goes wrong: &ldquo;Because of difficulties
beyond our control, Johnny Carson will be with you in just
one minute.&rdquo;  Similar is &ldquo;Due to a mistake, we bring you
Don Rickles.&rdquo;

The newspaper can also get into the act: &ldquo;It is with sincere
regret that we learn of Mr. Smith's recovery from an
auto accident.&rdquo;  Another in the same vein: &ldquo;We reported Mr.
Blank as absent from last week's meeting.  He was present
and we're sorry.&rdquo;  A different kind of apology is contained in
&ldquo;We regret that Senator Tower's speech could not be heard
by everyone because the speaker had a screw loose.&rdquo;

Announcements of cancellations include that of the
Couples Club meeting &ldquo;because of the many conflicts.&rdquo;  This
one appeals to me even more: &ldquo;Due to unforeseen circumstances,
the Fortune-telling Club will not meet this week.&rdquo;

The forecast of things to come can also strike a sour
note: &ldquo;Due to the illness of the owner, Sam's TV Service
will be run by a competent repairman for the next two
weeks.&rdquo;  Things get worse when we come to the local clubs
and their activities: &ldquo;Miss Jones will sing a few solos for us,
after which music will be enjoyed.&rdquo;  The Voter's League rejoices
that it has &ldquo;thirty odd legislators scheduled for our
program.&rdquo;  And the literary group makes its contribution:
&ldquo;Mr. Sadler is our only speaker for today; the rest of our
program is entertainment.&rdquo;

The boast gone wrong is seen in this report by the
police chief of a Texas city: &ldquo;The vice situation here is the
best we've had in a long time.&rdquo;  A similar misfire is: &ldquo;Our
policemen are fully able to compete with all the criminals in
town.&rdquo;  The press records the fact that &ldquo;This is Miss —'s first appearance in Dallas in twenty years, and everyone should
be happy.&rdquo;  And this bouquet that missed: &ldquo;Our choir participated yesterday in a radio program in New Orleans.  It
was good to hear them and to realize that they were over
five hundred miles away.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Watch out for the chili supper at the Methodist
Church&rdquo; is an example of an ad that can be misunderstood.
Another brags of roof repairing with &ldquo;Leaks Guaranteed.&rdquo;
Can a department store be prophetic in running a sale on
men's suits that &ldquo;won't last an hour&rdquo;?

Auto repair shops play a major role here; one promises
to do a &ldquo;bang-up job&rdquo; and another offers a &ldquo;complete grease
job, including floor mats and seat covers.&rdquo;  One puts it this
way: &ldquo;No matter how small your problem is, you can count
on our mechanics to do a major repair job.&rdquo;  The dealer invites
me to visit him and &ldquo;see how little you need to own a
new car.&rdquo;  And the friendly loan company asks, &ldquo;Why go
elsewhere to be cheated?  You can depend on us to do the
job!&rdquo;

The business concern that suffers most from the dirty
deals of language is the laundry.  The ad that seems to have
been with us as long as laundries is &ldquo;Don't kill your wife.
Let us do your dirty work.&rdquo;  Another comments that &ldquo;When
you get your laundry back from us, you will see how little
there is left to iron.&rdquo;

The matter of leaving the clothes at the laundry is variously
handled; here are three versions.  &ldquo;I. Ladies, leave
your clothes here and enjoy the afternoon.&rdquo;  &ldquo;II. Ladies who
drop off their clothes will receive prompt and individual attention.&rdquo;
&ldquo;III.  Our courteous attendant will be happy to remove
your clothes while you shop.&rdquo;  Even for those who
must depend on the delivery truck there is good advice: &ldquo;Arrange
your clothes for easy pickup.&rdquo;

The restaurant and night club also come in for their
full share of misunderstanding.  A highway cafe proclaims
proudly, EAT HERE AND GET GAS.  A complaint is answered in
advance with this: &ldquo;Patrons who think our waiters impolite
ought to see the manager.&rdquo;  One place runs its ad: &ldquo;Wanted
—man to wash dishes and two waitresses.&rdquo;  Another has an
intriguing menu: &ldquo;Catfish $4.00, Shrimp $4.50, Children
under 12 $2.75.&rdquo;

An obviously high-class club features &ldquo;Clean and Decent
Dancing Every Night Except Sunday.&rdquo;  A competitor
has &ldquo;Ladies Free with Escorts on Monday Nights.&rdquo;  A third
tries to pack them in with &ldquo;Girlie Floor Show—No Cover.&rdquo;
When crime strikes the event is headlined ROBBERS EAT THEN
HOLD UP CASHIER.

In the same vein, I hope that you will say of this essay,
&ldquo;I can't praise this too highly.&rdquo;

## Breaking the Law of Averages
*Warren Tupper Way, Wayzata, Minnesota*

When someone is described as &ldquo;just an average person,&rdquo;
you have a pretty good idea of what that
means.  There's no great need to know the precise meaning
of *average*.  But much of the time there is a need for definition.

For instance, if the creek is described as having an average
depth of 4 feet—and you can't swim—you'd better
ask what they mean by *average* before you start to wade
across.  The creek might be 10 feet deep toward the middle.

An amusing use of the word *average* was recently reported
in *The Reader's Digest* (and attributed to Robert P.
Levoy in *The Toastmaster*):

>The first time I stayed at a fancy hotel in Miami
Beach, I wanted to make sure I tipped the bellman
properly.  So as he was taking me to my room, I
asked, &ldquo;What is the average tip here in Miami
Beach?&rdquo;  And he said, &ldquo;Five dollars.&rdquo;  Not wanting to
look cheap, I gave him five bucks.  Then I said, &ldquo;If
five dollars is the average tip around here, you must
be getting rich,&rdquo; &ldquo;No sir,&rdquo; the bellman said.  &ldquo;In all
the time I've worked here, this is the first average tip
I've ever received.&rdquo;

The loose use of the term often misleads us, sometimes
gets us into trouble, may make us look silly or suspect.

When someone says, &ldquo;The law of averages will catch
up to you,&rdquo; probably he's suggesting &ldquo;you won't always be
this lucky.&rdquo;  Yet he probably doesn't know what the Law of
Averages *is*.  It's Bernoulli's theorem—according to Webster—which
says: &ldquo;When the number of trials *n* of an event
of probability *p* is increased indefinitely, the probability of
any assigned deviation from the expected value of *np* approaches
zero.&rdquo;  Because I'm just an average person, my unmathematical
mind boggles at this definition.  What approaches
zero is my understanding of it.  *The American
Heritage Dictionary* also has a definition that doesn't help
me much: &ldquo;*average 1.*  *Mathematics* *a.*  A number that typifies
a set of numbers of which it is a function.&rdquo;  Well, so
much for formal definitions.  Let's swing the pendulum and
try some over-simplication.

There are three basic kinds of average: *mean, median*,
and *mode*.  Mean (sometimes *arithmetical mean*) is the one
most people have in mind when they say *average*.  But *mean*
and *average* are not synonymous—*mean* is one kind of
average.  Suppose there are five children in your family, and
you want to know their average age.  You simply add their
ages and divide by five.  The average you get is the *mean*.  In
gym class your son Steve lines up with 21 of his schoolmates,
and they line up in order of their height.  Steve turns
out to be the 11th in line, the man in the middle.  His height
is the average, the *median*.  Sister Sue sells 67 homecoming
buttons, but most of the other pom-pom girls sell only their
allotted 50.  Fifty is the average, the most-frequent number,
the *mode*.

The world of sports is intensely interested in—perhaps
preoccupied with—averages: yards carried, free throws
made, goals allowed, pins, ringers, etc.  The *mean* seems to
be involved in most.  For example, *Earned Run Averages* are
figured by multiplying earned runs by 9 and dividing by
innings pitched.

In his book about college football, *Good Clean
Violence*, Ivan N. Kaye writes: &ldquo;Blanchard enjoyed a remarkable
7-yard average gain every time he carried the
ball.&rdquo;  The average Ivan uses here is the *mean*; but he
doesn't really mean &ldquo;every time he carried the ball,&rdquo; does
he?  How about &ldquo;averaged 7 yards a carry&rdquo;?  (If your team
averaged 3 yards a play, it would be in trouble.  But if it
could make 3 yards every *time*, it wouldn't have to give up
the ball.)

Bowling is one of the few sports that has an absolute
measure of perfection—you can't roll better than 300.
When you bowl in handicap competition, rolling way above
your established average causes comment.  Theoretically,
par is perfect golf; but neither pros nor hackers believe par
is *average*.

When I was in the business of selling electronic components,
we had a customer to whom we were supposed to
ship 10,000 capacitors twice a week.  One Thursday our factory
delivered 140 pieces, on Friday delivered 20,100.  The
140-piece shipment patently was absurd; but if we'd dared
to, we could have suggested that the 10,120-piece average
wasn't bad!

A *mode* is used by some communities in establishing
speed limits.  They check traffic; and if they find—for example—that
over a period of time most drivers travel a
route at about 35 miles per hour, that's the speed limit they
set.

I wonder what kind of average—and method—was
used to determine that &ldquo;the average rate of growth of hair is
about &frac12; inch a month&rdquo;?  Some years ago Harold Helfer also
reported in *The New York Times Magazine* that &ldquo;the average
American man shaves two miles of face during his lifetime,
felling over 250,000,000 whiskers.&rdquo;  You can tell that
this was written many years ago (1966), because another of
the items in his column says, &ldquo;The average salary of a
Federal employee is $559 a month.&rdquo;  And... &ldquo;Federal,
state, and local government spending in this country
averages $2,800 a year for each family.&rdquo;

Speaking of government, here's what Edwin Radford
wrote in *Unusual Words*:

>Average is another word distorted in our language.
It comes from the Latin *habere* 'to have.'  The *havings*,
or possessions, of a farmer were his cattle; and
he was compelled, when called upon, to place his
cattle at the disposal of his feudal lord's retainers for
carrying their armour in times of strife.  It was incumbent
upon him to keep a stipulated number, say
a hundred &ldquo;loads,&rdquo; and this was proclaimed as his
&ldquo;average.&rdquo;

In modern times, a critic has complained, &ldquo;If a man
stands with his right foot on a hot stove and his left foot in a
freezer—some statisticians would have us believe that, on
the average, he is comfortable.&rdquo;

The weather in Minnesota is (to use a Weather Bureau
euphemism) &ldquo;variable.&rdquo;  In January 1977 the *mean* temperature
was 11.2 degrees, but one day the thermometer plummeted
to minus 41.  In July the *mean* was 71, the high was 108. With those kinds of ranges, *means* don't mean much.
In contrast, the weather on the Caribbean island of Aruba
is so constant—averaging in the mid-80s year-round—that
the local language, Papiamento, has no words for the four
seasons.

Cathy (in the cartoon strip by a gal of the same name,
Cathy Guisewite) says to her mom, &ldquo;I'm so tired of being
average.  I look average... I live in an average house... I
make average money... I'm just average, average, average
!&rdquo;  (You'll note that Cathy is using—I think—all three
kinds of &ldquo;our&rdquo; average.) Anyway, her mom replies, &ldquo;Don't
be silly, Cathy.  It isn't so bad.  Everyone feels that way.&rdquo;

>In *In Memoriam* Sam Walter Foss wrote:  
>
>The plain man is the basic clod  
>From which we grow the demigod;  
>And in the average man is curled  
>The hero stuff that rules the world.

It's probably a good thing that the &ldquo;average&rdquo; person is
unusual.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Under Mayor Koch's proposal, anyone caught without
a registered handgun would be sentenced to a year in jail.&rdquo;
[*Good Morning, America*, ABC, February 22, 1980; submitted
by Tony Castagno, Rocky Hill, Connecticut.]  Does
that make Koch a funfighter in gun city?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The Most Promising Book to win the 1980 S/M Award;
How to Beat a Bad Back, Shirley Linde, Rawson Wade.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The answer is Hispanic.  What's the question?  Bureaucrats
invented Hispanic for a noun a few years (too late to
make the 1966 edition of The Random House Unabridged),
and they are now in trouble.  A Dept. of Commerce press release
for Nov. 7, 1979, reports, &ldquo;A central problem is the inability
of the census data to reflect a clear, unambiguous,
and objective defintion of exactly who is a member of the
Hispanic population.&rdquo;  They will never find out if they persist
in referring to &ldquo;the Hispanic population&rdquo; once they have
acknowledged that they don't know what it means.  Maybe
bureaucrats will learn to use the language descriptively and
to stop trying to find shortcuts.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Women in China Forcibly Sterilized by Thousands.&rdquo;
[Headline, *Los Angeles Times*, March 17, 1980, Part 1, p.1;
submitted by Dennis James Izzi, Los Angeles, California.]

## Take a Left on Sore Finger Road
*Kay Haugaard, Pasadena, California*

Not all of Arizona's color is in its landscape.  I discovered
this recently during a trip to Phoenix from Los
Angeles.

As my husband and I drove through desert scenes of
peachy beige, sand, grey-violet mountains, dusty mustard
bushes sprinkled about with brilliant yellow flowers beneath
the clear, blue April sky, I could hardly take my eyes off the
colors of the landscape; but then I started noticing the
names of the places we either passed through or saw signs
for.

Talk about colorful!  These were hearty, direct names
speaking of an uncomplicated, practical outlook with little
patience for &ldquo;pretty&rdquo; words.  Here was the vigor of the western
frontier.  There were a lot of Roads: Chuckwalla, Red
Cloud, Eagle Mountain, Sore Finger, and Jack Rabbit, to
name just a few.

Then we drove up to Flagstaff from Phoenix working
our way up from stately saguaros, chollas, and ocatillo in
the desert sand to prickly pear then juniper shrubs and
grassy expanses.  And as we passed the cut banks of mountains
we would see colorful, striated murals of iridescent
purple, orange, peach, gold, and any number of tans from
gold to rosy.  Then, gradually, leaving the desert and its hot
colors behind we came out in pine and juniper forests of
blue and green set with brown log cabins amid mountains
still frosted with winter snow and trickling with sparkling
spring snow melt.

To match this color the signs read, Skunk Creek, Dead
Man's Wash, Dog Track Road, Table Mesa (a handy redundancy
by way of translation for us gringos) and Horse Thief
Basin.  Nothing wishy-washy or ladylike about these names
—no Wisteria or Lilac or Wordsworth or Elm—just no-nonsense,
masculine names put there by unwitting rustic
poets.

But later on, mixed in with such plain talk names as
Bumble Bee Road and Badger Springs we found that a different
strain of more self-conscious romanticism was creeping
in with Paradise Valley, Green Valley, Hillside Bagdad,
Pleasant Mountain, Sunset Point, and Lookout Point.  But
interspersed with these more ordinary and &ldquo;pretty&rdquo; names
would come one every now and then to jolt us right back to
bedrock with its salty and uncompromising realism.  Such
were People's Valley, Bloody Basin, and Rock Springs
which, as far as I could see, referred to rocks springing out
of the ground, although there may have been some water
hiding somewhere.

Another vein of color was found in the names harking
back to the Spanish, names that roll mellifluously off the
tongue with a romantic ripple: Agua Fria River and Verde
Valley.  With Montezuma's Castle and Montezuma's Lake
we got a little more of the south-of-the-border heritage.

Then, as we came down from Williams after having
been to Flagstaff, we noticed the Indian influence in names
striking strangely on the ear.  Yavapai and Hassayampa:
challenging mouthfuls to those used to such tamed and mass
produced names as Larch and Lincoln, Fifth and Main.

Nothing timid about these names, they have tang.
Some even conjure up whole hair-raising, spine-chilling,
roistering, rollicking stories; Sun Dog Road, Devil Dog
Ranch Road and Skull Valley.  Even if the saguaros weren't
so stately and the spring desert flowers so bright and bold
and the sunsets so flaming I would still have enjoyed my
trip to Arizona for the names alone.


### ADDENDA
*W.G. Waters, Editor, Pacific Horticulture* 

I share Mr. Zettler's concern [V, 3] for the manner in
which publishers foist European books on American gardeners,
but believe he errs in choosing as an example, *A Gardener's
Dictionary of Plant Names* by J.W. Smith and W.T.
Steam.

Mr. Zettler criticizes the book's list of &ldquo;3000 vernacular
names and botanical counterparts&rdquo; claiming that, because
the original author, J.W. Smith, was an Englishman and
W.T. Steam, who revised and added to Smith's work, is
English, the vernacular names listed are &ldquo;almost exclusively
British.&rdquo;  The fault, he says, is &ldquo;probably Stearn's; as a professional
botanist, he cannot be expected to be at home with
vernacular nomenclature.&rdquo;

Stearn's reputation—and it is an international one—is
in the field of botanical bibliography, and he may therefore
be expected to be very much &ldquo;at home&rdquo; with vernacular
plant names.  Readers of *A Gardener's Dictionary* may confirm
this (as apparently Mr. Zettler has not) by referring to
Steam's essay on the subject beginning on Page 339.  It is an
outstanding explanation of the origins, uses and limitations
of vernacular plant names.

In support of his claim that the list &ldquo;is almost exclusively
British&rdquo; Mr. Zettler offers nothing but his own reputation,
with which, I regret, I am unfamiliar.  Dr. Stearn,
on the other hand, gives four authorities for his list, three of
which are U.S. publications.

Not content with his dismissal of the list for U.S.
gardeners, Mr. Zettler contends that it is &ldquo;not entirely useful
even for British common names.&rdquo;  He takes the example of
*Impatiens*, a vernacular name for which is balsam.  Balsam,
Mr. Zettler says, is not listed by Stearn, but careful readers
will find on Page 356 that balsam is given as a vernacular
for *Impatiens*.

The need to be selective in compiling a list of vernacular
plant names—and thus omitting many favorites—is
stressed in Stearn's essay.  He gives from many that might be
used, the example of marshmarigold (*Caltha palustris*)
which has over eighty local names in Britain, about sixty in
France and over one hundred and forty in Germany.  It is
usual, Stearn points out, to &ldquo;select from among the many,
one or two vernacular names as equivalents of the scientific
names of conspicuous, interesting and important species.&rdquo;
His references for the list to which Mr. Zettler takes exception,
include Bailey's *Manual of Cultivated Plants*, Fernald's
*Gray's Manual of Botany* (both U.S. publications) and Correll
and Johnston's *Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas*.
In the list of sources of further information there are also
several U.S. publications.

Mr. Zettler also takes a shot at the scientific list in *A
Gardener's Dictionary* and again his aim is poor.  It is not a
list of plant names, but of generic names and Latinized adjectives
from which specific epithets are derived.  This arrangement
is economical because many plants have similar
specific epithets and repetition of these is avoided.  Mr. Zettler
fails to realize this and complains, &ldquo;It does not mention
the second and third species either botanically or vernacularly
despite their very strong popularity on both sides of the
Atlantic.  Ditto for *Schlumbergera truncata, Plectranthus
australis, Senecio mikanioides*, etc.&rdquo;  All three of these
generic names are in fact listed and explained, and the adjectives
from which all three specific epithets are derived are
listed and explained.  Mr. Zettler's favorite vernacular names
for these plants are missing from the book and this omission
he is clearly not prepared to forgive.

[*See page 973.*]

## Naming the Flora and the Fauna
*Barbara Hunt Lazerson, Illinois State University (Normal)*

Why has man bestowed upon the plants and animals
within his environment the particular names that
he has given them?  Since the naming process does not occur
in *vacuo*, it seems reasonable to conclude that the names
that *homo loquens* has given to the flora and the fauna that
share his living space were not plucked from nowhere.  Names
such as *sunflower, bleeding-heart, bluebell, evergreen,
woodpecker, grasshopper, goldfish*, and *roadrunner* suggest
that man probably has tended to focus upon salient physical
and behavioral characteristics when naming the life around
him.  However, centuries of phonological and/or semantic
change have served to conceal from the speaker of contemporary
English the meanings that many plant and animal
names had for the original name-givers.  It is interesting to
examine the etymologies of the names of certain plants and
animals and thereby understand what our linguistic forefathers
had in mind when they named some of the flora and
fauna as they did.

*Names based on color*

*bear, beaver* &lt; *IE root *bher*- 'bright, brown'

*carnation* &lt; Latin *caro* 'flesh'

*chrysanthemum* &lt; Greek *chrysos* 'gold' + *anthemon*
'flower'

*edelweiss* &lt; German *edel* 'noble' + *weiss* 'white'

*elm, elk* &lt; IE root **el*- 'red, brown'

*iris* &lt; Greek *iris* 'rainbow'

*lilac* &lt; Persian *n&imacr;*l 'indigo blue'

*opossum* &lt; Algonquian *aposoum* 'white beast'

*oriole* &lt; Medieval Latin *oriolus* 'golden (bird)'

*penguin* &lt; Welsh *pen* 'head' + *gwyn* 'white'

*Names based on size and/or shape*

*cabbage* &lt; Old French *caboce* 'head'

*carrot, ginger* &lt; IE root **ker*- 'horn'

*cauliflower* &lt; Latin *caulis* 'cabbage' + *fl&omacr;ris* 'flower'

*dandelion* &lt; Old French *dent de lion* 'tooth of the lion'
(because of its jagged leaves)

*date* &lt; Greek *daktulos* 'finger'

*dolphin* &lt; Greek *delphus* 'womb' (because of its womblike
appearance)

*gladiolus* &lt; Latin *gladius* 'sword' (because of its swordshaped
leaves)

*orchid* &lt; Green *orchis* originally 'testicle' (because of its
double roots)

*porpoise* &lt; Latin *porcus* 'pig' + *piscis* 'fish'

*rutabaga* &lt; Old Norse *r&omacr;t* 'root' + *baggi* 'bag'

*tadpole* &lt; Middle English *tadde* 'toad' + *pol* 'head'

*tulip* &lt; Turkish *tul(i)bend* 'turban' (because of the shape of
its flower)

*vanilla* &lt; Spanish *vainilla* 'little sheath' (because of its
sheathlike pods)

*Names based on movement*

*bat* &lt; Old Norse *-blaka* in *ledhrblaka* 'leather flapper'

*dromedary* &lt; Greek *dromas* 'runner'

*duck* &lt; Old English *d&umacr;can* 'to dive'

*frog* &lt; IE root **preu*- 'to hop'

*polliwog* &lt; Middle English *polwygle: pol* 'head' + *wiglen* 'to wiggle'

*reptile* &lt; IE root **r&emacr;p*- 'to creep, slink'

*snail, snake* &lt; IE root **sneg*- 'to creep, creeping thing'

*spider* &lt; Old English *sp&imacr;thra* 'the spinner'

*stork* &lt; IE root **ster*- 'stiff (probably because of the stiff
manner in which it walks)

*weevil* &lt; IE root **webh*- 'to weave'

*worm* &lt; IE root **wer*- 'to turn, bend'

*Names based on sounds*

*crane, grackle, crow* &lt; IE root **get*- 'to cry hoarsely'

*cricket* &lt; Old French *criquet* &lt; *criquer* 'to click, creak'

*drone* &lt; IE root **dher*- 'to drone, murmur, buzz'

*owl* &lt; imitative IE root **ul*- 'to howl,' of. *ululate*

*swan* &lt; Germanic root **swanon* 'singer'

*Names based on protrusions and appendages*

*hawk* &lt; IE root **kap*- 'to grasp' (because of its grasping
talons)

*octopus* &lt; Greek *oct&omacr;*, 'eight' + *pous*, 'foot'

*phalanger* &lt; Latin *phalanx* 'toe bone' (because of the peculiar
structure of the second and third toes on its hind feet)

*porcupine* &lt; Latin *porcus* 'pig' + *sp&imacr;na* 'thorn, prickle,
spine'

*rhinoceros* &lt; Greek *rhin*- 'nose' + *keras* 'horn'

*shrew* &lt; IE root **skeru*- 'to cut, cutting tool' (because of
its snout)

*squirrel* &lt; Greek *skiouros* 'shadow tail'

*Names based on behavioral characteristics*

*amoeba* &lt; Greek *amoib&emacr;* 'change' (because of its
changeableness)

*caribou* &lt; Algonguian *mek&amacr;lixpowa* 'snow shoveler'

*Crab, crayfish* &lt; IE root **gerebh*- 'to scratch'

*crocodile* &lt; Greek *krok&amacr;* 'pebbles' + *drilos* 'worm' (because
it basks in the sun on a gravel beach, giving it the
appearance of a legless worm)

*hippopotamus* &lt; Greek *hippos* 'horse + *potamos* 'river'

*moose* &lt; Algonquian *mooswa* 'he who eats off bark'

*raccoon* &lt; Algonquian *arathkone* 'scratcher'

*Names based on sundry factors*

*apricot* &lt; Latin (*Pr&umacr;num*) *praecoquum* 'early ripening
(plum)'

*azalea* &lt; the feminine of Greek *azaleos* 'dry' (because it
grows in dry, sandy soil)

*daisy* &lt; Old English *&aelig;ges* 'day's' + *&emacr;age* 'eye' (because it
opens in the morning to reveal a yellow disk and then
closes in the evening)

*grape* &lt; Germanic root **kr&amacr;ppon* 'a hook' (named for the
crooked hook used in harvesting it)

*grapefruit* &lt; Modern English *grape* + *fruit* (because it
grows in clusters as grapes do)

*lettuce* &lt; Latin *lac* 'milk' (because of its milky juice)

*moss* &lt; IE root **meu*- 'moist' (because it grows in damp
places)

*nasturtium* &lt; Latin *n&amacr;sus* 'nose' + *tort*- stem of past of
*torqu&emacr;re* 'to twist, torture' (because its pungent odor
causes the nose to twist in pain)

*pansy* &lt; French *pens&eacute;e* 'thought' (because of the
&ldquo;thoughtful expression&rdquo; on its &ldquo;face&rdquo;)

*pumpkin* &lt; Greek *pep&omacr;n* 'ripe'

## Philip Howard on English English: *Byzantine*
*Philip Howard*

I notice that we hacks on this side of the Atlantic have
picked up *Byzantine* recently as a vogue epithet to mean
ridiculously complicated and boring.  For example, in a recent
news story: &ldquo;Only in the *Byzantine* world of Mine-workers'
politics would a wage claim knocking on 65 per
cent be labelled a victory for moderation.&rdquo;  It has become a
fashionable put-down for political and other activities of
which one disapproves.  I find it useful.  It is also an oversimplification,
and possibly unhistorical.  There was a great
deal more to *Byzantium* than the complexity of its politics.

Our one-eyed modern British use of *Byzantine* obscures
the fact that *Byzantium* is the umbilical cord to our classical
mothers of the ancient world.  It was the guardian of our
Western civilization and culture for ten centuries.  So we
undervalue history when we grumble about the *Byzantinism*
of academic criticism or sneer at the opacity of *Byzantine*
prose.

I think that the European Economic Community, with
its green pounds, and snakes, and the rest of the boring
jargon of Eurobabel, which are indeed as complex as any of
the actions of John Cantacuzene, has been a stimulus to the
metaphorical abuse of *Byzantium*.  When the United Kingdom
was negotiating to join the EEC, and Edward Heath's
detailed reports to the House of Commons about such minutiae
as tariffs on kangaroo-tail soup were earning him the
sobriquet of Grocer, it became a commonplace of political
journalism to refer to the Government's *Byzantine* approach.
*Byzantine* is still a favourite adjective in British
journalism for putting down the obscure activities and obscurer
jargon of the Eurocrats in Brussels, who so far seem
duller men than the rulers of an older empire established by
a Treaty of Rome.

Richard Nixon's presidency also provided us with frequent
opportunities for this new use of *Byzantine*: &ldquo;The CIA
empire grows, *Byzantine* in its complexity.&rdquo;  In fact a better
analogy was with the secrecies of Istanbul.  Over the years
the White House came to resemble the Yildiz Kiosk, where
the Ottoman emperor, Abdul the Damned, made a virtual
prisoner of himself.  Locked in the seclusion of the Yildiz,
the Ottoman got rid of reformers, reduced his ministers,
whom he rarely saw, to executive officers, transmitted
orders to them through the Mabeyn, his intimate secretaries,
and left the Chief Eunuch to deal with other matters.
In Nixon's Yildiz Erlichman and Haldeman were the Mabeyn,
and Dean was the Chief Eunuch.  Nixon as Abdul the
Damned is a much more persuasive metaphor than Nixon
Paleologus.

As we should expect from a man who handles most
European languages as easily as the rest of us handle our
spoons, George Steiner found a historically exact hierarchical
connotation for *Byzantium* when he wrote: &ldquo;It was
precisely on this occasion that Stalin struck the new ominous
note of the cult of personality, of the *Byzantine* homage to
the leader.&rdquo;

The evidence indicates that *Byzantine* became popular
as a derogatory epithet in British journalism in the 1960s
and 1970s.  The *Byzantines* would have been offended by
our narrow view of them.  They considered themselves an
eastern and superior breed of Romans, and claimed to be
inheritors carrying on the Roman Empire in the East after
Rome itself had sunk.  They preserved the literary and artistic
treasures of the Hellenic world for a thousand years:
these treasures are the unique legacy of the *Byzantines* to
Western Europe, far more important and interesting than
the devious politics.  But yes, the politics were on occasions
devious.  The curious reader has to keep his wits about him
to distinguish between his Comneni and his Palaeologi, the
family whose imperial line stretched out across the early
middle ages to the crack of doom made by the Turkish cannon.
There are, alas, no *Byzantines* around to protest at the
slur on their civilization.  And even if there were, they
would have as little effect on popular usage as Jesuits protesting
that they are not jesuitical, or the Welsh insisting
that they always pay their gambling debts, or the Jews
pointing out that their commercial morality is better than
that of gentiles.

Incidentally, we are in confusion about how to pronounce
the words.  American academics I have met seem to
favour Bizzanteen or Bizzantin.  There are various acceptable
British pronunciations.  One favoured by the learned
seems to be with a long first syllable, stress on the second
syllable, and the third syllable rhyming with &ldquo;wine&rdquo;—
Buy-ZAN-tine.  *Byzantium* sounds more magical to me in
poetry with a long &ldquo;y&rdquo;:

>And therefore I have sailed the seas and come  
To the holy city of *Byzantium*.

Modern Greeks begin the words with &ldquo;Viz,&rdquo; which is bold,
but no use to us.

## Shortcuts
*David Galef, Scarsdale, New York*

Several years ago, long before anyone was bemoaning
the existence of fuel at a dollar a gallon, *The New
York Times* warned of rising 'gas' prices.  The word *gas* was
hemmed in by single quotation marks because, in the views
of the editors, *gas* was still, after the trammeling of usage
had almost obliterated the distinction, a short way of spelling
*gasoline*.  Similarly, in English novels of that vintage era
which producted Dorothy Sayers, among others, one will
often find references to '*phones* and '*buses*.  One school of
thought clung to *omnibus* and *telephone*, while others presumably
scattered their prose with the new shortcuts.
Caught in the middle were those bent on preserving what at
times seemed an artificial distinction, avoiding '*cello* but
drawing the line at calling a baby grand a *piano forte*.

Nowadays, no one demurs when the shorter form of a
word supplants the original.  *Delicatessen* becomes *deli,
aero*- or *airplane* becomes plain *plane, automobile* becomes
*auto* (to give way, in its turn, to *car*), and even the British
have for years called their own source of fuel *petrol* instead
of *petroleum*.  *Petrol'* would look downright silly, if not confusing,
as well.

A psycholinguist will say that this phenomenon is
working proof of Zipf's Law, which states loosely that one
can generally determine the relative age of a particular
word or phrase by how short it has become—how many syllables
it has shed in its course of existence, how slurred or
simplified the pronunciation has become, and so on.  Nicknames,
such as *Richard* to *Ricky* or *Rich*, are good examples,
but the erosion occurs with myriads of other words.
Hence, *going to* becomes *gonna*, and *supposed* becomes
'*sposed*.  In his column, &ldquo;On Language,&rdquo; Safire cites *ongona*
for *I'm going to*.  *Tho, 'cause* or *cuz, thru*, and '*kay* are
other noxious forms.  The humorous writer Peter De Vries
has his characters bludgeon *probably* into *probly* or *prolly*,
and a few are content with the monosyllabic *pry*, which I
had to test before being content that that is indeed how
some people pronounce it: &ldquo;He's pry not here now&rdquo;; it
works.

Nonetheless, some foreshortened forms gain acceptance,
while others remain branded with the stamp of *coll*.,
*slang*, or *Amer*, *dial*.  Being somewhat interested in the purity,
or at least euphony, of the English language, I do not
welcome the random slurrings and imprecisions that serve
to drop consonants and whole syllables from speech.  They
are mostly oral solecisms, such as *Whudja get* for &ldquo;What did
you get.&rdquo;  People exchange whole dialogues in this vein:

>&ldquo;Hey, lemme do it, tho.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;Uh uh.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;C'mon, whyntcha lemme aleas try?&rdquo;  
&ldquo;Cause yer only semi-literate.&rdquo;  

The possibilities are as varied as individuals, though many
forms are in common parlance.  Moreover, they depend on
regional peculiarities and other factors ... and they are so
numerous that one is forever beleaguered trying to classify
them or even compile a modest collection.

The other type of shortened form, however, the one
which evolves through the years honestly and thus can be
found on the printed page as well as the streets, makes for a
more interesting search.  I have compiled a short list of examples
heretofore unmentioned, though some are inexact
cut-offs or may be termed borderline cases.

>*ampere*           —             *amp*  
*bicycle*          —             *bike* or *cycle*  
*brassiere*        —             *bra*  
*camera obscura*   —             *camera*  
*debutante*        —             *deb*  
*detective*        —             *tec*  
*discotheque*      —             *disco*  
*disk jockey*      —             *deejay*  
*flat iron*        —             *iron*  
*forecastle*       —             *fo'c'sle*  
*frankfurter*      —             *frank*  
*gymnasium*        —             *gym*  
*hamburger*        —             *burger*  
*headshrinker* (psychiatrist) —  *shrink*  
*high fidelity*     —            *hi-fi*  
*introduction*      —            *intro*  
*jockey*            —            *jock*  
*kilogram*          —            *kilo*  
*luncheon*          —            *lunch*  
*master of ceremonies*   —       *emcee*  
*moving pictures*      —         *movies* (early slang:*moom pitchers)*  
*newspaper*            —         *news or paper*  
*nuclear bomb*         —         *nuke*  
*parachute*            —         *chute*  
*perambulator*         —         *pram*  
*perquisite*           —         *perk*  
*postal card*          —         *postcard*  
*potato*               —         *tater*  
*preparatory school*   —         *prep school*  
*psychopath*           —         *psycho*  
*public house*         —         *pub*  
*quadrangle*           —         *quad*  
*recreation room*      —         *rec room*  
*rock and roll*        —         *rock*  
*sacrifice*            —         *sac* (in chess, principally)  
*schizophrenic*        —         *schizo*  
*science fiction*      —         *s.f. (sci-fi* denotes bad *s.f.)*  
*situation comedy*     —         *sitcom*  
*soda pop*             —         *soda or pop*  
*spectacles*           —         *specs*  
*stereophonic*         —         *stereo*  
*television*           —         *T.V. (telly* in Britain)  
*very important person* —        *V.I.P.*  
*zipper*                —        *zip*  

There are, of course, occasional disappointments:
*cheque*, or its American variant *check*, is not short for *ex-chequer*,
for instance.  True, there may be hundreds of
words that have undergone changes of one kind or another,
to be found if one follows them far back enough, but the
forms for which I search—not actively, mind you, but I do
keep my ears open—must be of relatively recent vintage.
*Zounds* for *His wounds, Goodby* for *God be with you*, or,
in a similar vein, '*strewth* or *ods bodkins* would not qualify.

It is therefore more of an amateur philologist's hunt,
which suits those of that ruminative nature.  *Oleomargarine*
and *refrigerator* are my two latest finds, though purists
might object to *fridge*.  I, for one, do not entirely accept *percolate*
with its diminutive *perk*.  There are also quite a few
phrases whose original endings often trail off nowadays,
but, well, *de gustibus*...

## Why &ldquo;Butterfly&rdquo;?
*Axel Hornos, Pittsford, New York*

Some areas in the uncertain realm of comparative linguistics
rest on reasonably solid ground.  Thus it can be safely
said that, as a rule, English words of Latin ancestry bear
a close resemblance to their equivalents in Romance languages.

Here are a few examples:

| Latin       | English   | French    |
| ----------- | --------- | --------- |
| *saccharum* | *sugar*   | *sucre*   |
| *sol*       | *sun*     | *soleil*  |
| *hora*      | *hour*    | *heure*   |
| *tres*      | *three*   | *trois*   |
| *machina*   | *machine* | *machine* |
| *flos*      | *flower*  | *fleur*   |

| Spanish          | Italian    | Portuguese       | Rumanian        |
| ---------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | --------------- |
| *az&uacute;car*  | *zucchero* | *a&ccedil;ucar*  | *zahar*         |
| *sol*            | *sole*     | *sol*            | *soare*         |
| *hora*           | *ora*      | *hora*           | *ora*           |
| *tres*           | *tre*      | *tres*           | *trei*          |
| *m&aacute;quina* | *macchina* | *m&aacute;quina* | *ma&scedil;ina* |
| *flor*           | *fiore*    | *flor*           | *floare*        |

Yet other words make a mockery of this rule.  Consider
our winged, flitting friend of the title.  In ancient Rome it
was known as *papilio*; it has become *butterfly* in English.

Why consign to oblivion the rightful *papilio*?  Did the
coiner of *butterfly* do so in revolt against what he may have
regarded a constrictive tradition?  Did *butterfly* convey better,
in his view, the insect's playfulness?  Or did he want to
emphasize what is perhaps the least significant color in
lepidoptera?

I, for one, resent *butterfly*.  The oleaginous first part,
combined with the offensive ending, dishonors one of Nature's
loveliest ornaments.  And to add insult to injury,
the same regrettable disregard for convention occurs in
four of the other languages.  *Butterfly* is *mariposa* in Spanish,
*farfalla* in Italian, *borboleta* in Portuguese, *fluture* in
Rumanian.  It is *papillon* in French—the exception within
the exception.

There ought to be a law preventing tradition-honored
Latin words from being dumped in favor of upstarts, often
nothing more than the product of unbridled fancy.

(On second through, I like *mariposa, farfalla, borboleta*
and *fluture*—one almost hears the rustle of fluttering
wings—even better than *papilio*.  Breaking entrenched rules
isn't a bad idea sometimes.  But why, oh why *butterfly*?).

### READERS' QUERIES

In January of 1979, a news story out of Davenport,
Iowa, reported that some one hundred motorists refused to
accept auto licence plates bearing the randomly assigned
prefix &ldquo;G-A-Y.&rdquo;  One indignant driver was quoted as saying,
&ldquo;Everybody knows *the connotation* of that word.&rdquo;  (Emphasis
mine.)  &ldquo;I cannot be a single teacher and sport those
plates around.&rdquo;

Other evidence of the existence of a kind of &ldquo;Gresham's
Law of Linguistics,&rdquo; which seems to mandate that a sexual
or a scatological connotation of any word drive all other
connotations out of circulation, abounds in the English language.
No doubt there are many coffee drinkers who would
swiftly switch to saccharine, cancer scare notwithstanding,
if they knew that *defecation* is a part of the process of sugar
refining.  And I cannot believe that many persons are aware
that the word *prophylactic*, defined as 'preventive of disease,'
may just as properly be used to describe the kind of
rubbers your mother made you wear in the rain as the devices
the army used to distribute for the protection of promiscuous
privates.

Almost anyone can come up with numerous words that
are thus being lost from our verbal pannier.  I can find only
one word that has gone the other way.  *Occupy*, as respectable
a term as there is today, was, some three centuries ago,
on a par with the dreaded *jape* and *swive* as a sexual
dysphemism.

I would like to know of any suggestions other readers
of VERBATIM might have regarding a way of preventing further
depletion of our linguistic larder.  Does anyone know of
additional examples of semantic change of the kind described
in this letter?  And does any similar phenomenon
occur in any language besides English?

*Gary R. Shroat, 212 N. 44 #5, Belleville, IL 62223*

## The Zimbabwe Constitution: On Negotiations
*Albert P. Blaustein, Rutgers University, Camden*

[Albert P. Blaustein, Professor of Law at Rutgers University
School of Law, was the official adviser on the drafting of
the constitutions for Bangladesh, Cambodia, and Peru and
co-author of *Constitutions of the Countries of the World*.
Recently, he was appointed adviser to Bishop Abel T.
Muzorewa, prime minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia, and he
participated in the meetings held in London this past
autumn to write a new constitution for that country.]

Constitutional negotiations on the preparations of a
new national charter for Zimbabwe were conducted solely
in the English language.  But that does not mean that it was
good English, and it does not mean that it always conformed
to the principles of good American English.

I had the unusual privilege of participating in the constitutional
negotiations and drafting in my capacity as
special counsel to the Zimbabwe Rhodesia Prime Minister,
Bishop Abel Muzorewa.  And one of my notable failures was
the failure to secure the deletion of the phrase &ldquo;that is to
say&rdquo; from the document.  For example, Article 11 begins like
this: &ldquo;Whereas every person in Zimbabwe is entitled to the
fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is
to say, the right, whatever his race, tribe, ...&rdquo;

But what was most troublesome (at least in the beginning)
was the word *tabling*.  When the British *table* a document,
it means they 'place it on the table for action'—unlike
the American practice of using the term *table* to indicate
'delay.'  Americans pick something up from the *table* when
they are ready to discuss and act upon it.

Like Americans, both British and Africans are obsessed
by that trendy colloquialism, *at this point in time*.  One
came to wonder whether any provision of any constitution
could be discussed without such reference.  I was gratified
by being spared the trendy Americanism of *the bottom line*
to indicate finality and results.  But my fellows at the
various conference tables had an equally overused trendy
substitute: *at the end of the day*.

Jarring to the ear was the African/British failure to
recognize that some nouns are collective.  One does a
doubletake when so eloquent a spokesman as Lord Carrington
says, &ldquo;the British Government have a full understanding
...&rdquo; and &ldquo;the Patriotic Front have criticized....&rdquo;  And,
although the word *judgment* is impeccably pronounced, the
various conference documents spelled the word as *judgement*.

Also strange to the American ear are all of those British
and African sentences beginning with the word *whilst*.
Nor, unlike their African and British counterparts, could
any American describe himself as *keen* on special tribal
representation or *keen* on the power of the Prime Minister
to appoint as Chief Justice a lawyer not recommended by
the Judicial Service Commission.

But the words which came to be most dreaded are
those which are innocent indeed to the American ear.  When
an African or Englishman begins his statement with the
words, *with respect*, you know very well that he disagrees
with you entirely and is prepared to demolish your position.

## Epenthetical Follow-up
*Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York*

Looks like I've struck a gusher in the short piece on
epenthesis [VI, 1].  I had intended to list both &ldquo;ashphalt&rdquo;
and &ldquo;restauranteur&rdquo; but failed to do so.  *Restauranteur*
washed in on the flood of responses.  Richard J. Roberts of
Toronto sent it, along with &ldquo;reforestration.&rdquo;  It must be
mentioned that &ldquo;restauranteur&rdquo; is so widespread a usage
that lexicographers now recognize it.  Originally, it was an
error.

*Realator* and *realitor* (for *realtor*) came in, the first
from Mrs. Jerome Gluck of Elberon, N.J., the second from
Jean Ferris of Portland, Ore.  Mrs. Gluck also offers the
popular &ldquo;nucular,&rdquo; but that is a mispronunciation, and not
epenthesis.  Benjamin Keller of Harbor City, Calif., contributes
&ldquo;preventative&rdquo; (which Webster lists as acceptable),
&ldquo;frust-r-um,&rdquo; &ldquo;burg-u-lar,&rdquo; &ldquo;ab-o-lutions&rdquo; (for washing) and
&ldquo;Texian&rdquo; for *Texan*.  This last is a bit hard to take but it
must be so because a report has come from Florida recording
the word &ldquo;Cubians&rdquo; for Cubans.  Helen Lamont of
Shelter Island Heights, N.Y., contributes the widely used
&ldquo;sherbert,&rdquo; a dubious &ldquo;vermillion&rdquo; (perhaps an original misspelling
but so universal that Webster lists it alongside the
one L spelling), and a complaint about *'til* for *till* or *until*.
Wright Bennett of Cos Cob, Conn., sends in &ldquo;decath-a-lon,&rdquo;
which he heard on a TV commercial, and &ldquo;aper-a-ture.&rdquo;

On the esoteric side there is an unbelievable &ldquo;dysplexia&rdquo;
(for dyslexia), sent in by Janet Smuga of Red Bank, N.J.,
who not only heard it from, but had it spelled out by, a sufferer
of same.  Her two-year-old child likes going to the &ldquo;li-a-bary,&rdquo;
and as a youngster herself she used to say &ldquo;ell-a-bow.&rdquo;

Carolyn Sobel of Queens College, N.Y.C., complains
that &ldquo;caroom&rdquo; and my other double O words are not epenthetical
but mispronunciations.  I claim they fit the Webster
definition of epenthesis (which Ms. Sobel says is correct):
&ldquo;The insertion of an extra consonant or vowel in the pronunciation
of a word.&rdquo;  Some will agree with me and some
with my critic, but that's what it's all about.

If I've overlooked any correspondents I apologize for
not being organized and efficient.

P.S. No less an excellent writer and stylist than George V.
Higgins either committed an epenthesis or had poor proof-reading
do it in his name.  In a beautifully written book
called &ldquo;A Year or So with Edgar,&rdquo; about some improper
Bostonians, the word &ldquo;depiliate&rdquo; (for *depilate*) appears.  Mr.
Higgins is not necessarily responsible for this, but the appearance
of such a word in print may linger in another
writer's mind and show up later and elsewhere because of
this.


### ADDENDA
*Howard G. Zettler, New Britain, Connecticut*

I am grateful to Mr. Waters for noting my carelessness
in overlooking the balsam entry, but I am essentially uneasy
about the validity of the rest of his critique.  Apparently he
made having fun with his essay a stronger objective than
developing a totally accurate argument, for he indulges in
unbecoming techniques to achieve his ends.  He fails entirely
to see that a reference book must be judged in terms of its
utility, finds delight in the frequently fallacious ploy of
criticizing a critique by criticizing the critic, confuses (in his
last paragraph) the vast difference between an etymology
and a definition (whether gloss or explanation), and because
of this confusion commits the almost unforgivable sin of cutting
a quotation and ignoring its context so as to obscure its
original point.  Above all, overlooking my first sentence, he
maneuvers (like Shaw's Bannal) by making an appeal to the
authority of Dr. Stearn (which I should be the last to deny),
fails to note that even authorities sometimes goof, and therefore
fails to meet my intended point: that St. Martin's is to
be faulted for issuing, without revision for a vastly different
audience, a book for *British* gardeners.  American gardeners,
by and large, are still unused to naming in botanical terms,
and a book released for them should not only list American
species but also, to be truly useful, must be more thorough
in its common-to-botanical section.  The Stearn book was
written, not for professionals like horticulturists, botanists,
or learned editors, but for gardeners.  My thesis still holds: it
is not truly helpful to *American gardeners*.

## Writer's Blindness
*Philip Haldeman, Seattle, Washington*

After helping to write and edit a comprehensive international
travel guide &ldquo;describing 3000 adventure
trips on land, sea, air, and underwater,&rdquo; I have come to the
conclusion that writer's *blindness* can be far more interesting
than writer's *block*.

Writer's blindness might be defined as the inability to
perceive other than the intended meaning of a newly composed
word, phrase, or sentence.  My preoccupation with
the phenomenon began during my first day as an editor of
the travel guide when, after editing three or four trip descriptions,
I was confronted by the following sentence:

>The Klamath River trip is for individuals who wish  
to paddle themselves in one-person inflatable canoes.

I blinked.  Now that was a kinky trip, I thought to myself.  I
went to the writer who had composed the sentence and got
what became the most common reaction: &ldquo;You're kidding.  I
really wrote that?!&rdquo;  Complete unawareness is the main feature
of the disease.

Seeing a priceless opportunity, I began to collect examples
from the thousands of 150- to 200-word trip descriptions
contributed to the travel guide by the writing staff (including
my own).  The trip descriptions were rewritten from
advertising and trip operator brochures sent to our magazine
office.  Ideally, each writer was to turn in ten descriptions
per day based on brochure material.  Although speed
was important, writers were instructed to reread and rewrite
where necessary.  In other words, they had every opportunity
to revise and correct mistakes immediately after
typing a first draft.  After I drew attention to several funny
sentences, the other editors started helping me, and the resulting
collection became known as &ldquo;The Zinger List.&rdquo;  At
first it was slightly embarrassing to everyone, but it was
finally accepted as some sort of occupational disease.  I concluded
that the frequency of &ldquo;zinger&rdquo; sentences was primarily
a function of the ability of an individual writer.  No one,
however, was entirely immune, and it seemed that out of
15,000 to 20,000 sentences, a few really amusing constructions
were inevitable.  Initially, mere chance and the tricky
nature of the English language could be blamed; but the
fact was, writers often missed these errors even after a revision
or two.  We at once realized how easily some of those
sentences might have found their way onto the printed
page, given a tired editor at five o'clock in the afternoon.
The following are selections from a collected list of 57 sentences
that were weeded out of the travel guide before it
was too late.

1.  Individuals, though accompanied by professional river
guides, embark on the journey alone.

2.  The group takes a ferry to South Island, where it splits
into two parts, according to the interests of group
members.

3.  Meals and accommodations at the inn are within
walking distance.

4.  Birders and naturalists can wing south with the only
existing flock of whooping cranes to winter along the salt
flats and marshes of Arkansas.

5.  Participants may visit islands fringed by coral reefs, an
orangutan sanctuary, tropical forests from sea level to
6000 feet and several national parks.

6.  A licensed captain and dive guide accompany each trip
during which divers can also snorkel, photograph, and
engage in shelling.

7.  Participants fly from Juneau to be dropped at a remote
stream.

8.  While lunching on the banks of the Hanalei River,
adventurers see egrets and perch.

9.  After the backpacking adventure, hikers become rafters
and float down the Alatna River during never-ending
days and very short nights.

10.  A cemetery for the many mountaineers who have been
killed while climbing the peak is passed on the trail of the
relatively safe and easy 11-day hike.

11.  Certified individuals may rent equipment without
instruction.

12.  At the lower elevations, participants are likely to see
moose, black bear, or grizzly bear as they return to
Anchorage.

13.  Participants proceed through the inaccessible canyons of
the Chama River.

14.  The tropical rain forests of Ecuador are a rich, natural
laboratory for a 2-week study of the ecological problems
of frogs and lizards.

15.  Depending on river conditions, participants may have
the opportunity to handle the oars on trips with more
than 16 participants, while the more adventurous are
provided with U-boats.

16.  Each morning is spent in the tidal zone, making
observations and conducting experiments with some of
the finest representatives of plants and animals on the
West Coast.

17.  Hot dinners and beds await participants at the end of
each day.

18.  Participants supply their own food and personal fear.

19.  After crossing a beautiful lagoon, the guide introduces
travelers to the Indians.

20.  Exotic plants and wildlife typical of the Amazon Basin
waterways include the hallucinogenic yaje vine, the wild
boar, fruit-eating bats, the 30-ft.-long anaconda serpent,
1300 species of birds, and the expert Ecuador explorers
who guide the trip.

21.  Students study the feeding behavior of anemones as
they stretch their tentacles out to passing fish, help deliver
baby dogfish and induce fertilization of sea urchin eggs to
observe their development.

Various categories of pitfall can be found.  One of the
problems specific to the travel guide was having to work
from material used for advertising.  The ever-present temptation
to use the brochure vocabulary to save time often got
a writer into trouble.  Advertisers always wanted to add
drama to the traveled terrain, so they would routinely describe
&ldquo;vast&rdquo; wilderness, &ldquo;wild&rdquo; mountain country, and in
one case &ldquo;inaccessible&rdquo; canyons.  These adjectives would
sometimes automatically end up in the descriptions, as the
latter did in sentence 13.  Rarely, the writer would simply
condense several sentences of ad hype into one, as in 9.  Example
17 amusingly demonstrates how leaving *out* an adjective
(could it have been &ldquo;warm&rdquo; beds?) got the writer into
trouble.

The most common errors were sentences in which a
single word might have more than one meaning.  During
writer's blindness, only the intended meaning is perceived.
Therefore, a writer could read a sentence like 8 over and
over again without discovering a problem.  Several double
meanings arose because of sport or hobby usage, as in sentence
6.

The most inevitable and comical source of writer's
blindness was the oft-cited agreement/referent problem.  In
the collected examples pronouns were the main culprit.  My
favorite is 21.  Other sentences simply took it for granted
that they referred to a previous sentence or sentences.  In 4
the airline was mentioned in the previous sentence.  In 11 a
reference to U.S. Coast Guard certification of scuba divers
appeared in an earlier paragraph.  Item 3 assumes knowledge
that hikers are coming to the inn from elsewhere.

Oddly enough, the easiest errors for a writer to discover
upon re-reading were typing mistakes.  15 was corrected
before it got to the editors, but 18 was not.  In the
first one, *U-boats* should have been *U-row boats*.  In the second,
*fear* was meant to be *gear*.

A significant number of the &ldquo;zingers&rdquo; were very strange
indeed.  Perhaps the reader would like to try to locate and
classify them.  10 contains no grammatical errors at all, but
was included for its thought-provoking juxtaposition of
clauses.

In the course of our sentence-gathering experiment we
found two aids for writer's blindness.  One was experience.
The more one writes, the more one's prose awareness grows.
The second was delay in revising.  Those of us who both
wrote and edited the travel guide found that we could easily
edit our own trip descriptions when those descriptions had
been written earlier during the project: the level of objectivity
is directly related to the amount of time between the
writing and the editing of a particular piece of work.  It is to
be hoped that experience decreases the amount of time necessary
until little or no waiting time is needed.  In the meantime,
simple awareness of the problem and of its sometimes
amusing consequences can be a great help.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Over 90% of homeowners plan to insulate themselves
better.&rdquo;  [Caption, advt. for Diamond International, *Business
Week*, August 20, 1979, p.87; submitted by Elizabeth
Christiansen, Lompoc, California.)


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Headline, *N.Y. Times*, January 15, 1980, p. B2: &ldquo;Carey
Meets a Father of Retarded Son, 16, After 9-month Delay.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Sign at dry-cleaning shop on Dixwell Avenue, New
Haven, Connecticut: &ldquo;Sweaters Blocked to Sighs.&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Trade Names Dictionary*](https://www.amazon.com/Trade-names-dictionary-manufacturers-distributors/dp/0810306921) and *Trade Names Dictionary: Company Index*
Ellen T.Crowley, ed., Second Edition, 2 vols. 900pp. and Ellen T. Crowley, ed., Second Edition, 899pp.

Both from: Gale Research Company, Book Tower, Detroit, Michigan 48226.

Since it was first issued in 1975, some 24,000 new trade
names have been added to the second edition of the *Trade
Names Dictionary (TND)*, which brings the present total
listing to some 130,000 names for products known to the
consumer-public.

The Second Edition offers a bonus for the trademark
owners whose marks are listed: each trademark is accompanied
by the generic description of the goods.  This is a
very welcome coupling since it allows a writer to use either
the trademark in the proper manner (with an initial capital
letter) or only the description for the goods.  This is one of
the ten trademark commandments for the press.  With the
new additions, it can be assumed the book may continue to
grow.  There are almost one half million marks registered in
the United States Patent &amp; Trademark Office (PTO), thousands
more registered in the states or not registered at all
...plus marks used worldwide.  This impressive number of
products bearing trademarks proves a heady challenge to
anyone offering a new product for which a new name is
needed.

The guidelines for a &ldquo;good&rdquo; mark dictate that it be arbitrary
(if possible), that it not duplicate a mark already in
use, that it be easy to spell and to speak, and that it be attractive
and catchy enough to make new friends.  Trademark
lists are important for research because they help to
eliminate obvious or frequently used words at the outset of
the selection process.

To guess at the monumental task facing the publishers,
it should be noted also that trademark applications filed in
the PTO increased from 33,300 in 1970 to 49,000 in 1978,
and current reports indicate this pace will be maintained.
International trade continues to expand every day and a
complete book of active trademarks defies even the most
conscientious publisher.  However, the *TND* is surely a step
in the right direction, and in this computer age we may look
to such a complete reference tome in days to come.

On the other hand, the process of selection of the marks
listed in the *TND* is interesting since it emphasizes the
marks known to the consumer as opposed to those of an industrial
nature.  In addition to product marks, they include
service marks (*Stouffer's* hotel and motel chain) and certification
marks (*Wear-Dated* for apparel).  No effort has
been made to report registered or unregistered marks and
since use of a mark is the underlying concept of trademark
law, it would appear to serve the purpose of a researcher in
its present form.  There are other books devoted to marks
that are registered.

The advantage of the *TND* is the form of presentation,
which is easy to use.  In addition to the trade name itself,
each reference listing is cross-indexed with the owner-manufacturer,
whose addresses are given.  There is room for additions:
as a person who has spent a good deal of time in the
trademark field, I find that some trademarks well known to
the consuming public are missing and I hope future volumes
will correct these omissions.

Because the trademark field is made up of purist lawyers,
it would be an oversight not to point out that the use
of &ldquo;Trade Name&rdquo; for this dictionary is a misnomer.  It
should properly be a &ldquo;Trademark&rdquo; book.  The editors acknowledge
this misuse of &ldquo;Trade Name&rdquo; as being more comprehensive
and widely understood by the general public.  To
the purist, a *trade name* is a 'corporate name.'

A recent companion volume is &ldquo;*Trade Names Dictionary:
Company Index*, which reverses the process and lists
the trademark-owning companies with the marks for their
various products.  Dorothy Fey

*[Executive Director, The United States Trademark Association]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Doublespeak Dictionary*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/browse/?b.search=Doublespeak%20Dictionary%20William%20Lambdin#b.s=mostPopular-desc&b.p=1&b.pp=30&b.oos&b.tile)
William Lambdin, (Pinnacle Books, Los Angeles, 1979), xv. + 330pp.

If you like sardonic, cynical &ldquo;humor&rdquo; in dictionary
form, then this is the book for you.  A bit of this goes a long
way for me, especially since alphabetical order has never
appealed to me, particularly, as a suitable framework for
humor.  When the author—one could scarcely call him a
lexicographer just because he titled his work a &ldquo;dictionary&rdquo;
—encroaches on the world of fact, he comes up with silly

fictions, like &ldquo;...the number of words in English has
grown from 50,000 in Old English to over 650,000 at present....&rdquo;
which is patently so inaccurate as not to merit
confutation.

*Doublespeak* has acquired a very specific sense, which
the author defines in the Preface as, &ldquo;the nonsense spoken
by politicians, bureaucrats and other public figures.&rdquo;  He
goes on to say that he has used the term &ldquo;to describe distorted
language because it recalls the doublethink and Newspeak
that George Orwell said are employed to make lies
sound truthful and to give an appearance of solidarity to
pure wind.&rdquo;  Lambdin does not define *doublespeak* in the
dictionary itself, but he does have an entry on the Double-speak
Committee of the National Council of Teachers of
English.

The problem with the book is that its definitions are
contorted with cynicism in the author's efforts to wring the
last drop of humor from them: his humor (and the points
made in a serious vein in the Preface) would have been funnier
and his point more telling had he chosen to play it
straight.  It is not at all helpful to the uninformed, for instance,
to have to cope with his definition of *do your own
thing:*

>Used by people who &ldquo;thing&rdquo; for themselves.  The full
meaning of the phrase is &ldquo;Do your own thing before
someone else does unto it.&rdquo;

No matter how the meaning of the entry can be twisted, it
doesn't mean that at all, and anyone trying to understand
the meaning could expect no help from this definition.
Another entry, *drive-in funeral*, is, on the face of it, an idea
in such execrably gross taste that even Lambdin should not
have had to tamper with it.  But he did.

This book achieves neither of two possible goals: it does
not provide the reader to whom an expression is unfamiliar
with an undistorted definition that he can understand; nor
does it offer humor in its unsubtle presentation of information.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Place-Name Changes Since 1900, A World Gazetteer*](https://www.biblio.com/place-name-changes-since-by-room-adrian/work/1085880)
Comp. Adrian Room, (Scarecrow Press, 1979), 224pp.

When an individual changes his name from *Joseph
Klinckowierczoremski* to *William Klinckowierczoremski*, no
one is particuarly surprised: we recognize his impatience at
being asked, &ldquo;Whaddya know, Joe?&rdquo;  And when *Stalingrad*
is changed to *Volgograd*, aware of the volatile nature of
Soviet political favor, we are not astonished—after all, even
the Russians aren't eager to back a loser.  Even *Spassky
Zaton* was changed to *Kuybyshevsky Zaton*—though one
shouldn't be deceived: that took place in 1935, not as a
result of Spassky's defeat by Bobby Fischer, *Rhodesia* became
*Zimbabwe* too late for inclusion in this book, which
very conveniently documents the place-name changes of the
past eight decades.  It is bound to be of great use to editors
of dictionaries and of other reference books; though, recalling
my experience with the problems of name changes when
working on dictionaries, I should have wished for a complete
listing, going back as far as possible.  So *Istanbul* was
*Constantinople* (from the song of the same name), but
*Byzantium* is missing entirely.

The time when a complete listing comes in handy is
when one is dealing with biographies of people born in the
19th century or earlier: it is hard to know in which country
they were born if the city changed hands often (as, say, between
Germany and Poland).  Also, someone born in *Randolph*,
California, in 1909, was born in the same city as
someone born in *Brea*, California in 1912, which must be a
bit confusing for parents, children, and grandchildren.

There can be no doubt that more tourists would go to
*Hog Island* once it has been renamed *Paradise Island*; and I
can understand why the people living in *Akow* changed its
name in 1920—but why to *Pinktung?*; for ten years
(1939-48) *Marechal Floriano* in Brazil was graced by that
euphonious name: it is now carnivorously known as
*Piranhas*.  Where have all the flowers gone?

Adrian Room knows, and he has set them all down in
this volume, a very useful one for any public or school
library and an important adjunct to the gazetteer in many
private libraries.  Can you imagine changing the name of
your town to *Uglegorsk*, regardless of what it was?  Incredible!

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We want to extend our sympathies to the Stock family.
Mrs. Stock (Valerie) died suddenly last year and the
same happened to her husband (Michael) who was buried
this week from St. Anselm.&rdquo;  [Submitted by Javan Kienzle, Detroit, Michigan] Obviously, they wanted to keep him in
stock as long as possible.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: 

### [*Understanding English Place-Names*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=Understanding%20English%20Place-Names%20William%20Addison&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results&ds=20) and [*How Place-Names Began*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?kn=How%20Place-Names%20Began%20C.M.%20Matthews&sts=t&cm_sp=SearchF-_-topnav-_-Results)
William Addison, (Futura), 192pp. and C.M. Matthews, (Hamlyn Publishing Group), 176pp.

In 1944 George R. Stewart completed his *Names on the
Land*.  The book could have become just another discursive
work about place names, but as place-name enthusiasts
know; it was soon apparent that it was far more than that.
It set a standard for all such books, showing that they might
be written in superb prose, occasionally bordering on
poetry, while remaining soundly based on first class scholarship
and research.

Professor Stewart was perhaps fortunate in that he had
to deal with American rather than British place names.  The
study of American names, especially minor ones, often involves
looking into fairly recent social history.  There are
people still alive who—if their memories are stirred—can
explain how and why certain township names came into being.
The researcher is thus dealing in a kind of human archaeology.
As for the earlier, major names, they and the documents
that refer to them are accessible and mostly easy to
read.  Even the names that do pose serious problems, deriving
from Indian tribal languages, take the scholar into a
youthful, thriving area of scholarship, linguistics rather
than philology.  It is therefore easy to understand the widespread
appeal that American place names have for many
young academics.

British place names pose a very different set of problems
to an investigator.  Very early forms of the names must
be found, then a combination of philological, archaeological,
historical, and topographical information must be
weighed in an effort to arrive at explanations.  The stories
behind British place names are often of more interest as
technical explanations—meaningful to other specialists—
than they are to a layman.

Two recently published paperbacks nevertheless attempt
to interpret British place names to non-specialist
readers.  *Understanding English Place-names*, by William
Addison (192pp., Futura, &pound;1.25), sets about its task in a
quietly dignified way.  Its tone is that of a professor addressing
his academic colleagues in a series of informal,
common-room lectures.  It assumes, in other words, that
highly literate, thinking readers will give the book the attention
it deserves.  Such readers will undoubtedly enjoy it
very much, for it avoids both the scholarly intensity of P.H.
Reaney's *The Origin of English Place Names* and the
stylistic barrenness of Kenneth Cameron's *English Place
Names*.  But one wonders just how many such ideal readers
still exist.  Even bookish people have become accustomed to
the highly imaginative and varied presentation of information
in good television documentaries.  Had any chapter of
this book become the commentary for such a film, it would
have been brought to life visually in countless ways.  There
is little doubt in my mind that generous and imaginative illustration
would have made the book of interest to a great
many more readers.  As it is, it makes a pleasant bedtime
companion, to be read—and thought about—in small doses.

C. M. Matthews has previously written several discursive
works about both place names and surnames, though
Sir William chooses to ignore them in his Bibliography.
Mrs. Matthews' latest work appears under the Beaver Book
imprint, a series of paperbacks meant for children, as *How
Place-names Began* (176pp., Hamlyn Publishing Group, 65
pence).

A bright cover and some rather abstract line drawings
have been provided in an effort to turn a solid text into
something more tempting and readable.  These may be
moves in the right direction, but children need far more.  I
tried the book on my own offspring, Stephen (15) and Catherine
(13).  They simply couldn't get into it.  Looking at it in
detail, I think I know why.  It deals with its difficult subject
matter in traditional, stolid prose.  There is no *dialogue* with
the youthful reader, no questions to challenge him, no jokes
to share with him, no real sense of discovery or excitement,
not even any real enthusiasm displayed for the subject.
Communicating with young people in their own terms is a
highly specialized skill, and on the evidence of this book,
Mrs. Matthews does not possess it.

*[Leslie Dunking. Thames Ditton, England]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Collins Dictionary Of The English Language: An extensive coverage of contemporary international and Australian English.*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/collins-english-dictionary/author/hanks-patrick/)
Patrick Hanks, ed., Thomas Hill Long, managing ed., Laurence Urdang, ed. dir., G.A. Wilkes, Special Australian Consultant, (Sydney, Auckland, Glasgow, Collins, 1979).

[By special arrangement with the publisher, VERBATIM is
able to offer the *Regular Edition*, in the United States only,
at $20.00 postpaid.]

In the last few years there has been a flood of new dictionaries
depending, one imagines, on the realization by
many buyers that to ask &ldquo;Which dictionary shall I buy?&rdquo;  is
not entirely unlike asking &ldquo;Which novel shall I buy?&rdquo;  Just as
one may have a set of screwdrivers for different jobs, it is
possible to have and use a collection of special and general
dictionaries of various sizes.

Having decided on size and specialty, a dictionary-maker
is faced with a series of further decisions.  Lexicography
is not simply adding one good point to another to
make an ideal dictionary, but balancing the saving of space
against fullness of information, the amount of information
against cost, a more exact pronunciation guide against
added difficulty for some users, the addition of extra information
(pronunciation or syllabification) in the headword
at the expense of its clean appearance.  An assessor can
always therefore find something to praise or blame; the fair
thing is to judge how well on balance all variables have
been managed.

The new *Collins* is a comprehensive general dictionary
at a very competitive price.  Its editorial staff drew on consultants
in regional varieties of English and pronunciation.
Names such as A.C. Gimson (pronunciation), Harold Orton
(British regional English), and G. A. Wilkes (Australian
English) will indicate to those knowing the field the high
standard of expertise called upon.  In addition numerous
special contributors and a large specialized editorial staff attended
to special and technical subjects and technical
departments of lexicography such as etymology.

The dictionary sets out to record international English
and an excellent set of brief introductory essays includes accounts
of Australian English and the development of English
as a world language.  In practice British English appears
to be the basis used in main entries, as it must, since it is the
nearest thing we have to an agreed standard.  Thus *secretary*
is recorded only with a pronunciation (given in IPA symbols)
recognizably neither American nor Australian and
through *colo(u)r* is recorded in both spellings, the &ldquo;see&rdquo;
reference is to the British spelling.

Alongside the purely lexical tradition in dictionaries,
which has been dominant in England, is an encyclopaedic
tradition.  The *Collins* comes somewhere between with a
predominantly lexical approach but with the addition of
proper names, so that the dictionary also serves as a gazetteer
and a dictionary of biography.  I tested it with five
names of South Australian towns, finding only the largest
*(Whyalla)* included, but on testing a group of remembered
towns in a favourite part of France, I found that all
(*Besancon, Arles, Avignon, N&icirc;mes, Aix-en-Provence*) were
there.  Recent population statistics are given in all cases.  For
New Zealand I found the *Waikato* (the longest river) included
but not the *Wairoa* (mentioned in a poem by Robert
Browning).  Stamp collectors will be helped by the inclusion
of some foreign forms of names (*Danmark, Helvetia,
Bayern*).  For biographies I checked three names of Australian
prime ministers (Hughes, Menzies, and Whitlam) and
found all were there.

Some dictionaries save space by collapsing entries in
paragraphs, listing compounds under a headword.  This one
makes separate entries so that *on-line*, for instance, is not
simply part of the entry for *on* and *onshore* and *on stream*
will be found in their alphabetical sequence after *onomatopoeia*,
etc.  Within each entry the several senses of a word
are numbered.  *Set*, for example, is given 49 different senses
(along with 12 see references to *set-off, set-up* and so on,
these two themselves having respectively 11 and 16 separate
senses).

Abbreviations are included in the same sequence with
other entries, so that *OPEC* comes between *ope* and *open*.
Contractions (e.g., *Mr., Dr.*) are not distinguished from
other abbreviations, and are given a full stop, but symbols
(e.g., chemical symbols) are separately labelled.  An interesting
inclusion is the international car-registration symbols
(GB, CH, ZA, MAL, etc.).

Headwords in entries are marked with small crosses or
raised dots to show syllabification as a guide to hyphenation.
This is an extra service but at the cost of &ldquo;clean&rdquo;
typography.

Etymologies are careful and show scholarship by recording
honest ignorance when there is otherwise only conjecture.
(This even extends to the Australianism *ocker* for
which Professor Wilkes himself suggests a plausible definition
in his *Dictionary of Australian Colloquialisms*.)  On the
other hand *posh* is given an etymology &ldquo;supposedly&rdquo; from
'port out, starboard home' which is by no means universally
accepted.

Taboo words are included, as generally in modern dictionaries,
and are marked *Taboo slang*.  Other registers are
marked *Slang* or *Informal* and technicalities are labelled
*Pathol., Insurance, Ballet*, etc.

No dictionary is ever quite up-to-date.  While dictionaries
are in press *Ayatollahs* and *boat people* get into the
news, *Avgas* becomes short and people begin to plan *jojoba*.
It is, anyway, easy to overlook, or not know, terms like the
jogger's *positive addiction*, or even the wider *positive discrimination*,
or *wall art*, or *workaholic*, or *fast foods*, or
*tenosynovitis* (a painful affliction of manual workers doing
repetitive routine jobs).  On the other hand this dictionary
has caught up with *chip* (in its computer sense), *yellowcake*
(labelled *Canadian informal* but used in Australia now), *cot
death, aggro, bionic, dieback* and *podiatrist* (as chiropodists
now like to be called).

Australian coverage is good, for a general dictionary.  I
checked with a list of test words used to assess dictionaries
claiming Australian coverage and found the main items included
(e.g., *backblocks, banksia, barrack, barramundi
under ba-*).  Some omissions were *dawn parade, fireban* and
*firerisk* (bushfire prevention terms), *welcome swallow* (a
bird mentioned in a poem by Judith Wright), *green bans*
(trade-union environmentalist action), or *gelato*; and among
the 39 recorded senses of *block*, the common Australian
sense of 'a building plot or lot' (or, in New Zealand, *section*)
is not included.  Incidentally, I did not manage to remove
my antipodean ignorance of the correct terms for a building
parcel of land in the U.S. and U.K. by using this dictionary.
As is usual, and forgivable, in dictionaries, regionalisms
within Australia are poorly represented.  Traditional ones
like *quokka* get an airing, but the quokka is a rare animal
now, found only on a few offshore islands in Western Australia,
and so the word must be much less often used than
an everyday Adelaide word like *stobie pole* ('utility pole'),
for instance.  Similarly with New Zealand items; a tree unknown
to me (forty years a New Zealander), *mako*, is included
while the ubiquitous *macrocarpa* (an introduced cypress)
and important Maori social terms such as *marae*
('courtyard of a meeting-house') and *Maoritanga* 'Maori
traditions generally' are omitted.  Ultimately these problems
can be solved by general dictionaries only when adequate
regional dictionaries are available to back them up.

To assess the reliability of the dictionary in its technical
coverage, I sampled the one science I know anything about,
linguistics, and found the dictionary very satisfactory.  Definitions
of *spelling pronunciation, speech = parole, phoneme*,
and *tagmemics*, were good, though *tagmeme*, a difficult
word to define briefly, did not seem quite to meet
either Bloomfield's or Pike's use of the term.  A dictionary of
international English might have remembered *TESL* and
*TEFL* 'teaching of English as a Second (or Foreign)
Language,' however.

The real difficulties are the traditional terms, *noun,
verb* or *sentence*; no dictionary quite pleases everyone with
definitions of these words.  *Collins* does very well with
*sentence* (and since C.C. Fries complained that there were
over 200 definitions of a sentence, none satisfactory, and did
not really provide one himself, this is no mean praise).  For
*verb, Collins* gives a choice of two definitions, one old-fashioned
and one structural, and remains a big vague, in a
traditional way, about *noun*.

To sum up, this new large dictionary, convenient to
use, up-to-date and reliable, is, even in the highly active
and competitive area of modern dictionary-making, something
of an event.  All collectors of good dictionaries must
add it to their collections, and the buyer of a first dictionary
must give it very serious consideration.

*[George Turner, University of Adelaide]*


### OBITER DICTA

The following letter, which we reprint in careful detail,
provides, we think, an excellent example of how genuine
a sincerity of feeling and a sense of poetry are conveyed
in this first letter in English by a Nigerian.  It was sent to us
by Barbara Marsh, of San Diego.  How many young native
speakers, whose blunders in English are more axiomatic
than idiomatic, could match the eloquence of these words?
It was written on October 7, 1954.

>Dear Sir,
>
>I have the pleasure of writing you.  Perhaps you may be
astonished, if not amused, to realize this letter the first of its
kind.  Afford me with the opportunity to make a fair little
introduction.  Im, as indicated in the above address, a
brother to E—, who is now there under your care.  Right
enough he could introduce me in detail.
>
>However, I am compelled to tell you I appreciate fully
your help.  I want to pay my compliments to you and your
wife, and tell you how much I appreciate all that you are
doing for my dear brother, E—, Without being told I
know, through your kindness to my brother, that you are a
good man.
>
>On the other hand, words cann't express my tremendous
enjoyment the day I received the message of E's safe
arrival in the United States.  In fact, it is our great desire for
a long time to send him overseas for a good mission and
achievement, which will benefit the world and this great
country of Nigeria.  Indeed time failed to facilitate us with
the opportunity to accomplish this intention.  Nevertheless,
we have not failed to ask God's help to brighten the star of
E's, as the promising son in our family.
>
>However, at last, he is in California, wholly and entirely
under your care—your pet (laughter).  I also stress that
God has made it possible through your hand, and we trust
you will receive a blessing.  Today, considering the great
degree of modesty you and your wife have taken E— as a
son, may he be able to win a name in the vast world, and
also help his people in due course of time.
>
>Without minding all the trouble you are helping the
poor.  Once again I immensely thank you and your wife.  Actually
words fail me to greet you all.  I know God will reward
you His best.  I shall always remember you in my
prayers.  Then, your kindness is quite appreciated and welcomed
here by my people and all lovers of the progress of
youth.  In view of your help to E—, it is understood that
people in California are nice people.  Of course there is no
doubt of this, hence seeing is believing.  High above all, it is
left to you now, as E's father there, to develop, train and
bring him up to be very useful to the world and Nigeria in
particular.  Whatever you feel best about him, please render
it to him.
>
>J—is a township in the Northern Region of Nigeria.  It
is in the Plateau Province.  It is one of the best townships in
this country.  It is a cold place.  You may be interested to
know that for the past three months, J— has been as miserable
as it seems the summer in England has been.  Local
opinion is that not for many years has it been so cold and
wet as this year.  However, October so far promises some
sunshine.
>
>Accept my sincere compliments for the season.  Give my
regards to your lovely wife.  Remember me to her.  My love
to E—, and I wish you God's rewards and the best of the
season.  So long until then.  Would you be kind enough to
reply.
>
>With kindest regards, Yours affectionately,


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;To some extent, this is the kind of political dilemma
incumbents always face.  They have to deal with the real
world as it is while their opponents can indulge themselves
in the subjunctive.&rdquo;  [Germond-Witcover in *The San Diego
Union*, November 13, 1979, p. B-7; submitted by Thomas
S. Terrill, Carlsbad, California.] ... Which ought to put
them in the right mood.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Rebels taken by surprise.  (8)  
5\. Worker in a hack is a college man.  (6)  
10\. Raised hell and wiped out about half a dozen.  (7)  
11\. Pays out to cover probe into cause of death.  (7)  
12\. Conservative bent, but not beyond reason.  (15)  
13\. Briefly, an old remedy, hard to grasp.  (7)  
14\. Article leading to doctrine of belief.  (6)  
17\. High price of manors? (6)  
20\. Would this voter break the bill about Equal Rights Amendment?  (7)  
23\. It gives me chance in impasse to gain freedom.  (6, 9)  
25\. Original thinker in a maiden appearance.  (4, 3)  
26\. Sins for the thrill of it.  (7)  
27\. The most teetotal get the DTs about rye.  (6)  
28\. The grandest systems for catching criminals.  (8)

**Down**

1\. Fighter with slim chance to win could be grounded.  (8)  
2\. Despoliations of the savager kind.  (7)  
3\. Relay races not reported in all editions of the paper.  (5, 4)  
4\. Russian port?  (3, 4)  
6\. Cadet took steps out of order.  (5)  
7\. Making a clean breast of things ...(7)  
8\. ... unless, of course, more or less flat-chested.  (6)  
9\. Still a robber, despite being forbidden it at the hearing.  (6)  
15\. Answering a call to arms?  (9)  
16\. Meal in tins to provide nutritious foods.  (8)  
18\. Cupid's game.  (7)  
19\. Second in importance.  (6)  
20\. A match for the Devil.  (7)  
21\. Concerning natural offspring, or just a clone?  (7)  
22\. Unfulfilled indeed! (6)  
24\. Hearts and *flowers*?  (5)

    
## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. UPRISERS;  
5\. C-ant-AB;  
10\. DE-vi-LED;  
11\. A-utoPSY;  
12\. Rightmindedness;  
13\. Obs.-cure;  
14\. The-ISM;  
17\. RANSOM;  
20\. Lib-ERA-1;  
23\. ESCAPE; MECHANISM (me + chance (in) impasse);  
25\. IDEA M-a-N;  
26\. FR-issO-n;  
27\. D-rye-ST;  
28\. DRAGNETS.  
 
**Down**

1\. UNDERDOG;  
2\. RAVAGES;  
3\. Split runs;  
4\. Red wine;  
6\. ACTED;  
7\. Topless;  
8\. Boyish;  
9\. Ban(ne)d-it;  
15\. Embracing;  
16\. AL-i-ME-nts;  
18\. Archery;  
19\. Moment;  
20\. Lucifer;  
21\. Re-issue;  
22\. DENIED;  
24\. Pumps.  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v6n4_Spring_1980)