--- 
title: "VOL VII, No 1 [Summer 1980]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## The Pun Is Mightier Than the Sword A Short History of Paronomasia
*Victor Margolin, Evanston, Illinois*

Through the centuries, pros and cons have argued
over the merits of the pun. By some, punning is
called an art form; by others, a mental sickness. *Stedman's
Medical Dictionary* lists an ailment known as *Witzelsucht*—
literally 'wit-seeking'—which is characterized by &ldquo;a morbid
tendency to pun and tell pointless stories while being inordinately
entertained thereby.&rdquo; No indication of the cause and
treatment is given, nor is it stated whether a cure is even
possible.

A long line of wags and wits have given the lie to the
old adage that &ldquo;The pun is the lowest form of wit&rdquo; (&ldquo;The
bun is the lowest form of wheat&rdquo;). Although there have
been some low moments in the history of the pun, each play
on words must be judged on its own merits, for the proof is
in the punning.

Since Biblical times, the pun has been considered a valuable
literary device. In the sixteenth chapter of St. Matthew,
Jesus calls his disciple Peter (*petros*) and says of him
that upon this *rock* (*petra*) he will build his church. In the
Old Testament, it is stated in the Book of Samuel that
David shall not build a *house* ('temple') for Jehovah but
Jehovah shall build a *house* ('dynasty') for David.

Aristotle, in *Rhetoric*, held that several forms of paranomasia,
as puns were once called, might be permissible in
elegant writing. But not all puns made by the Greeks approached
elegance. A certain Philagius produced a book of
witticisms called *Laughter-loving* in which the following
story can be found:

>A one-eyed doctor visiting a patient asked in salutation
&ldquo;How are you?&rdquo; &ldquo;As you see,&rdquo; replied the patient.
&ldquo;Then,&rdquo; said the physician, &ldquo;if you are as I see, you are
half-dead.&rdquo;

The best known pun in classical literature can be found
in the ninth book of Homer's *Odyssey*. Ulysses and his comrades
have been captured by Polyphemus, the one-eyed
giant to whom Ulysses gives his name as *Outis* ('No man').
Polyphemus is later betrayed by this pun when Ulysses
blinds him with a blazing pole and the giant, in his agony,
yells, &ldquo;No man has blinded me.&rdquo; Polyphemus' brother giants
take him literally and ignore him while Ulysses escapes.

Medieval literature is almost devoid of puns and even
Chaucer, for all his wit, was not addicted to this form.
Petrarch, however, is accused of making endless puns on the
name of his beloved Laura. With the revival of literature,�
the Renaissance brought a rebirth of punning. Rabelais
filled his *Gargantua and Pantagruel* with a plethora of
puns—many of them ribald and unfortunately lost in the
translation from French to English.

By the 16th century, a school of punsters had arisen,
comprised chiefly of the best-known English dramatists:
Shakespeare, Jonson, Marlowe, Dekker, and Heywood. Unfortunately,
there was more quantity than quality to their
punning, as can be deduced from a few lines of Thomas
Dekker's *The Shoemaker's Holiday* where double entendre
changes the object of a hunt from deer to women:

>ROSE: Why do you stay and not pursue your game?  
SYBIL: I'll hold my life, their hunting nags be lame.  
HAMMON: A deer more dear is found within this place.  
ROSE: But not the deer, sir, which you had in chase.  
HAMMON: I chased the deer, but this dear chaseth me.  
ROSE: The strangest hunting that ever I see.

In the art of punning, Shakespeare was great shakes
and without peer. Molly Mahood, in *Shakespeare's Wordplay*,
estimates that he used approximately 3000 puns in his
plays. The manner in which his characters use puns lends
support to the contention that the function of verbal wit is
to afford a safe outlet for repressed impulses. Falstaff's impulse
to be irrational provides a type of pointless punning.
In *Henry IV, Part 2*, he puns on the names of his soldiers.
Mouldy is told that it is time he were used; Shadow, that he
would make a cold soldier but would serve for summer; and
Wart, that he is a ragged wart. At his cohort Pistol, Falstaff
bellows, &ldquo;No more Pistol; I would not have you go off here.
Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.&rdquo;

A more subtle release of impulses can be found in Mercutio's
punning in *Romeo and Juliet*:

>NURSE: God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
>
>MERCUTIO: God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
>
>NURSE: Is it good den?
>
>MERCUTIO: Tis no less. I tell you; for the bawdy hand
of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
>
>NURSE: Out upon you. What a man are you.

Both *den* and *dial* allude .to the time of day and the female
sex organ. *Prick* alludes to the time of day and the male
organ. Under the guise of giving Nurse the time, Mereutio is
suggesting a role in the hay.

A pun sometimes attributed to Shakespeare was actually
made by Charles Dibdin, a British dramatist, and published
as part of a poem in 1803. It is in the form of a punning
epitaph on the death of Shakespeare's wife:

>To melt the sad, make blithe the gay,  
And Nature charm, Anne hath a way,  
She hath a way,  
Anne Hathaway  
To breath delight Anne hath away.

But the dramatists of the Elizabethan age did not have
a monopoly on punning. Elizabeth herself joined the ranks
of pun devotees when she remarked to one of her noblemen,
&ldquo;Ye may be burly, my Lord of Burleigh, but ye shall make
less stir in my realm that the Lord of Leicester.&rdquo;

A rather neat but probably apocryphal pun is attributed
to Sir Francis Drake who, reporting to Queen Elizabeth
after his defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, supposedly
uttered only the Greek name for a well-known
aphrodisiac—*Cantharides* ('the Spanish fly').

James I was a pun fancier and purportedly appointed
few members of his Privy Council who were not versed in
punning. When Charles I took the throne, he bestowed
upon Thomas Killigrew, the English dramatist and wit, the
title of king's fool, or jester, and provided him with cap and
bells so that he could joke without offense. Killigrew once
boasted that he could make a pun on any subject. &ldquo;Make
one on me,&rdquo; said Charles. &ldquo;But that I cannot do, your Majesty,&rdquo;
retorted Killigrew, &ldquo;for the king is no subject.&rdquo;

A controversy flourished in the 18th century over the
merits of punning. Although history has exculpated Samuel
Johnson from the remark that &ldquo;A man who would perpetrate
a pun would have little hesitancy in picking a pocket,&rdquo;
he was still no great proponent of the pun. An anecdote has
it that Johnson, when confronted by Boswell's challenge
that his dislike of puns might be attributed to his inability to
engage in this practice, roared at his accuser, &ldquo;Sir, if I were
punish-ed for every pun I shed, there would not be left a
puny shred of my punnish head.&rdquo;

In his *Dictionary of the English Language*, Johnson defined
a punster as &ldquo;a low wit who endeavors at reputation
by double meaning.&rdquo; Yet he was not above getting off a pun
whenever an opportunity arose. At the Library of St. Andrews,
he inquired whether they possessed a certain book.
&ldquo;No sir,&rdquo; was the reply, &ldquo;it's a very expensive book and
beyond our means.&rdquo; &ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; said the doctor, alluding to the
custom of selling diplomas, &ldquo;you'll probably get it by
degrees.&rdquo;

Joseph Addison, editor of *The Spectator*, also looked
less than favorably upon a pun. He stated in an editorial
that &ldquo;The seeds of punning are in the minds of all men;
and, though they may be subdued by reason, reflection, and
good sense, they will be apt to shoot up in the greatest
genius that is not broken and cultivated by the rules of art.&rdquo;

Unlike Addison, Jonathan Swift defended the pun,
declaring that &ldquo;Punning is a talent which no man affects to
despise, but he that is without it.&rdquo; In a tract on punning
which Swift is purported to have written, seventy-nine rules
of punning are listed which read like a manual of parliamentary
procedure. Rule five states that any man may pun
another man's puns about half an hour after he has made
them. According to the &ldquo;Rule of Interruption,&rdquo; it is lawful
to interrupt a discourse of the most serious consequence with
a pun. The &ldquo;Rule of Retaliation&rdquo; obliges the individual, if
another man makes fifty puns, to return all or most of them
in kind. By the &ldquo;Rule of Concatenation,&rdquo; a person should
make a string of puns as fast as possible so that nobody else
can put in a word until he has exhausted the subject. The
&ldquo;Rule of Alienation&rdquo; might be the best means of bringing
peace and harmony to the world. When people are disputing
hotly on a subject, the punster is obliged to pick out the
word that is causing the greatest disturbance and make a
pun on it. This, says the tract, has not only occasioned
peace in private companies but has put a stop to hot wrangling
in Parliaments and convocations which, otherwise,
would not so soon come to a resolution.

One of Swift's allies in The Great Pun Debate was the
dramatist Richard Brinsley Sheridan, author of The Rivals,
who invented a fanciful origin for the pun in his poem *The
Origin of Punning from Plato's Symposiaks:*

>Once on a Time in a Merry Mood  
Jove made a Pun of flesh and blood,  
A double two face'd living creature  
Androgynes, of two-fold Nature  
For Back to Back with Single Skin  
He bound the Male and Female in  
So much alike so near the same  
They stuck as closely as their name  
Whatever words the female spoke  
The male converted to a joke  
So in this form of man and wife  
They led a merry Punning life.

One would not expect to find Napoleon Bonaparte
among the ranks of 18th-century punsters, but authorities
give him credit for a pun made during his Italian campaign
of 1796-97. To a lady who was amazed to find him so
young, he replied &ldquo;I am young today but tomorrow I shall
have Milan.&rdquo; (*Mille ans*, in French, means 'a thousand
years').

The first half of the 19th century has been called the
golden age of punning. In Britain it spawned a bevy of pundits
whose irreverence for the English language was unbounded.
Charles Lamb, author of the *Essays of Elia*, and a
few friends were once seated in a comfortable drawing
room on a rainy night when a dog began to howl outside.
One of the group arose to let him in, but Lamb protested
with &ldquo;Why begrudge him his whine and water?&rdquo; When
someone said to Lamb, &ldquo;Make me a pun,&rdquo; he replied &ldquo;Upon
what, sir?&rdquo; Regarding those who were foe and against punning,
Lamb commented, &ldquo;I never knew an enemy of puns
who was not an ill-natured man.&rdquo;

Two younger contemporaries of Lamb, Theodore Hook
and Thomas Hood, were perhaps the most notorious
punsters of all time. Hood, probably the first Englishman to
make a living solely from commercial humor, was a veritable
punning machine who ground out puns with alarming
facility. His many volumes of poetry are riddled with puns
which used to annoy his more serious readers. But he
defended himself with the couplet:

>However critics may take offense  
A double meaning has a double sense.

Some of his better puns can be found in verses from &ldquo;Faithless
Sally Brown&rdquo;:

>His death which happened in his berth  
At forty-odd befell  
They went and told the sexton  
And the sexton tolled the bell.

and from &ldquo;Faithless Nelly Grey&rdquo;:

>Ben Battle was a soldier bold,  
And used to war's alarms;  
But a cannon ball took off his legs  
So he laid down his arms.

Extolling a drink called Athel brose, made in the northern
part of Scotland by pouring boiling water on oatmeal and
adding some condiments. Hood wrote the following
epigram:

>Charmed with a drink which Highlanders compose,  
A German traveller exclaimed with glee,  
&ldquo;Potztausend! sare, if dis is Athol Brose  
How goot der Athol Boetry must be!&rdquo;

Edgar Allan Poe once said of Thomas Hood that &ldquo;during
the larger portion of his life, he seemed to breath only
for the purpose of perpetrating puns.&rdquo; Describing the meeting
of a man with a lion. Hood said, &ldquo;The man ran off with
all his might and the lion with all his mane.&rdquo;

Theodore Hook achieved success at an early age by
writing comic operas and spent a number of years as a man
about town, winning a foremost place in the world of
fashion as well as startling the public by the audacity of his
practical jokes. Hook's memory is associated with what
William Walsh called &ldquo;the most audacious jest on record.&rdquo;
As Governor of Mauritius, Hook ruled for five years before
being accused of embezzling 12,000 pounds of public funds.
He was dismissed from his post and returned to England,
where he told friends that his dismissal was &ldquo;on account of a
disorder in my chest.&rdquo; Neither Hood nor Hook was above
using any possible situation as an excuse to make a pun.
Hood said that an undertaker, who wanted to cremate his
ashes when he died, had become very solicitous of late
because he was seeking to &ldquo;urn a lively Hood.&rdquo; Hook, not
far behind, spoke lightly of a &ldquo;fit of coffin&rdquo; and told of the
bereaved widower who said at his wife's funeral that he was
going on a black-burying party.&rdquo; Of a man hanged at Newgate,
Hook said that &ldquo;he had taken a drop too much,&rdquo; and
of a man murdering his mother in a garret, &ldquo;he was above
committing a crime.&rdquo; A story is told about Hook and Hood
strolling one evening on the outskirts of London with their
friend Charles Mathews, the actor. Hood said to Hook,
&ldquo;They call us inseparables, but after all it's only natural that
Hook and eye [I] should go together.&rdquo; Hook then suggested
that the two have a match to see who could make up the
best joke on the spur of the moment. They agreed that the
loser would buy supper tor the group and Mathews was appointed
umpire. Scarcely were the terms agreed on when
they spied a sign board the owner of which, wishing to advertise
that he sold beer, had mistaken an a for an e and, instead
of &ldquo;Beer sold here&rdquo; had written &ldquo;Bear sold here.&rdquo;
&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; said Hook, &ldquo;I suppose that bear is his own bruin
[brewin'].&rdquo; Hook then went on to say that his rival might
beat him because he carried more than two faces under one
Hood. At that moment. Hood sighted a small house which
displayed a sign reading &ldquo;Beware the dog.&rdquo; Discovering no
dog, he scribbled on the sign, &ldquo;Ware be the dog?&rdquo; At this,
Mathews declared that he could not decide between two
such horrible puns and that each should pay for his own
dinner.

Though Lamb, Hood, and Hook dominated 19th-century
punning, there were other wags whose tales dogged
those of the better-known punmen. A Mr. Poole, author of
*Paul Pry*, was also considered a clever wit. An actor named
Priest was playing at a London theater and someone at the
Garrick Club remarked that there were a great many men
in the pit. &ldquo;Probably clerks who've taken Priest's orders&rdquo;
quipped Poole, who once defined *dogmatism* as &ldquo;Puppyism
come to maturity.&rdquo;

When asked if he could pun on the signs of the zodiac,
the dramatist Douglas Jerrold replied, &ldquo;By Gemini, I can.&rdquo;

Sydney Smith quoted the anonymous teacher who
rebuked a careless student for reading the word *patriarchs*
as *partridges* with the scathing comment, &ldquo;You are making
game of the patriarchs.&rdquo;

Byron also unleashed some biting puns such as the
conclusion of his epitaph on the drunken carrier, John
Adams:

>The liquor he drank being too much for one  
He could not carry off, so he's now carrion.

It is commonly believed that the most laconic military
dispatch was Julius Caesar's *Veni, vidi, vici* 'I came, I saw,
I conquered,' but none could equal in brevity that attributed
to Sir Charles Napier, a British officer fighting in India
who has figured in the capture of the Indian territory of
Scinde. His dispatch to the British War Office in London
contained only the Latin verb *peccavi*, meaning 'I have
sinned' [Scinde]. Unfortunately this most perfect of puns
belongs not to Napier but to *Punch*, which printed the story
in 1844.

Some of the best puns in the English language have
been made on names. At a tavern where he had been overcharged,
Samuel Foote, the English dramatist and actor,
asked his host &ldquo;What's your name?&rdquo; &ldquo;Partridge, sir&rdquo; was the
reply. &ldquo;Partridge!&rdquo; returned Foote. &ldquo;It should have been
Woodcock by the length of your bill.&rdquo;

There is also the jest of Dr. Thomas Browne who, having
unsuccessfully courted a lady, was challenged to drink
her health and replied, &ldquo;I have toasted her many years, but
I cannot make her Browne so I'll toast her no longer.&rdquo;

When Dr. Barton Warren was informed that his acquaintance
Dr. Vowel was dead, he exclaimed, &ldquo;What!
Vowel dead? Well thank heaven it was neither you nor I.&rdquo;

Moving back a century we find equally pun-gent lines
in the epitaph of that eminent pun gentleman, Jonathan
Swift, for the Earl of Kildare:

>Who killed Kildare?  
Who dared Kildare to kill?  
Death killed Kildare,  
Who dared kill whom he will.

Another pun which may or may not have been Swift's
resulted from a visit by Swift's friend. Dr. Ash, to an inn
soon after the passing of an act for the protection of growing
timber. The doctor requested a waiter to help him off
with his coat but the man refused saying that it was a felony
to strip an ash. Regardless of who made the pun, it is a fine
example of Swift wit.

Another 18th-century joker commented on John Gay's
*The Beggar's* Opera, produced by John Rich, that the production
&ldquo;made Rich gay and Gay rich.&rdquo;

The Scottish poet, Thomas Campbell, in his student
days in Glasgow, observed that Mr. Drum, the liquor
dealer, and Mr. Fife, an apothecary, were next-door neighbors.
The apothecary displayed a sign in his window which
stated &ldquo;Ears pierced by A. Fife.&rdquo; One night Campbell, with
the assistance of several schoolmates, placed a long wooden
board between the windows of the two shops bearing in
large capital letters the Shakespearean line, &ldquo;The spiritstirring
Drum, the ear-piercing Fife.&rdquo;

Among the ranks of American punsters it is not surprising
to find old Poor Richard himself, Ben Franklin. The
best-known pun attributed to Franklin was made during the
signing of the Declaration of Independence. John Hancock
addressed his associates with the words &ldquo;We must be unanimous;
there must be no pulling different ways; we must all
hang together.&rdquo; Franklin replied &ldquo;We must indeed all hang
together or, most assuredly, we shall all hang separately.&rdquo;
Another Revolutionary pun was made by Mather Boyles, a
Tory Loyalist of New England. Because of his political
views, the American patriots posted a sentinel to keep him
under surveillance. Boyles, in return, called this sentinel his
&ldquo;Observe-a-tory.&rdquo;

Oliver Wendell Holmes was a noted practitioner of the
pun. His advice to financial speculators was &ldquo;Put not your
trust in money but your money in trust.&rdquo; He also wrote the
famous limerick about Henry Ward Beecher.

>The Reverend Henry Ward Beecher  
Called a hen a most elegant creature  
The hen pleased with that,  
Laid an egg in his hat  
And thus did the hen reward Beecher.

In the 1920s and '30s fate brought some of America's
finest wits together at the Algonquin Round Table in New
York whence issued forth a sally of clever puns. Franklin P.
Adams's remark &ldquo;Take care of your peonies and the dahlias
will take care of themselves&rdquo; is a classic. George S. Kaufman
once groaned during a card game, &ldquo;I'm being treydeuced.&rdquo;
Alexander Woolcott titled a book of theater
criticism *Enchanted Aisles*.

Other American writers such as Peter de Vries, Clifton
Fadiman—who dubbed Debussy fans &ldquo;Debussybodies&rdquo;—
Christopher Morley, and S.J. Perelman have favored the
pun. Morley, who defined a pun as 'language on vacation,'
observed two small wigs on stands in a wig shop and commented,
&ldquo;They're alike as toupees.&rdquo;

Perelman wrote some of Groucho Marx's best lines. In
the film *Horsefeathers*, a secretary who has been holding a
caller at bay in the anteroom warns Groucho that &ldquo;Jennings
is waxing wroth,&rdquo; to which Groucho replies, &ldquo;Tell Roth to
wax Jennings for a while.&rdquo;

Groucho specialized in outrageous puns that stretched
the English language to its breaking point. He once advised
&ldquo;Don't conscience-stricken before they're hatched.&rdquo; In the
original stage version of *The Coconuts*, he introduced the
orchestra leader as follows: &ldquo;This is Emanuel. I got him
from Emanuel Training School. He's Emanuel like.&rdquo; In the
film *Animal Crackers*, Groucho, speaking about elephant
hunting, remarked with characteristic zaniness, &ldquo;In Africa
the tusks are too firmly rooted, but in Alabama the
Tuscaloosa.&rdquo;

James Joyce is the greatest wordsmith of all. His *Finnegans
Wake* contains upwards of 50,000 plays on words in
more than 12 languages. Some have quintuple layers and
can only be deciphered by trained experts. Although Joyce
made the pun arcane it belongs to the people and is meant
to be immediately understood rather than deciphered.

The pun is a subversive element which torpedoes any
attempt to make a language too exact, too formal. It is a
pleasant reminder to us that language is not a cold, precision
instrument but a fascinating ragbag of delights and surprises.

## Who Wrote That?!

Here are some quotations that ought to give you paws
if you are a purist. See if you can identify either the author,
or the source, or both. Score 10 points for each correct
answer. If you score 100, you must have cheated. A score of
50 classes you as a genius. If you get none right, your ego
may be dampened, but just think how much you still have
to learn!

1\. All debts are cleared between you and I.  
2\. Brain Worm has been with my cousin Edward and I all this day.  
3\. If a person is born of a gloomy temper they cannot help it.  
4\. There's two of you.  
5\. He talks like Brunswick did.  
6\. Lord Delaware is considerably younger than me.  
7\. Consider first, that Great and Bright infers no excellence.  
8\. The Whitish gleam was ... conferred by the enormity of their remotion.  
9\. Unfortunately, few have observed like you have done.  
10\. Typhus fever decimated the school periodically.

## Answers

1\. Shakespeare, *The Merchant of Venice,* III, ii, 321.  
2\. Jonson, *Every Man in His Humour,* V, iii.  
3\. Chesterfield, *Letters,* IV, ccIv, 170.  
4\. Shakespeare, 2 *Henry VI,* III, ii, 303.  
5\. Southey, *Letters*, I, I, 12.  
6\. Byron, *Letters*, 2 Nov. 1804.  
7\. Milton, *Paradise Lost,* VIII, 91.  
8\. De Quincey, *The System of the Heavens,* III, 183.  
9\. Darwin, , *Life and Letters*, III, 58.  
10\. Charlotte bronte, letter, in Mrs. Gaskell's *Life,* 276.

The above was abridged and adapted from &ldquo;Plain English,&rdquo; by
Jim Quinn, in *Washington Post Magazine,* December 11, 1977,
pp. 14-16, 34-35. Used by permission.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Police report that a man drove a car wrecklessly
through town, damaging several parked cars along the way.
The town police cruiser received $500 damage in the incident.&rdquo;
[From the (Kingston, Ontario) *Whig-Standard*, April 2, 1980,
p.26. Submitted by Patricia Whitaker, Kingston, Ontario,
who reports that the *Whig-Standard . . . is a pretty
good paper, . . . only treating us to lost &ldquo;spade&rdquo; cats and
&ldquo;martial&rdquo; relationships*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

A sign in the window of a neighborhood restaurant in
San Francisco offers &ldquo;FOOD&rdquo; TO TAKE OUT. [Submitted by
Margaret Tenney, Berkeley, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

One isn't struck quite so hard by the ambiguous headline
in *The Times* [London, April 14, 1980, p.4] that read
&ldquo;Ban on live sex shows 'strikes at freedom&rdquo;' till he learns
that the acronym of the pressure group campaigning for
changes in the obscenity laws in England is NCROPA (just
missing the &ldquo;E&rdquo; by a whisker). One might get the impression
that such a group would favor sex shows among the
dead-grateful and otherwise.

## A Pooh-Poohey
*Virginia Howard, New Orleans, Louisiana*

In my job as an editor of articles to be submitted to
medical journals, the written word consumes my mind.
One day, for example, while I was immersed in a paper
about the use of arylsulphatase in the treatment of leukemia,
my telephone rang and I automatically lifted the
receiver; in my usual &ldquo;answering-the-telephone&rdquo; voice, I
crooned, &ldquo;Arylsulphatase.&rdquo; Such is my absorption.

Problems with the written word are encountered and
surmounted every day. Idiosyncrasies in spelling and syntax
can be understood because the words stay still on the page
and withstand hours of withering scrutiny. The most capricious
misspelling can be disentangled into a meaningful
word, and sometimes the error is even curiously more satisfying
than its correction. One doctor wrote: &ldquo;Chronic laxative
use may lead to laxative dependency and the inability
to induce a normal response to colon distention, which may
then lead to higher and higher doses of laxative and a
viscous cycle.&rdquo; Such peculiarities even fleetingly glimpsed,
such as &ldquo;ORKA&rdquo; on the sign at a roadside vegetable stand, are
still intelligible. Errant script is wonderfully inert, but verbal
vagaries that bounce off the eardrums strike without
warning and then slither away. The brain is left stunned.

The problem that plagues my phonetically oriented
mind is not the ordinary variation in pronunciation, such as
being addressed as &ldquo;Miz Hired,&rdquo; nor is it the simple
spoonerism, like the &ldquo;turned bokey&rdquo; that a coworker enthusiastically
announced she was having for lunch. Other
variations cause only minor gnashing of teeth and clawing
at ears. In north Alabama, two radio announcers give disparate
interpretations of the title *Mrs.* To one announcer,
*Mrs. Smith* is &ldquo;Mizriz Smith,&rdquo; and to the other she is
&ldquo;Meriziz Smith.&rdquo; Less tolerable, but still grudgingly understandable,
is a poorly educated high-school English teacher's
instruction to her students to write &ldquo;rough graphs&rdquo; of their
themes.

What is it then that dissolves my mind into a quaking
muddle? What dreaded verbal encounter leaves me clutching
at a slippery alphabet? The source of my quandary is
when an incomprehensible comment is directed to me and
an immediate response is expected. The speaker knows what
word has just rolled off his tongue, but my mind is unable
to grasp it. If, as Emerson suggested, &ldquo;to be great is to be
misunderstood,&rdquo; then many great people have spoken to me.

My inability to comprehend variations in spoken English
first emerged in an educational psychology course, requiring
field work in a children's nursery school. A five-year-old
boy proposed a game of cowboys and Indians, and
designated to me, &ldquo;You can be Day-Oh.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Who?&rdquo; I asked. A hazy image of Harry Bellafonte,
singing &ldquo;The Banana Boat Song,&rdquo; flitted through my head.
Were calypso singers part of the Old West?

&ldquo;Day-Oh,&rdquo; he repeated.

&ldquo;Day-Oh?&rdquo; I asked.

&ldquo;No,&rdquo; he said peevishly, and clenching his fists, he
enunciated slowly and clearly, &ldquo;Not *Day*-Oh—DAY-Oh!&rdquo;

&ldquo;Who?&rdquo; I asked, knowing I dare not repeat the name.

&ldquo;DAY-OH,&rdquo; he said, his face glowing pink with gathering
rage, &ldquo;DAY-OH! DAY-OH!&rdquo;

&ldquo;I'm afraid I don't know who that is,&rdquo; I admitted.

&ldquo;Day-Oh Evans,&rdquo; he said in disgust.

I had hoped that my affliction was limited to eardrum
encounters with five-year-old vocal cords, but my life continued
to be hounded by perplexing vocal riddles. A friend
and I were getting off an elevator when she turned to me
and asked, &ldquo;Is that Marv?&rdquo; The only other person getting
off the elevator with us was a girl wearing a purple blouse.

&ldquo;N-no, I don't think so,&rdquo; I replied hesitantly. She certainly
didn't look as though her name would be Marv.

My friend continued, &ldquo;I just wondered what the color
Marv looked like exactly. I thought maybe that shade of
purple was about right.&rdquo; (A next-door neighbor once threatened
to paint his house *chattaroose*. He may have been kidding
about his choice of color, but his pronunciation was no
joke.)

Are others similarly burdened by this lack of finesse in
communication? Are they left spluttering as they try to
unwind common words from their linguistic shrouds? Could
it be an inherited characteristic? In my case, it definitely
is. My father bought some doughnuts in a doughnut shop
in Tennessee, and the salesgirl politely asked him, &ldquo;Yat
beyaw?&rdquo;

He stared at her and said, &ldquo;I-I beg your pardon?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yat beyaw?&rdquo; she squealed.

&ldquo;What?&rdquo; he asked in alarm. &ldquo;What, what?&rdquo;

&ldquo;*Yat beyaw!?*&rdquo; she squeaked, getting a tinge impatient.

&ldquo;Er-yes,&rdquo; he agreed as he grabbed his bag of doughnuts
and fled. When he got outside, he exclaimed, &ldquo;That girl just
meowed at me!&rdquo;

Others in my family have vestiges of the disorder. As
we were waiting in a hospital corridor for the arrival of
the elevator, my mother and I were conversing with a
gentlewoman from south Georgia and her daughter. We
commented on the slowness of the elevator, and the lady
contrasted this elevator's tardiness with the speed of the elevator
in the hotel where she and her daughter were staying,
&ldquo;Why, that elevator's so fast,&rdquo; she said, &ldquo;that last night
when it arrived, I got in and 'fo' Jean got in—WHOOSH—the
door closed and the elevator was gone!&rdquo;

My mother later commented, &ldquo;Doesn't that lady's
daughter have a strange name—Fojean! I've never heard
the name *Fojean* before.&rdquo;

Is there a gene—a phogene, perhaps—that predisposes
some brains to misinterpret speech patterns that others
understand? Those of us who have inherited the phogene
may, after months of understanding everything that everyone
says to us, become complacent. The disease, however, is
only dormant. Sooner or later a word, innocently uttered,
will explode in the phogene-laden brain, and the struggle to
capture an auditory outlaw begins again.

Just yesterday my brain was happily dandling written
words on its cerebral knees when someone from the orthopedics
department of the medical school telephoned me and
flung out this question, &ldquo;What does *pooh-poohey* mean?&rdquo;

&ldquo;I don't know,&rdquo; I stammered, while nervously fingering
my dictionary, &ldquo;but it sounds decidedly nasty to me.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Don't you have any idea about *pooh-poohey?*&rdquo; she
persisted. I admitted that I didn't. If I was unable to
recognize *Marv* when I saw her, how could I admit
familiarity with *pooh-poohey*?

Searching for a clue I could jab my pencil into, I
asked, &ldquo;Could you mean *pooh-pooh*? That's an expression of
contempt.&rdquo;

&ldquo;No,&rdquo; she replied, &ldquo;That doesn't make any sense. I
think there's even a restaurant in town called 'The Pooh-Poohey.&rdquo;'

&ldquo;Could it be Hawaiian?&rdquo; I suggested, &ldquo;A double dose of
*poi* perhaps? *Poi-poi?*&rdquo;

&ldquo;*Pooh-poohey* isn't used that way at all in the paper
I'm typing.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Just how is it used?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It's the title of an article I'm typing from a tape recording.
The title is 'Hand Surgery—A Pooh-Poohey.&rdquo;'

Suddenly, the lid was off the jar—a whiff of flowers,
herbs, and spices, a medley of sensations—this miscellaneous
collection revealed the truth about pooh-poohey!
My relief was immeasurable.

Yat beyaw?

Yayus!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;... I would lie on a picnic bench with my head in
one of my great-aunt's broad laps. . . .&rdquo; [From &ldquo;Fallin' In
with the Great-Aunts,&rdquo; VERBATIM, Winter 1980, p. 14.
Submitted by Edgar P. Wyman, North Sandwich, New
Hampshire, who suggests that *Either [the author] had a
lapse of memory, or the editor allowed his attention to
punctuation to lapse, or Great Aunty was a freak (or had
been re-lap(s)ed*.)]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Devil's Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?an=ambrose+bierce&bsi=30&fe=on&sortby=17&tn=devil+dictionary&prevpage=1)
Ambrose Bierce, (Stemmer House Publishers, Inc., Owings Mills, Maryland, 1978), xx + 286pp., illustrated.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

*GLUTTON, n.* A person who escapes the evils of moderation
by committing dyspepsia.

*DRAMATIST, n.* One who adapts plays from the French.

*KLEPTOMANIAC, n.* A rich thief.  

*LAP, n.* One of the most important organs of the female
system—an admirable provision of nature for the repose
of infancy, but chiefly useful in rural festivities to
support plates of cold chicken and heads of adult
mates. The male of our species has a rudimentary lap,
imperfectly developed and in no way contributing to
the animal's substantial welfare.

*POLITICS, n.* A strife of interests masquerading as a
contest of principles. The conduct of public affairs for
private advantage.

*TELEPHONE, n.* An invention of the devil which abrogates
some of the advantages of making a disagreeable
person keep his distance.

To those who are not familiar with such definitions,
they speak for themselves; to those familiar with them, their
source will be apparent: *THE DEVIL'S DICTIONARY*.

This was first published in the early 1900s as part of a
large collection of Bierce's works. The present edition-I am
not sure that other editions are readily available-is beautifully
produced and contains a number of attractive black-
and-white and color illustrations. Surely, it is a classic work
of cynicism tempered by humor, unlike more recent attempts
at the same sort of thing: modern authors who write
such definitions almost invariably produce irascible, silly, or
bitterly sardonic entries that lack Bierce's gentle humor.
Many of the definitions have been quoted by writers since
original publication. The volume at hand would make not
only a fine addition to any language-lover's library but a
welcome gift to others, as well.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Bears and Lions Growl
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

In a work entitled *Divine Songs*, Isaac Watts (1674-1748),
an English theologian and hymn writer, observed that

>Let dogs delight to bark and bite,  
For God hath made them so;  
Let bears and lions growl and fight,  
For 'tis their nature too.

Not very good or very profound poetry, to be sure, but the
lines do serve to point up the fact that while humans speak,
other living creatures do not, although they can and do utter
sounds. And the English language is rich in terms to describe
those sounds. As Watts noted, dogs *bark* and bears and
lions *growl*. Some such English terms apply to different
species of nonhuman creatures; for example, both insects
and birds *churr*. Others denote a particular nonhuman
sound but, at the same time, serve other purposes: cranes
and geese *clang* but so do bells and streetcars. There are, on
the other hand, some terms that are highly particularized.
What *quacks* other than a duck? And what *oinks* other than
a pig? It may also be observed that for many nonhuman
creatures, there is more than one applicable English word.
Take, for example, the two most common animals, namely,
cats and dogs. Cats *caterwaul, mew, miaou (or meow),
meaul, purr, and yowl*, while dogs *bark, bay, growl, howl,
snarl, yap, yelp, and yowl*. Dogs can also *cry*, although that
term is generally reserved for hounds, as is *bay*.

Terms that are applicable to the various barnyard denizens,
animal and fowl, include the following:

>*bulls bellow* and *roar*          
*hens cackle, chuck,*  
*cows bellow, low,* and *moo*      
*chuckle, cluck,* and *gabble*  
*calves blat* and *bleat*          
chicks *cheep* and *peep*  
*asses* and *donkeys bray*         
roosters *cock, cock-a-*  
*goats bleat*                                 
*doodle-doo,* and *crow*  
*pigs grunt, squeal,* and *oink*                                        
hen turkeys *yelp*  
*horses neigh, nicker, snort,*                
tom  turkeys *gobble*  
*whicker,* and *whinny*            
*geese cackle, clang, cronk,*  
*sheep baa, blat,* and *bleat*     
*gabble, hiss,* and *honk*  
ducks *quack* and *squawk*

Applicable terms for our feathered friends of the sky
are just as numerous, if not more so. Birds in general *chatter,
chirrup, chitter, pipe, squall, trill, twitter*, and *whistle*,
while fledglings *cheep, chirp, peep*, and *tweet*. Specific
species also do their specific things:

>bitterns *boom*                              
nightingales and partridges *churr*  
cranes *clang* and *whoop*        
crows *caw* and *croak*           
owls *hoot, screech, tu-whit,* *tu-whoo,* and *whoop*  
cuckoos *cuckoo*                             
eagles *scream*                              
pigeons and doves *coo*  
gulls *cry* and *mew*             
ravens *caw, croak,* and *cronk*  
hawks *cry*                                  
snipes *scape*                               
rooks *caw*

Terms available for various species of wildlife include:

>elephants *trumpet*                            
bears *growl*  
lions *growl, roar,* and *snarl*    
rutting deer *bell*  
monkeys *chatter*                              
bucks *troat*  
jackals *wail*                                 
squirrels *chatter*  
wolves *howl*                                  
mice *cheep, peep,* and *squeak*  
foxes* bark, yap,* and *yelp*       
bats *cheep*

Insects also have their distinctive terms. Insects in
general can be said to *chirp, churr*, and *trill*, while specific
terms for specific insects include:

>bees *boom, buzz, drone,*                      
grasshoppers and locusts and *hum*                   
*chirr, crick,* and *whirr*  
crickets *chirp* and *creak*        
mosquitoes and gnats *hum* and *trumpet*  
beetles *boom, drone,* and *hum*                     
Also, frogs *croak* and *pipe,* and snakes *hiss*.

I doubt very much that these terms include all that are
contained in the English lexicon, and readers who are ardent
logophiles will very likely be able to add others. If they
can't the paleomorphophiliacs certainly should be able to do
so. In that connection, I might note that in her delightful
book on archaic English words, *Poplollies and Bellibones*,
Susan Kelz Sperling cites three such words: *blore* (like a
sheep), *crunkle* (like a crane), and *winx* (like a donkey).

There are several general observations that can be
made about these terms. First of all, the great majority are
one-syllable words and almost all derive from Old or Middle
English or are, in origin, what lexicographers term &ldquo;imitative,&rdquo;
that is, onomatopoeic. Secondly, the simple noun
form is identical with the verbal infinitive. These factors set
them very far apart from their Latin-derived associates,
which are uniformly multisyllabic and which have differing
noun and verb forms, for example: *latrate* (like a dog) and
*latration; stridulate* (like a cricket or grasshopper) and
*stridulation*; and *ululate* (like a dog, jackal, wolf, or owl)
and *ululation*.

As already noted, many of the terms cited are imitative,
or onomatopoeic, in origin. Onomatopoeia can be defined
as &ldquo;the formation of a word, as *cuckoo* or *boom*, by
imitation of a sound made by or associated with its
referent&rdquo;; and since a particular kind of animal makes the
same sound wherever it may be, an onomatopoeic rendition
of that sound should, logically, be the same everywhere.
That is not the case, however. Onomatopoeia is very much
ethnocentric or, if you prefer, linguicentric, and what is
onomatopoeic for the speaker of one language is not necessarily
so for the speaker of another. What is *bow-wow* in
English, for example, is *oua oua* in French, *Wauwau* in
German, *vau vau* in Hungarian, *bau bau* in Italian, *wan
wan* in Japanese, *mong-mong* in Korean, *vovvov* in Norwegian
and *hav hav* in Turkish.

At the same time, onomatopoeic ethnocentricity must
not be over-emphasized, for the similarities in some cases
can be as striking as the differences in others. In other
words, there are some sounds which register very similarly
on ears around the world. The sounds represented in English
by *cock-a-doodle-doo* and *meow* are good examples:

>Croatian  —    *kukuriku*    —    *mijau*  
Dutch    —     *kukeleku*     —   *miauw*  
French     —   *cocorico*     —   *miau*  
German      —  *das Kikeriku* —   *das Miau*  
Hungarian  —   *kukurik&uacute;* — *nyavogas*  
Indonesian —   *kukurukuk*   —    *ng&eacute;ong*  
Italian   —    *chicchirichi* —   *miagolio*  
Japanese  —    *kokko-kooko* —    *nyaw*  
Korean    —    *kkokyo*     —     *meow*  
Norwegian  —   *kykeliky*   —     *mjaue*  
Polish    —    *kukuryku*    —    *miau*  
Portuguese —   *cocoroc&oacute;* — *miado*  
Romanian   —   *cutcurigu*   —    *mieunat*  
Swedish   —    *kuckeliku*   —    *jama*  
Thai     —     *aek-ei-ek-ek* —   *miew*  
Turkish   —    *kokoriko*   —     *miyav*  
Vietnamese —   *cuc-cu-cu*   —    *meo meo*

## Odd Couples
*Eric Winters, Marble Dale, Connecticut*
Here is a list of a few Latin-derived words with their
counterparts-element for element-in Greek. Most of
the pairs have entirely different meanings though their
components are equivalent, only a few can be considered
synonymous.

>*aversion— antipathy*          
*benediction— eulogy*         
*carnivore— sarcophagus*      
*circumlocution— periphrasis*  
*compassion— sympathy*        
*composition— syntax*         
*concourse— syndrome*         
*lucifer— phosphor*  
*passive— pathetic*  
*prescription— program*  
*projection— hyperbole*  
*resolution— analysis*  
*supposition— hypothesis*  
*transformation— metamorphosis*

Would the readers of VERBATIM care to add to this list?

## The Good Life
*Robert A. Fowkes, New York University*

A few years ago I stood on a modest eminence overlooking
the Hudson, accompanied by an in/outlaw.
Small craft glided by, some more magnificent than the rest.
When a particularly impressive boat went past, the people
lounging luxuriously on deck, drinking wine and obviously
enjoying the day, my relative-by-marriage turned to me and
said, &ldquo;The good life, eh Bob?!&rdquo; and I had no answer to his
rhetorical question, for, although not too sure what the
&ldquo;good life&rdquo; meant, I had never thought of it as including
sybaritic pleasure. It had, in fact, quasi-theological overtones
for me, reminiscent of Paul and his &ldquo;good fight&rdquo;; not
that the good fight was synonymous with the good life, but
the assonance seemed to connect the two somehow. Strangely
enough, there seems to be no scriptural attestation of the
good life in so many words. The Lord looked upon His
handiwork after each day's stint in the creation and saw
that is was &ldquo;good.&rdquo; Yet the serpent's seductive promise to
make Adam and Eve like gods, through giving them the
power to distinguish between good and evil is clearly condemned
(Gen.3.5). And the source of the &ldquo;good life&rdquo;
remains elusive.

We are, therefore, fortunate that our advertising hucksters
tell us what it is all about. An advertisement for a
swimming pool (on one of those annoying sheets that clutter
up magazines and fall to the floor with two or three others)
tells us what the good life is: &ldquo;Summer sun for the
kids—right in their own backyard—and the perfect setting
for entertaining friends—a casual pool party and barbecue,
maybe a few cocktails, and there you have it—the good life,
your own private country club.&rdquo; Maybe my in-law was
right. He could find further confirmation of his notion that
the good life = the life of goods in Phyllis and Fred Feldkamp's
*The Good Life ... or What's Left of It* (New York:
Harper and Row, 1972) with the illuminating subtitle, &ldquo;Being
a recounting of the pleasures of the senses that contribute
to the enjoyment of life in France.&rdquo; The ingredients
of the good life include moments at the race track, a visit to
a *fermier* who preserves the ancient art of making Camembert,
an evening at the de Gaulles' place, and an encounter
with the cultural element called the truffle: &ldquo;At the center
of it all rests the ugly fungus with the delicate scent, the
mysterious *truffe*&rdquo; (p. 143).

&ldquo;The good life&rdquo; has attracted several other writers as an
appropriate book title. Douglas Wallop packed that title on
to a novel in 1969. (He is perhaps better known for *The
Mermaid in the Swimming Pool* and *The Year the Yankees
Lost the Pennant*.) In this version of the good life a man and
his wife sell their suburban house (euphemistically called a
&ldquo;home,&rdquo; of course) and hire themselves out as caretakers of
a magnificent estate. Handsome wages and pool privileges
(a pool again!) are theirs for minimal duties. To them, the
good life means a chance to experience the delights of the
well-to-do without the concomitant worries.

A narcissistic ad in *The New York Times*, May 27,
1977, p.C24, proclaims, &ldquo;Ah, the Good Life! Good food,
good wine, good talk (and home delivery of the New York
Times).&rdquo; Paradise enow. Sylvia Porter expressed forebodings
(*New York Post*, August 16, 1977, p.60) that the good life
might be heading for a fall. The &ldquo;good life&rdquo; (quotation
marks hers; she is bright enough to see through the sham) is
explained as amounting to the perquisites enjoyed by well-
paid executives. The &ldquo;fall&rdquo; refers to anticipated difficulties
after retirement.

Uncle Sam evinces similar materialistic notions of the
good life in a pamphlet published by the U. S. Department
of Agriculture, 1971: *A Good Life for More People*, where,
it must be admitted, the indefinite article somewhat muffles
the effect. But I suppose our government knows best what is
good for us, if not what life is.

With the current maddening predilection for the
Romance comparative, we might expect to find the &ldquo;better
life.&rdquo; We do better than that, however, cf. *The New York
Times*, May 14, 1979, p.76: &ldquo;Barbados. It's better than the
good life. It's the best&rdquo; (the *summum bonum*, no doubt),
That superlative degree of excellence is manifested in discounts
and special rates.

The revived *Life* magazine does not disappoint us.
Where, if not there, should we expect to find attestations of
the expression? It occurs as the title of an article on a spectacular
&ldquo;operative,&rdquo; Ali Hassan Salameh: &ldquo;A Charming
Assassin Who Loved the Good Life&rdquo; (April, 1979, pp.
101-108). We learn that he &ldquo;did not allow duty or danger to
inhibit his appetite for the good life.&rdquo; The elements of that
life are enumerated: &ldquo;Scotch whisky, fast cars, beautiful
women and (even when moving under cover abroad)
elegant restaurants and fine hotels&rdquo; (pp. 101-102). No swimming
pools?

A program on pimps and prostitutes (David Susskind's
TV show, 1 AM, May 27, 1979) introduced a still more astounding
use of the term, when a (disguised) pimp asserted
that young girls are lured into the profession by a taste of
the good life!

While such meretricious distortion of the concept proliferates,
every now and then a more venerable and less
hedonistic use emerges, as if to defy the hucksters. The recent
book by Helen and Scott Nearing (New York: Schocken
Books, 1979) bears the title *Continuing the Good Life* and
obviously harks back to their earlier book *Living the Good
Life* (1954). The Nearings regard the good life as related to
the back-to-the-land movement and to the re-embracing of
a more natural and simple (and arduous) way of life. They
reject the labor of farm animals and most use of machinery,
preferring hand tools Mr. Nearing (95 years old!) is somewhat
incredibly said to be capable of mowing a field with a
scythe before breakfast. He and his youthful bride (not yet
80) are strict vegetarians and consume no milk or eggs.
They have disciples who share their idea of what the good
life is.

William H. Marnell, in *The Good Life of Western
Man* (New York, 1971) makes a sustained effort to determine
what the &ldquo;good life&rdquo; seems to have meant to &ldquo;western
man&rdquo; through the ages. That he chauvinistically excludes
the whole East is somewhat disappointing, and, in fact, he
is taken to task for this in a foreword by Arnold Toynbee.
But the valid central theme of the book is that the good life
is to be related to things like altruism and the golden mean.
There is no mention of ego-fulfillment or belly gratification
or perks for jerks.

Perhaps most people of our day—their ears, eyes, and
brains (when present) assailed by all the media with the
spurious sense of the &ldquo;good life&rdquo;—would regard the Nearing
and Marnell titles as either egregious bloopers or as irony.
After all, does not *bon vivant* come close to the real essence
of the term? Yet, pursuers of what in Italian is called the.
*mala vita* seem to aim to enjoy those luxuries and delights
which, for many, are the real fruits of the &ldquo;good life.&rdquo; If
Buddha or Christ or a saint or two exhorted would-be
followers to get rid of their material possessions, how could
the life to which they pointed the way—a life without
goods—be a good life, let alone the good life? *Cui bono?
Cui* indeed.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;While some retailers are towing the line cautiously,
others. . . .&rdquo; [From *California Apparel News*, February 29,
1980. Submitted by Warren Wilkins, Seattle, Washington.]
*Give them enough rope*. . . .


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;She was much shorter than I, but she indeed weighed
more than me.&rdquo; [James A. Michener, *Miami Herald*, March
16, 1980. Submitted by Daniel James, Ivoryton, Connecticut,
who comments. *New Rule of Grammar: Height takes
the nominative case; weight the objective*.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Created from colorful, anodized aluminum and
tough, strong compressed polystyrene, you can write with
any ball-type pen or pencil on the long-lasting tag.&rdquo; [From
a tag accompanying a vegetable and flower marker sold by
Gardener's Eden, Boston, Massachusetts. Submitted by
Hans Beacham, Austin, Texas, who comments. *What about
those of us that are not created from colorful, anodized
aluminum and tough, strong compressed polystyrene?*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

A restaurant in Katmandu, Nepal, offers *testy snacks*,
one in Sana'a, Yemen, *paper steak* and *Garden Blue*, and
one in Freetown, Sierra Leone (where English is the official
language, *stake*. [Submitted by Kathryn W. Uphaus, Freetown, Sierra Leone.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;REWARD FUND CREATED FOR BURNING ARSONISTS . . .
Last month [Mayor] Voinovich promised . . . that he would
request that the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
set aside $10,000 for a reward program for nonfatal
crimes of arson.&rdquo; [From *The Cleveland Press*, March 8,
1980, A8. Submitted by Brud Turner, Cleveland Heights,
Ohio, who comments. *Code of Hammurabi* (Lex Talionis) *is
alive and well in Cleveland!*]

## Score-bored
*Clair Schulz, Clinton, Wisconsin*

Lately I have been attentively listening to reports of
baseball scores, but with little interest in the results. One
might ask, &ldquo;Why follow the scores if you don't care who
wins?&rdquo; Because there is an interesting aspect to these reports
other than the naming of the winner and loser. That element
is the significant *how*.

Carefully listening to the latest verdicts, I have learned
that the readers of scores or the writers of scores who work
for wire services lack variety in decribing the manner of victory
or defeat. Beat (or *beaten*) is used most frequently,
although *downed* (&ldquo;The Phillies downed the Cubs 4-2&rdquo;) and
*over* (&ldquo;The Indians over the Tigers 7-3&rdquo;) also appear often
in the litany. Like a club owner who resists change these reporters
(or, more precisely, reciters) continue to use the
same words day after day. Occasionally, when a team is
shut out, a creative imp might throw in a statement like
&ldquo;The Mets blanked the Reds 2-0,&rdquo; but soon things are back
to *beat* and *over* and *out* (*out* being the commercial).

When one considers the hundreds of verbs waiting
eagerly to get their chance, it seems rather heartless to play
the same line-up all the time. No matter what the outcome,
the English language boasts a full pen of terms waiting to
go into action. Was it a close game? The lackluster *got by*
may bid for a tryout, but it pales beside the likes of *edged,
nudged, nipped*, and *trimmed*. A lopsided contest? &ldquo;The
Twins took the Angels&rdquo; sounds as if the teams are dating.
But the listener who hears *slapped, destroyed, trounced,
clubbed, pounded, clobbered, slugged, slammed, punished,
routed*, or *pummeled* inserted into a program will know
that a team has taken a beating. For those who claim that
they lack sufficient air time to search for words, here is an
easy-to-remember handful: *tripped, clipped, tipped, ripped,
whipped*, and (for shutouts) *zipped*.

With a little practice a sportscaster could develop a
delivery with enough panache to please even connoisseurs.
A gourmet might be delighted to know that the Giants
*grated* the Braves 10-1 and the Orioles *battered* the Yankees
12-2. Teams could be *diced, sliced*, and *shredded* to please
any palate. Various types of artists formerly preoccupied
with aesthetics might pause in their work to listen to reports
that included terms like *outstroked, pasted, welded, blotted
out, smashed, chiseled, needled*, and *tattooed*. And those involved
in the fashion world would certainly respond
favorably to descriptions of teams *socking, belting, collaring,
handcuffing*, and *straitjacketing* their hapless
opponents.

There are many other candidates capable of pinchhitting
for the overworked veterans, but they may be destined
for early retirement unless the managers of language
toss off the enchantments of sloth. By now these people who
are responsible for the delivery of official results should
know that the easy word, the one that comes immediately
to mind, is often the dullest. Not only will the reader of
scores who varies his verbs find the task less tedious but
those listening will be released from the strains of
monotonic repetition that seem to emanate from every station.
Then they may discover that it is not just this listener
to whom the winning and losing is not as important as how
you say the game.

## Mubblefubbles: An Old-Fashioned Bout with the Black Dog; or Coming Down in the Mouth with a Case of the Humpy-Grumpies
*John L. Idol, Jr., Clemson University*

>I writ of melancholy, by being busy to avoid  
melancholy. There is no greater cause of melancholy  
than idleness, no better cure than business. . . .
>
>*Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy*

As any good modern thesaurus (Alien's, Rodale's,
Mawson's, or Soule's) will show, present-day English
has no lack of words to express a melancholic state when
&ldquo;doleful dumps the mind oppress&rdquo; (*Romeo and Juliet*, IV, v,
129). From standard English through dialectal words to
slang terms, words and phrases abound to help anyone suffering
from *jawfall* to express how blue his funk has become.
Fascinating as such modern terms are, not they but
archaic, obsolete, and rare words for melancholy or dejection
will be the theme of this essay on a Cimmerian subject.
So &ldquo;Hail divinest Melancholy&rdquo; while I write of darksome
words.

The sanguine Wife of Bath, narrating the tale of the
lecherous Knight who thought he must wed a hag, confided
in Dryden's modernization of her story: &ldquo;Mirth there was
none, the man was a *la mort*.&rdquo; Once a term naturalized in
English, *alamort* is now considered French and is rarely, if
ever, used in Dryden's sense of 'melancholy.' Two jocose
corruptions of *melancholy, allycholly* and *colliemollie*, have
been dropped from the language since Shakespeare's time.
Shakespeare has the Host in *The Two Gentlemen of Verona*
say to Julia, &ldquo;Methinks you're allycholly; I pray you, why is
it?&rdquo; (IV, ii, 27). An anonymous writer in 1603 wrote: &ldquo;The
Devil was a little colli-mollie and would not come off.&rdquo; Old
Nick probably did not come off because at the moment he
was an *atrabilarian* suffering acutely from *black bile* or
*black choler*, and his *atrabilariousness* was making him
woefully *chumpish*. Sidney's *Arcadia* in 1580 had used
*chumpish* to express the notion of sullenness. Had the Old
Deuce had the good fortune to come upon John Quincy
Adams a couple of centuries later (1777), he might have
borrowed a sentence from one of Adams's letters and
griped, &ldquo;The spleen, the vapours, the dismals, the horrors
seemed to have seized [my] whole State.&rdquo;

The *dole* of someone in a *griefful* state is powerfully exhibited
by Spenser when cannibals with sharp knives and
hungry looks *gaze* upon the Damzell in Book VI, Canto
VIII, of *The Faerie Queene*:

>Which when she sees with ghastly griefful eies,  
Her heart does quake, and deadly pallid hew  
Benumbes her cheekes.

Indeed, at this frightful moment, one could share her
*hepatic* condition, for whose liver would not secrete plenteous
bile if liver and all else lay subject to a cannibal's greedy
appetite. If not just the liver, then surely the other parts of
the *hypochondria*, the seat of spleen and melancholia,
would render one an instant *hypochondriack*. Without
enough pluck to overcome such dreadful foes, what damsel
would not be *luctiferous*, for she would bear much sorrow
in losing her limbs and paps to lustful flesheaters. Considering
so dire a plight, she could well have anticipated a later
cry by Richardson's Pamela, &ldquo;My heart was so lumpish!&rdquo;
(1741). Such a bloody end would leave any decent girl feeling
justifiably *maltalent*.

Escaped from these *tristful* Spenserian perils and safely
at court with a copy of John Lyiy's play *Midas* in her hands,
she could shake her head in agreement over the behavior of
young men at court at this time. &ldquo;Melancholy is the creast
of Courtiers armes, and now everie base companion, being
in his mubblefubbles, says he is melancholy&rdquo; (V, ii), unless,
of course, keeping up on the latest cant, he is in his *mumblefubbles*.
Should he not care to use slang, he might report
that he is now in something of a qualm himself because his
friends behave so *splenetically*. Perchance, if he were not
too far sunk in his spleenishness, he could lift words from
Gabriel Harvey and confess, &ldquo;I was never so splenetique
when I was most dumpish but I could smile at a frise jest.&rdquo;

A *yearnful* distant descendant of his, quoting Sir
Richard Blackmore, might well give a similar report about
the modish malaise her stylish friends display when &ldquo;The
spleen with sullen vapours clouds the brain,/ And binds the
spirits in its heavy chain.&rdquo; Or should a still later descendant
turn ever more bookish and launch a career in dictionary-
making, he could be described by a contemporary journalist
as &ldquo;too splentitive, austere, impatient ... to reach the
abacus of excellence in the science of lexicography&rdquo; (*Monthly
Magazine*, 1815). A further turn from lexicography to
romantic love could subject him to a hopeless seizure of
*Wertherism*. A studiously placed pistol could thus put an
end to his *dreariment*.

Out in the provinces, the cousins of these city-bred
*melancholiacks* were to have their own problems with the
mulligrubs and pass their doldrums on down to their children,
and their children to theirs. *Dolements* could beset
anyone, but especially a *fiddlefaced glumpish* fellow whose
*grum* and *glum* afflicted all of his friends and neighbors
with a severe outbreak of the *humpy-grumpies*. Not to be
outdone, his neighbors could be *grouty* and *grump, glunch,
grunch* until they were worn out with *gruntling*. The long
and short of it was that if one wanted to be *dowly*, the dismals
could strike as deeply in Yorkshire as in London. Any
doubters of that generalization need weigh only this neighborly
diagnosis by an unnamed Yorkshireman: &ldquo;She's having
a long dowl on't this time, there's somewhat the matter,
depend on it.&rdquo;

The truth of the matter is that the *blue devils* can make
anyone, countryman or city swell, feel &ldquo;lower than the ring
around a Scotsman's bathtub&rdquo; anywhere, anytime. But
some people choose not to *sing the blues* with sesquipedalian
terms, opting, instead, to chop off long words, create new
ones, blend others, or fashion original phrases. One of the
first words to go under the knife of the slangwright was
*hypochondria*, becoming *hipped, hippish, hypo*, and *down
in the hips* in the early 18th century. For example, Richard
Steele in 1712 wrote in the *Spectator*: &ldquo;I have been to the
last Degree hipped since I saw you.&rdquo; The even further
clipped form, *hip*, was not to appear until 1840.

An early creation was *hump*, which found its way into
a sentence by Defoe in this context: &ldquo;Under many Hardships
and Restrictions, many Humps and Grumps.&rdquo; A later creation,
*fantad* or *fantod*, formed perhaps on the base of *fantastic*,
appeared in 1867, some twenty-three years before
some disheartened victim of *Monday fever got the morbs*
(1880).

Victims of the *boo-hoos* (1830s) or the *dolefuls* (1820s),
if they were not wholly *picklepussed*, could brighten their
own nights by sharing such sprightly blends as *solemncholy*
(*ca.* 1860), *lemonjolly* (*ca.* 1860), and *lemoncholy* (1909).
Once such playful blends cropped up, some wag dubbed a
pregnant woman's craving for watermelon as *watermeloncholy*.
But one could obviously develop incurable *woefits* if
forced to endure levels of wit no higher than this.

The creators of phrases have been even more productive.
Swift is credited with creating or recording *down in
the hips* (1729), but since Swift's time melancholic folk have
*given the pip* (1890) or *gotten the pip* (1885) or the *woefuls*
(1909). Of course, they have coined dozens of phrases still
current in British or American slang.

These old-fashioned words and phrases, together with
the scores of phrases and words presently denoting a melancholic
state or disposition, plausibly suggest that new terms
must come as mankind learns more and more about the
megrims, for as poor Belarius of *Cymbeline* once cried, &ldquo;O
melancholy! Who ever yet could sound thy bottom?&rdquo; (IV, ii,
204.)

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Reader Over Your Shoulder*](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/547475/the-reader-over-your-shoulder-by-robert-graves-introduction-by-patricia-oconner/9781609807337)
Robert Graves and Alan Hodge, (Vintage Books, 1979; original edition, 1943; revised and abridged edition, 1947), 290pp.

One approaches a review of a book bearing Robert
Grave's name with respect, almost not daring to dislike it,
careful lest the slightest adverse comment make the reviewer
a fool. Yet, the cover of this book identifies Graves (presumably
for that segment of the television audience to which it
is hoped it may appeal) as the author of *I, Claudius,* a work
I found quite tedious when I tried to read it some 25 years
ago. That is quite irrelevant, of course, but then so is the
publisher's identification of Graves: either you know who he
is or you don't, and whatever mark he might have made as
author of *I, Claudius* has scarcely any bearing on his qualifications
for writing a work on English exposition.

Notwithstanding the respect that Craves and Hodge
may merit for their works of fiction, their observations that
&ldquo;English is less ancient than French&rdquo; on the grounds of its
freedom from gender differentiation, and that &ldquo;French is
clearly less ancient than Latin, since it has no separate
neuter gender and does not decline its nouns,&rdquo; are simply
not consonant with the facts we know about other languages.
That is not to say that French is older than Latin,
for we know that is not the case. But the criteria offered,
when applied to Polish or Russian on the one hand and to
Chinese on the other, prove completely specious. [Besides, it
is annoying to find *grammer* so spelled on the third line of
such a book; but there are other typographical errors.]

All of the preceding takes place on page one, an
altogether inauspicious beginning for a work on the language.
But it gets worse before it gets better. Page seven:
&ldquo;The Romance and Germanic languages, not having had
occasion to simplify themselves to the same degree [as
English], still retain their genders and inflections. There is
no logical justification for genders. They are a decorative
survival from a primitive time when the supposed sex of all
concepts—trees, diseases, cooking implements—had to be
considered for the sake of religious convention or taboo.&rdquo;
This may be the linguistics of *The White Goddess,* but it is
not what we associate with the linguistics since the neogrammarians
of the 19th century. In fact, applying the notion
of natural (or sex) gender to grammar is probably one
of the most misleading bits of nonsense that grammarians
ever did, for it has confused students ever since. Don't you
think that the Germans—even the proto-Germans—knew
that *M&auml;dchens* are feminine? Yet, applying the criteria of
sex gender, *das M&auml;dchen* is, of course, neuter. Examples
abound. Even in languages like English where we expect
&ldquo;natural gender,&rdquo; we find nautical references to feminine
vessels. The point is not that &ldquo;gender is illogical,&rdquo; as the
authors say, but that it is subject to a different logic. This is
especially evident in French, where there is no neuter
gender. In any event, Romance gender is based on Latin
gender, in which the gender of a word depended pretty
much on the prehistory of the declension to which it belonged,
with the so-called first declension (*femina, agricola,*
etc.) being the most archaic. Roman culture was not blessed
with a population of Amazonian farmers. The subject is too
complex to discuss here, but the point has been made.

The authors continue by criticizing the paradigm of
French 'will'—*je serai, tu seras, il sera, nous serons, vous
serez, ils seront*—as if it consisted of six forms. Clearly, if
pronunciation is the measure (as it should be for a spoken
language), then there are only four forms, since *seras* and
*sera, serons* and *seront* are indistinguishable. It is even
doubtful that *serai* and *serez* are distinguishable, reducing
the forms to three, that is, only one more than English (if
we allow *shall* for I and we, and *will* only for the rest), or,
at worst, two more. To make such a comparison becomes
ridiculous, for one must also contend with the interrogative
forms, which yield *serai-je, seras-tu, sera-t-il, serous-nous,
serez-vous,* and *seront-ils*. Moreover, following the affirmative
form by a word like *ici* 'here,' one runs into further
problems reflected by the rule of *liaison* 'elision' in French.

The authors comments on the method of expressing
various relationships in German and French (and, though
they don't choose to list them, languages other than English)
by the use of prepositions that do not translate well into
English are absurd: all that need be said about their objections
is that German *mit* is only imperfectly translated into
English as 'with'; to be sure, mit means 'with' far more
often than it means anything else in English, but not in
every conceivable instance. And their example. *The Man in
the Cloak vs Der Mensh mit dem Mantel* is simply a proof
of my argument, not theirs.

Parts of the book have a quaint, somewhat archaic
ring. Comments like &ldquo;One cannot yet tell whether the word
&ldquo;quisling&rdquo; will outlast the Nazi technique of preparing for
the invasion of a country by a political infiltration&rdquo; became
understandable when viewed with the information that this
Second Edition was revised in 1947. It thus may serve as an
interesting document to be added to the archival history of
English language criticism, but it scarcely merits acceptance
as an up-to-date critique of English usage in the last quarter
of the 20th century.

I have little enough faith in those who write about
English, yet I must confess a deep respect for Graves. When
he writes a sentence like this; &ldquo;Why so many well-educated
people spell badly is because they were quick-brained as
children . . . ,&rdquo; I lose faith completely and wonder how
much worse it can get. It cannot be recommended that
writers take advice from one who offers up such examples.
Unfortunately, they abound:

>A useful test of the logic of metamorphical English  
prose is to translate it into Latin, [p. 32]
>
>...[S]ince English by its simplicity of structure permits
a greater mobility of thought than other languages,
and so can express subtler insinuations and
more powerful thrusts of meaning, an English writer
with something to say needs no rhetorical art. [p. 38]
>
>...[T]he future tense goes: 'I shall, thou wilt, he
will, we shall, you will, they will.' [p. 93].

There follow several chapters in which principles of
concise expression are catalogued, followed by poor examples
which are discussed and, in many cases, rewritten in
improved style by Graves and Hodge. The device is a good
one, provided that the reader is able to decipher the
original, the discussion, and the improvement. But the
authors have selected such sophisticated illustrations and
have over-intellectualized their discussions and improvements
to such an extent that I found it difficult to believe
that anyone capable of understanding their argument would
be likely to be reading this kind of book. For instance,
&ldquo;Principle E: Except where the writer is being deliberately
facetious, all phrases in a sentence, or sentences in a paragraph,
should belong to the same vocabulary or level of
language.&rdquo; I cannot quarrel with the principle. But the examples
given are from (1) a newspaper sermon, (2, 3, 4) a
translation of Seneca's *Apocolocyntosis,* and (5, 6) a translation
of Petronius's *Satyricon,* It seems unlikely that translators
Dr. A. L. Rouse and Michael Heseltine would be
reading this book to learn how to improve their styles; it is
equally doubtful that the average reader who might derive
some benefit from reading this book would be able to make
heads or tails of these classical citations, much less care
about them. Those who want and need books about improving
their style of writing should have available to them
works that are explicit and that contain examples typical
of the kind they are likely to encounter, not supercilious
comments about infelicitous translations of Seneca and
Petronious.

The last section of the book consists of a collection of
writings by T. S. Eliot, Sir James Jeans, J. M. Keynes, J. B.
Priestley, I. A. Richards, Bertrand Russell, G. B. Shaw,
H. G. Wells, A. M. Whitehead, Sir Leonard Woolley, and
a few less well known writers. In each case. Graves and
Hodge pick apart the extracts, bit by bit, while applying
their Principles. Most people would be satisfied to write as
&ldquo;badly&rdquo; as the authors cited, even at their worst, and were
Graves and Hodge less well known themselves, they could
only have come off as purveyors of sour grapes.

The entire book suffers from an imbalance. Perhaps, in
1947, it was directed at a highly literate university reader;
today, however, it would seem pompous, stilted, and turgid
to the average user. On all of these grounds, I find it impossible
to recommend it except to those who collect books
on the teaching of style: it simply doesn't meet the requirements
of a practical vademecum.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Latest entry in the noun-stacking contest: *Merit pay
appraisal system research field test training session*. [From
*Bulletin* 22, of the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards
AFB, California. Submitted by Ted Bear, Historian, AFFTC, Edwards AFB, California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;How BONDAGE LIBERATED ME ... It was only when
tied down that she first felt free.&rdquo; [Title and subtitle of an
article in *Variations,* Fall 1978, p.7. Submitted by Angus I.
Campbell, San Francisco, California, who characterizes it
as a *double oxymoron*.]

## English English
*Philip Howard*

I am *chuffed* as *bollocks* about a piece I wrote earlier
this year in what Americans quaintly describe as *The London
Times*. Depending upon your understanding of the
idiom, this means that I am either pleased or displeased,
gruntled or disgruntled. The article was about Janus words
and expressions that mean the opposite of what they seem
to; for example: I hate to gossip, but . . .; To cut a long
story short . . .; the union regrets any inconvenience caused
to the public; the Government is confident that most of our
athletes will wish to boycott the Moscow Games; NO EXIT
(on the London Underground); and *chuffed*.

The article argued that *chuffed* was an exemplary
Janus or reversible word, because there was reputable authority
of good writers who understood it to mean gruntled,
and other equally good writers who understood it to mean
disgruntled. An avalanche of mail deluged upon us to give
*The Times* the real news about *chuffed*. Unfortunately no
two letters agreed. One persuasive wordsmith declared that
*chuffed* never meant anything except extremely browned
off before the war in the British Army; and that since the
war it has done a semantic somersault to mean 'pleased.'
For connoisseurs of class nuances it was observed that while
the stiff-upper-lipped officer corps was merely *chuffed* at
reversals of fortune, the troops were invariably *dead
chuffed*.

On the other hand equally old and persuasive retired
soldiers declared that *chuffed* had never meant anything
other than 'gratified,' and that the displeased variant was
pure civilian ignorance. One gave the intensifiers *chuffed as
fuck* and *chuffed as bollocks*. Old soldiers from the Indian
Army wrote claiming that the word was derived from
Hindi, like the many words from *jungle* to *bungalow* that
have come into English from the Anglo-Indian connexion.
Old soldiers from the Indian Army have a propensity to do
this about any word of disputed etymology.

The Oxford lexicographers confirm that the expression
was originally military, but are silent about its precise
derivation. Eric Partridge, always very well-informed about
military slang, said that *chuff* had been used in the British
Army since about 1930 to mean 'food,' on the analogy of
*chow*. Partridge gave as a second meaning of *chuff*, with
pretty precision, 'stimulation of male member by lumbar
thrust in coition.' Whatever did the Prime Minister of New
Zealand, Mr. Holyoake, mean, in that case, when he used
*to sit on one's chuff* to mean 'to sit back and do nothing'?

Partridge noted the Janus meanings of *chuffed*. He
declared that if one needed to distinguish them, one said
*chuffed to fuck* or *chuffed to arseholes* or *chuffed pink* or
*bo-chuffed* to mean 'gruntled,' and dead *chuffed* to mean
'disgruntled.'

Squadron Leader John Bloomfield of the RAF in Suffolk
sent us an official Ministry of Defence memorandum
about chuffed—RAF version 1960s:

>The Pongos have missed the nuances of the word and
its proper use.  
*dead chuffed,* very pleased  
*highly chuffed,* quite pleased  
*chuffed,* pleased  
*dis-chuffed,* disenchanted  
*chokka* (or *chockered*), displeased  
*right chokka,* very displeased  
(*Right and dead* can be transposed.)  
Hence I'm *chuffed* by your occasional articles. I'd be
*dead chuffed* if you referred to the above, but *right
chokka* if you can't be bothered to acknowledge this
note.  
P.S. *Choked off* is another matter entirely.

I doubt whether we are ever going to arrive at an explanation
of *chuffed* that is going to satisfy everyone. In any
case the Janus word is distinctly old-fashioned in British
English.

Meanwhile I am fussing about the piece of American
slang *laid back* that has recently become all the rage in
British journalism. I know that it means, roughly, 'cool,
easy-going, relaxed, and generally admirable.' It is the derivation
that puzzles me. Is it just slumped back in one's
character as in one's chair? Or is it, more interestingly, a
piece of Californian psychobabble?


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

As one interested in the anatomy of language, I was
pleased to read Jay Siwek's article on the language of
anatomy [VI, 1]. One quibble, however. I have long
cherished the belief that the relationship between the testes
and the Latin root of such words as *testify, testimony,* etc.,
derived, not from the fact that they &ldquo;bear 'witness' to manhood
and virility&rdquo;—an etymology alluded to by the *OED,*
though without much conviction—but rather from the Ancient
Roman's practice of swearing by (among other things)
what he held most precious and would least like to lose;
i.e., by placing his hands on his genitals. (Perhaps akin to
the curious Old Testament oath elicited by Abraham from
his servant, &ldquo;Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh&rdquo;
[Genesis, 24, 2]—a reciprocal action according to Josephus
[*Antiquities*, I, 16]—and to Jacob's identical deathbed request
of Joseph [Genesis, 47, 29].) At least so my venerable
Latin teacher Mr. Sullivan once (blushingly) affirmed. I
wouldn't swear to it myself—and certainly not that way—
but I like to think that the old man was right and that he
wasn't just having a ball at my expense.

I am, however, willing to swear to a few other obsservations
occasioned by Sterling Eisiminger's article on colors
in the same number. Without niggling unduly over a
couple of incorrect French genders—*histoire verte, langue
verte,* please, not *vert*—I would point out that when a
Frenchman cracks a wry smile it is his *rire* that is *jaune,*
yellow, not his *ris* (which, as a noun, is archaic), and would
take even more strenuous issue with the alleged expression
*reste bleu*. No Frenchman, to my knowledge, has ever been
in one, whatever it is supposed to be. (It certainly isn't a
'blue rest.') When befuddled or amazed he might well exclaim
j'en *reste bleu,* literally 'I remain blue from it,&rdquo; which
is probably what Mr. Eisiminger had in mind, mistaking *en*
for the preposition in and the verb *reste* for a noun.

In the adjoining neighborhood of the spectrum, it is of
cultural interest to note the origin of another French expression
he mentions, *prendre sans vert,* 'to catch without
green,' i.e., 'to take unawares.' It stems (appropriately
speaking) from the charming medieval practice of wearing a
green leaf during the month of May, in tribute to the
spring. (Presumably not a fig leaf, though I woundn't swear
to-or on-that either.)

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*

## Unlikely? That's the Name of the Game
*Warren Tupper Way, Wayzata, Minnesota*

*unstrung* a naked guitar  
*unlikely* you aren't disliked, but &ldquo;'people don't  give you no respect&rdquo;  
*unaccustomed* smuggled  
*uninspired* an empty balloon  
*undulation* faint praise  
*unbalanced* a neurotic bookkeeper  
*unremitting* slow pay  
*ungainly* just got back to the line of scrimmage  
*unbecoming* won't be home for Christmas  
*unlocked* Samson  
*uncanny* no toilets  
*untold* the Liberty Bell  
*unadulterated* a chaste wife  
*unmatched* fire by friction  
*unfulfilled* no help for your two pair   
*unbidden* a three-point bridge hand  
*untoward* backwards  
*unjust* not quite  
*unlettered* gets no mail  
*unspoken* comes with disc wheels  
*unprepossessing* owner of a brand new car  
*unTIMEly* U.S. News &amp; World Report  
*unhorse* no longer has a sore throat  
*uncooperative* a company store  
*unincorporated* a very small labor union  
*unwashed* money that doesn't go to the &ldquo;family&rdquo; until Monday  
*unwanted* already in prison  
*unwilling* will die intestate  
*unfortunate* disinherited by a wealthy relative  
*unfriendly* a former Quaker  
*untreated* an empty Halloween bag  
*unavailing* when you plead to Noah Vail  
*unfailing* made a &ldquo;D&rdquo; average

## Borrowing and Biases in German and English
*Sterling Eisiminger, Clemson University*

A parenthetical remark in Peter Trudgill's *Sociolinguistics:
An Introduction* leads one into some interesting
comparisons of various linguistic biases. Trudgill states that
&ldquo;preserving 'linguistic purity' ... is one of the reasons for
the replacement of German words like *Geographie* by the
supposedly purer *Erdkunde* during the Nazi period.&rdquo;[^a1] According to the Nazis, the Germanic
'earth science' was &ldquo;less contaminated&rdquo; than the Greek 'earth science.'

My wife, who was born in Germany during the Nazi
era, recalls men painting over the word *Telephon* (a word
of Greek origin meaning 'distant sound') on public telephones
and replacing the former word with the Germanic
*Fernsprecher* (literally, 'distant speaker'). She also
remembers being scolded by a teacher for using *verb* instead
of *Zeitwort*, a Germanic synonym literally meaning 'time
word' or a word that expresses time.

Biases against other languages exist in many cultures
including our own. An American, for example, who goes
about using *tram, lorry*, and *telly*, whether he is originally
British or not will soon have a reputation for being an affected
snob. Politicians have long recognized the popular
bias against learned words (usually words of Latin or Greek
origin) and have consequently avoided them. Short are the
tenures of Congressmen who *concur* with the public in attacking
*corpulent* budgets and who challenge the *veracity* of
their opponents in *esoteric* terms.

During the English Renaissance, language purists and
nationalists resisted the influx of pedantic and recondite inkhorn
terms adapted from Greek and Latin such as *condisciple,
splendidious,* and *adnichilate*. Likewise the Ciceronians,
a group of 16th-century Latin prose stylists, scorned
the use of any Latin word not located in Cicero's writings.
Later centuries, similarly, were marked by language
purists. The 20th century, for example, found Edna St. Vincent
Millay employing only words of Anglo-Saxon derivation
in her poem *The King's Henchmen* because Latinate
diction, she felt, lacked the direct force and concreteness of
the Anglo-Saxon. But a sentence like, &ldquo;Once out of his cell,
Jack powdered river rocks with a fool's fury,&rdquo; is predominantly
constructed of words that English owes to the Norman
Conquest.

Perhaps no language has gone as far as German to
purify itself of outside influences. The following list illustrates
the extent to which German transliterators have
gone to provide Germanic equivalents for foreign borrowings.

| ENGLISH        | ENGLISH ROOT SENSE        | GERMAN                              | GERMAN ROOT SENSE    |
| -------------- | ------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| *anthology*    | 'study of the flowers'    | Blumenlese                          | 'flowers of reading' |
| *catapult*     | 'down bent'               | Wurfmaschine                        | 'throwing machine'   |
| *extravagance* | 'wandering beyond'        | &Uuml;bermass                       | 'over measure'       |
| *geometry*     | 'earth measure'           | Raumlehre                           | 'space gauge'        |
| *import*       | 'carry in'                | Einfuhr                             | 'lead in'            |
| *jeep*         | 'general-purpose vehicle' | Gel&auml;ndewagen 'country vehicle' |
| *malaria*      | 'bad air'                 | Sumpffieber                         | 'swamp fever'        |
| *pathology*    | 'study of illness'        | Krankheitslehre                     | 'study of illness'   |
| *utopia*       | 'no where'                | Luftschloss                         | 'air castle'         |
| *vagabond*     | 'wanderer'                | Landstreicher                       | 'country rambler'    |
                                                             
The puzzling thing about this list is that for each of the
German terms in the third column there are Germanic-
Romance equivalents: *Anthologie, Katapult, Extravaganz,
Geometric, Import, Jeep, Malaria, Pathologie, Utopie*, and
*Vagabund*.

At present there is no pressure on Germans, as far as I
know, to use *Blumenlese*, for example, in place of *Anthologie*.
Quite a different situation exists in France, though,
where a person may be fined about $35 for using *le weekend*,
for example, in an advertisement or other public
document. On the other hand, in Germany, where English
enjoys a great popularity, one regularly hears words like
*ausflippen, Babydollhemp, gemanaged*, and *stop-and-go-Verkehr*.

As a consequence of the recent English linguistic invasion,
German now does have its version of the *Franglais*
movement called the *Gegenfremdw&ouml;rter*, or 'anti-foreign-
word,' movement. Proponents of this latest trend oppose the
Germanic variations of English words such as *Cr&auml;cker,
Eskalation, Kompact*, and *quizzen*. But their major objection
is to the numerous words borrowed directly from English
without any change whatsoever. The following terms
have been collected by several people in Germany who
listened and looked for English terms on the radio, television,
and in printed material. The list can in no way be
thought of as complete, but it should give a strong indication
of how extensively English is infiltrating the German
language and culture.

>*adapter*  
*aftershave*  
*allroundman*  
*apartment*  
*apple sauce*  
*aquaplane*  
*astronaut*  
*baby*  
*bacon*  
*balance*  
*band (music)*  
*barbeque*  
*beach party*  
*beat (music)*  
*beauty*  
*beefsteak*  
*beef tea*  
*bestseller*  
*bikini*  
*blazer*  
*blues*  
*boss*  
*bourbon*  
*bowling*  
*boy*  
*brandy*  
*broccoli*  
*buggy*  
*bungalow*  
*butler*  
*cake-makeup*  
*callgirl*  
*camera*  
*camping*  
*cash and carry*  
*catsup (ketchup}*  
*center*  
*chair*  
*charter*  
*to check*  
*cheeseburger*  
*chips*  
*chutney*  
*city*  
*cityjet*  
*club sandwich*  
*coat*  
*cocoa flip*  
*cocktail*  
*comics*  
*comic strip*  
*company*  
*computer*  
*cool jazz*  
*copyright*  
*corned beef*  
*corn crisps*  
*corn flakes*  
*cottage cheese*  
*couch*  
*countdown*  
*crew (athletics)*  
*darling*  
*deodorant*  
*dessert*  
*designer*  
*dialer*  
*digital*  
*diner*  
*dip (foods)*  
*disc jockey*  
*disco*  
*do it yourself*  
*entertainer*  
*establishment*  
*eyeliner*  
*facelift*  
*fair (athletics)*  
*fairness (athletics)*  
*family*  
*fan (athletics)*  
*festival*  
*film*  
*filmforum*  
*filter*  
*finish*  
*First Lady*  
*flip*  
*freeze*  
*French dressing*  
*friend*  
*gangster*  
*gangway*  
*gentleman*  
*gin fizz*  
*girl*  
*grapefruit*  
*grill*  
*grog*  
*hamburger*  
*handmixer*  
*happening*  
*hearing*  
*hifi*  
*high society*  
*hippy*  
*hit*  
*hit parade*  
*hobby*  
*human-interest*  
*image*  
*in (fashionable)*  
*input*  
*instant*  
*Irish coffee*  
*Irish stew*  
*jam session*  
*jazz*  
*jeans*  
*jet*  
*jet-set*  
*job*  
*jockey*  
*keeper (athletics)*  
*kicker (athletics)*  
*killer*  
*knockout*  
*leasing*  
*Levis*  
*lift*  
*lobby*  
*lobbyist*  
*long drink*  
*lotion*  
*love*  
*lumberjacket*  
*lunch*  
*makeup*  
*match*  
*manager*  
*martini*  
*meeting*  
*midriff*  
*mint*  
*mister*  
*mistress*  
*mixed grill*  
*mixed pickle*  
*mixer*  
*moderator*  
*monitor*  
*monster*  
*musical (drama)*  
*necking*  
*non-iron*  
*nonsense*  
*nonstop*  
*nuts*  
*Ohio cocktail*  
*okay*  
*Old Fashioned (beverage)*  
*omelet(te)*  
*output*  
*pantry*  
*parka*  
*park and ride*  
*partner*  
*party*  
*pen*  
*pencil*  
*petticoat*  
*petting*  
*picnic*  
*pie*  
*playboy*  
*plum pudding*  
*police taskforce*  
*pool (billiards)*  
*pop art*  
*pop corn*  
*pop music*  
*portable*  
*porterhouse steak*  
*production*  
*processional*  
*protest song*  
*prairie oyster*  
*preshave*  
*pressure group*  
*prunes*  
*publicity*  
*public relations*  
*pudding*  
*pyjama*  
*racing*  
*radio*  
*receiver*  
*recorder*  
*rent-a-car*  
*revolver*  
*roast beef*  
*rock combo*  
*Roger (radio)*  
*roundtable*  
*rush hour*  
*safe*  
*sandwich*  
*scotch*  
*second-hand*  
*service*  
*sexy*  
*shaker (bartending)*  
*shirt*  
*shorts*  
*show*  
*showmaster*  
*shrimp*  
*single (record)*  
*sir*  
*sixth sense*  
*skateboard*  
*sleeping pill*  
*slip*  
*slipper*  
*smart*  
*snack*  
*snob*  
*speedway*  
*sponsor*  
*spot*  
*spotlight*  
*spray*  
*springtime drink*  
*standby*  
*star*  
*steak*  
*stereo*  
*store*  
*story*  
*stress*  
*stripteaser*  
*stuntman*  
*style*  
*super*  
*sweater*  
*sweatshirt*  
*swimming pool*  
*swing*  
*table*  
*talkshow*  
*talkshow master*  
*team*  
*teamwork*  
*teenager*  
*television*  
*test*  
*textile*  
*ticket*  
*tip*  
*toast*  
*tour*  
*touring*  
*tradition*  
*trainer*  
*training*  
*travel*  
*trenchcoat*  
*trend*  
*triumph*  
*tuning*  
*T.V.*  
*tweed*  
*ultracolor*  
*underground*  
*up to date*  
*veal*  
*vehicle*  
*walkie-talkie*  
*weekend*  
*Welsh rarebit*  
*whiskey*  
*whiskey sour*  
*workshop*  
*yippy*

The *Gegenfremdw&ouml;rter* movement has none of the
power or government support enjoyed by opponents of
*Franglais*. The fear among contemporary Germans, at a
time when many are striving to improve Germany's
authoritarian image, is that any repressive movement will
be labeled Nazi. A language, it seems, adopts what it needs
until a saturation point is reached, and the purists begin
their repressive counter movement. Bias seldom, however,
keeps a useful word out of a language, for languages, like
humans, need fresh supplies. Linguistic borrowings fulfill
this need for a language, but if the supply threatens its existence,
the flow must be cut off. Language, it appears, has
such a valuable though erratic mechanism.

***

[^a1]: Peter Trudgill, Sociolinguistics: An Introduction (New York:
Penguin, 1974), p. 59.

## Orthographe Mirabile
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

In 1750, Phillip, 4th Earl of Chesterfield, wrote, in a
letter to his son: &ldquo;One false spelling may fix a stigma
upon a man for life.&rdquo; If Lord Chesterfield's chilling dictum
is true, just about all of us are stigmatized, for who among
us has not stumbled on or into the potholes and booby traps
that dot the terrain of English spelling?

Indeed, with the possible exceptions of politicians,
sports commissioners, and oil companies, there is no more
popular object of abuse and ridicule than our &ldquo;system&rdquo; of
English orthography. &ldquo;Spelling,&rdquo; declares Mario Pei, &ldquo;is the
world's most awesome mess.&rdquo; Otto Jespersen brands it a
&ldquo;pseudo-historical and anti-educational abomination.&rdquo; And
J. Donald Adams adds: &ldquo;It is wildly erratic and almost
wholly without logic. One needs the eye of a hawk, the ear
of a dog, and the memory of an elephant to make headway
against its confusions and inconsistencies.&rdquo;

These are strong words, but even the briefest glance at
the situation reveals that they are quite just. In what other
language could one find the pairs *publicly* and *basically,
moveable* and *immovable, led* and *read* (past tense), *harass*
and *embarrass, deceit* and *receipt*, and *deign* and *disdain?*
In what other language could *manslaughter* and *man's
laughter* be spelled with exactly the same letters? In what
other language could *minuscule* be so unfailingly misspelled
that lexicographers have finally had to add *miniscule* as a
variant form? In what other language could *coffee* be misspelled
*kauphy* and *usage, yowztich*—not a single correct
letter in the bunch!

The most prominent cause of the whoop-de-do (also
*whoop-de-doo*) about English orthography is the considerable
distance that stretches between the sounds of our words
and their spelling — a state of affairs created by the inadequacy
of our Roman alphabet to represent the sounds of
English; our cheerful willingness to borrow words and, with
them, unconventional spellings from other languages; and,
finally, the changes in our pronunciation, most of which
have not been matched by repairs to our orthography. The
result is that about eighty per cent of our words are not
spelled phonetically; in effect we have two languages, one
spoken and one written.

One way to explore the chasm that separates phonology
from orthography is to examine how letters, alone or in
combination, can represent a variety of disparate sounds.
The *e's* in *reentered*, for example, have four different pronunciations,
including one silent letter. A favorite target of
the scoffers is the combination ough, a terror that can produce
nine distinct sounds, as in *bough, bought, cough,
dough, hiccough, lough, rough, thorough*, and *through*.

What most complicated the situation is that English
spelling is haunted by what William Watt calls &ldquo;the little
ghosts of silent letters.&rdquo; Many of these were once sounded,
such as the *k* and *gh* in *knight*, the *l* in *would*, the *p* in
*pneumonia*, and the final *e*. For centuries *colonel* was a
three-syllable word, as in the opening line of Milton's sonnet:

>Captain or Col-o-nel or Knight at Arms.

Other letters, like the *b* in *doubt* and the *g* in *foreign*, were
never pronounced but were added in the Renaissance to
make English words conform, often erroneously, to Latin
and Greek morphology. As a result, it has been estimated
that two-thirds of our lexicon is populated with silent letters,
leading Thorstein Veblen to proclaim, &ldquo;English orthography
satisfies all the requirements of the canons of reputability
under the law of conspicuous waste.&rdquo;

Confronted by such delicious chaos, the intrepid logophile
is moved to discover just how consistent is the inconsistency.
By comparing the spelling of words with their
phonetic transcriptions in the dictionary, I have found contexts
in which all twenty-six letters in the alphabet are
mute. In the line-up that follows I offer, wherever possible,
several settings for each silent letter:

>*algae,* bre*a*d, marriage, pharaoh; dou*b*t, su*b*tle,
thum*b*; bla*c*kguard, Conne*c*ticut, indi*c*t, s*c*ience, vi*c*tual;
e*d*ge, han*d*kerchief, We*d*nesday; h*e*ight, hop*e*, st*e*ak,
valu*e*, ye*o*man; hal*f*penny; gnome, reign, tight, although;
bou*gh*, g*h*ost, *h*onor, r*h*yme, shep*h*erd, up*h*olster; ba*i*t,
bus*i*ness, S*i*oux, th*i*ef; ri*j*sttafel; blac*k*guard, know;
ha*l*fpenny, Linco*l*n; sa*l*mon; *m*nemonic; colum*n*; c*o*untry,
lab*o*ratory, le*o*pard, pe*o*ple, tort*o*ise; cu*p*board,
*p*neumonia, *p*sychiatrist, recei*p*t; Col*q*uhoun, rac*q*uet;
fo*r*ecastle, Wo*r*cester; ai*s*le, debri*s*, i*s*land, rendezvou*s*,
vi*s*count; gorme*t*, lis*t*en; parfai*t*, sof*t*en; circ*u*it, do*u*gh,
g*u*ide, vict*u*al; sav*u*y; ans*w*er, cocks*w*ain, t*w*o, *w*rist; fau*x*
pas, grand pri*x*, Siou*x*; a*y*e, pra*y*; rende*z*vous, brit*z*ska.[^b1]

I would welcome readers' suggestions for improving
any of the above items, especially the following—J: I would
prefer a more familiar entry than *rijsttafel* (r&imacr;st&auml;fel), an Indonesian
rice dish; *Q*: the name of British author and explorer
Archibald Colquhoun (k&omacr;h&omacr;&omacr;n) is listed in the back of
*Webster's Third*, but I would like to avoid heavy reliance
on a proper name; in *racquet* I am forced to argue that
either the *qu* or the *c* is silent; *V*; for this, the most elusive
(one could say the loudest) letter in my search, I can uncover
only double-letter items, such as *savvy* and *flivver*.
Despite these niggling problems, I have demonstrated the
deafening silence that rings through English orthography.

Now let us reverse our field. Not only can certain letters
represent a variety of English sounds (and silences), we
also find that a single sound can be recorded by many different
letters. George Bernard Shaw, who first championed
and then (unsuccessfully) attempted to bequeath a sizable
(also sizeable) sum of money to the cause of spelling reform,
once announced that he had discovered a new way to spell
the word *fish*. His fabrication was *ghoti: gh* as in *enough*, *o*
as in *women*, and *ti* as in *nation*. And there are many other
fish in the sea: *phusi: ph* as in *physic*, *u* as in *busy*, *si* as in
*pension; ffess: off, pretty, issue; ughyce: laugh, hymn,
ocean; Pfeechsi: Pfeiffer, been, fuchsia; pphiapsh: sapphire,
marriage, pshaw, fuise: fat, guilt, nauseous; ftaisch: soften,
villain, schwa; ueisci: lieutenant, forfeit, conscious*. We stop
here only because the game has become ineffable.

We can adapt Shaw's tactic to almost any word. My
surname, for instance, can be represented by *Lleoddoloyrrh*,
a Frankenstein monster sewn together from pieces
of *ball, leopard, bladder, cotonel*, and *myrrh*.

Let us ask ourselves what sounds can be represented by
the greatest variety of letters or letter-combinations in English
spelling. In stalking the answer to this great question,
we inevitably become entangled with two thorny issues.
First, since sound and spelling don't match in English, how
are we to allocate the printed letters to the sounds? In
particular, if a silent consonant follows a vowel or vowel
combination, as in *aisle, island*, and *feign*, should it be
credited to the vowel sound? After much soul-searching, I
have decided that it should, or at least can. Second, what
do we do with the exotic spellings of proper names like
Featherstone-Haux (pronounced *Fanshaw!*), a question subsumed
under the larger issue of which words are &ldquo;foreign&rdquo;
and which are &ldquo;English&rdquo;? My solution has been to include
only words that are listed in the main part of *Webster's
New International Dictionary* (second or third editions) or
*The Random House Dictionary*. If a word is enshrined in
these esteemed tones, it is, as far as I am concerned, an
English word.

Here then are my chief candidates for orthographic
variety. For convenience, I list the letters and combinations
in alphabetical order.

*SH (23 variants): appreciate, ocean, chaperone,
rapprochement, fuchsia, suspicion, hsin, pshaw, sugar,
crescendo, schwa, eschscholtzia, conscious, nauseous, shoe,
mansion, assure, Asshur, Bysshe, mission, szlachta,
initiate, nation.*

*EYE (23 variants): Kayak, maestro, shanghai,
trouvaille, Versailles, aisle, Paraguay, aye, feisty, height,
geyser, eye, I, indict, tie, sign, high, island, coyote,
guide, buy, my, bye.*

*EE (31 variants): bologna, aegis, shillelagh, shillelah,
Dun Laoghaire, Aoife, quay, edict, heat, Beauchamp, see,
deceit, Raleigh, receipt, people, demesne, key, vaccine,
grief, genii, debris, esprit, Camonix, amoeba, chamois,
buoy, Portuguese, guillotine, guyot, happy, maitre d'.*

*OO (33 variants): Seoul, sleuth, queue, Devereux,
blew, silhouette, lieutenant, Sioux, do, shoe, manoeuvre,
boot, pooh, soup, denouement, bouillon, through,
brougham, coup, rendezvous, ragout, bouts-rimes, billetdoux,
gnu, true, pugh, buhl, suit, buoyant, muumuu,
Schuykill, cwm, two.*

*OH (33 variants): Cura&ccedil;ao, pharaoh, chauvinist,
Vaud, La Rochefoucauld, Perrault, faux pas, bureau,
trousseaux, yeoman, Seoul, sew, haute couture, haut
monde, table d'hote, go, boat, boatswain, Gounod, doe,
cologne. Van Gogh, oh, yolk, brooch, de trop, apropos,
prevost, depot, soul, dough, tow, owe.*

*AY (35 variants): aorta, sundae, champagne, trait,
campaign, straight, Beaujolais, parfait, halfpenny, gaol,
gauge, day, aye, fianc&eacute;, break, matinee, thegn, eh, rein,
feign, weigh, Pompeii, soleil, Marseilles, dossier, demesne,
buffet, t&ecirc;te a t&ecirc;te, entremets, they, eyot, rendezvous,
lingerie, menstruate, guerite.*

In compiling these lists, I have become such a Wizard
of *OH's* that I now unveil a 21-word tour de force (tour de
farce?), in which all words possess an OH sound, yet each is
spelled differently:

>*Although Cura&ccedil;ao yeoman folk owe Pharaoh's Vaud
bureau hoed oats, gauche Van Gogh, swallowing cognac
oh so soulfully, sews grosgrain, picoted chapeaux*.

*[Parts of this article have appeared previously in Word Ways (Nov.1) and the English Leaflet (Spring 1979). The idea for the ghoti
expansions originated with Sandra A, Engel and the search for the
silent alphabet with Guy Mermier and Eric W. Johnson.*]

***

[^b1]: In all fairness to English spelling, we must note that silent letters
frequently gain a voice when the base word is extended by a suffix:
bomb-bom*b*ard, muscle-mus*c*ular, line-lin*e*ar, resign-resignation,
fruit-fru*i*tion, condemn-condem*n*ation, circuit-circ*u*itous.


### CORRIGENDA
*D.L. Emblen, Santa Rosa, California*

As one who spent five years researching the life and
work of the creator of the *Thesaurus* (see my *Peter Mark
Roget: The Word and the Man*, New York: Crowell, 1970;
London: Longman, 1971), I feel bound to respond to Philip
Howard's article in VERBATIM [VI, 3]. I'll try to be as good
natured as Mr. Howard was, but I probably won't succeed,
for, while I am happy to join him in observing the bicentennial
of Roget's birthday (January 18, 1779), I'm afraid Mr.
Howard has simply perpetuated a number of misconceptions
about both Roget and his book.

&ldquo;Roget was a pioneer of dictionaries of synonyms in
English,&rdquo; writes Mr. Howard. Sorry, but he's wrong on two
counts.

1\. Roget was by no means a pioneer in the usual sense
of that word. His *Thesaurus*, first published in 1852, followed
a very long history of similar books, the earliest being
an anonymous 17th-century manuscript, &ldquo;An Essay Towards
a New English Dictionary, wherein the Terms of Art
are Cast together, as Likewise Words and Phrases of the
Same Import, so that Every Reader May Without Trouble
Find Words and Expressions Proper to His Subject.&rdquo; Some
forty printed works on English synonymy had appeared
before Roget's book in 1852. Beginning with the first of the
&ldquo;discriminating&rdquo; synonymies—that of John Trusler in 1766
—the attempts to organize the English vocabulary in some
practical way followed each other closely right up to the
year before Roget's *Thesaurus* was published, with a volume
by James Rawson appearing in 1850, and another by Elizabeth
Whately in 1851. These attempts did not, of course,
cease with Roget's triumph, but have continued to the present,
the latest I have seen being *Webster's Collegiate
Thesaurus*, 1976. In fact, during the ten years preceding
Roget's book, no fewer than fourteen new synonymy works
appeared on the market. That Roget was working not only
a very popular vein but a lucrative one as well is suggested
by the fact that the more-or-less standard work of the kind
at mid-century, *English Synonymes Explained*, by George
Crabbe, a 700-page compendium originally published in
1816, had run through at least sixteen editions in England
and America before the *Thesaurus* showed its face. Even the
one feature that made Roget's effort different from others—
his system of classifying words according to ideas—had been
anticipated earlier, as he himself acknowledges in his introduction
to the *Thesaurus*. That he vastly improved that
scheme by applying to it his lifelong interest in classification,
his characteristic thoroughness, and his insistence on a
practical organization is certainly true as the apparently
endless success of the *Thesaurus* attests. However, rather
than initiating a new kind of reference work, as Mr.
Howard's remark implies, Roget was but one of a long and
crowded tradition.

2\. Roget's work is not a dictionary of synonyms as he
himself pointed out many times during his last twenty years,
during which he shepherded his surprisingly successful book
through twenty-five editions before his death in 1869. That
later publishers and editors have often brought out alternate
forms of the *Thesaurus*, which were, in truth, nothing but
alphabetically arranged sets of synonyms, is another story.
Those who have produced alphabetized versions of Roget
have, indeed, made &ldquo;dictionaries of synonyms,&rdquo; but those
bore little resemblance to what Roget had in mind and
what he indeed created. The simplest way to appreciate the
difference is to compare any of the many &ldquo;dictionaries of
synonyms,&rdquo; including the alphabetized versions of the
*Thesaurus* and such recent attempts as *Funk &amp; Wagnalls
Modern Guide to Synonyms and Related Words*, edited by
S. I. Hayakawa (1968), with Roget's book, the latest edition
of which was edited by Robert A. Dutch and published by
Longman in 1962. For a more thorough study, one could
not do better than to read Roget's own introduction to his
book, still the best explanation of the ambitious scheme
Roget had in mind: nothing less than the arrangement and
classification of *all human knowledge* under a graduated
system of headings and key words. This is hardly the place
to get into *that*, but whatever it was, it was not a &ldquo;dictionary
of synonyms.&rdquo; To that erroneous description can be
attributed much of the misuse of the *Thesaurus* noted by
Mr. Howard.

(Actually, Roget envisioned an even grander scheme,
and, if he had had another ninety years, he probably would
have accomplished it—a *polyglot lexicon* that would, he
thought, provide a practicable basis for developing a universal
language!)

I find it odd that Mr. Howard describes the *Thesaurus*
as a &ldquo;controversial&rdquo; work and that he refers to &ldquo;frequent
criticism&rdquo; of it. True, like other English teachers, I have
some misgivings about what happens to his prose when a
freshman first discovers the *Thesaurus*. But I have the same
concerns about the use of any reference work, including an
ordinary dictionary. If that is what Mr. Howard means by
&ldquo;controversial,&rdquo; we have no quarrel, but his statement gave
me the impression that the value of the *Thesaurus* was a
matter of great argument in the critical literature. This does
not square with my research. In tracing the initial reception
of the *Thesaurus* and in following its undiminished popularity
through its publication history, I read nearly every
review from 1852 to 1970, and with one or two very rare
exceptions, I found nothing but a growing admiration for
the book. Some of the early reviewers did not quite know
what to make of the *Thesaurus*, but they were uniformly
respectful and seemed inclined to put their faith in Roget's
enormous reputation as a scholar and scientist. And, with
each new revision of the *Thesaurus*, the reviews have
become more and more appreciative, more mellow, more
affectionate, and less and less inclined to examine it critically.
As early as 1855, the editor of *Putnam's* severely criticized
the first American editor of the *Thesaurus*, Rev. Barnas
Sears, D.D., for &ldquo;meddling with Professor Roget's
book.&rdquo; Sears had omitted from the English edition a large
number of what he called &ldquo;vulgar words and phrases.&rdquo; In
other words, the *Thesaurus* rapidly developed such a
following that to criticize it or to tamper with it was tantamount
to slighting the Queen. Perhaps Mr. Howard thought
of the *Thesaurus* as controversial in the same sense that certain
officials did at a Paris airport, according to a columnist
in the *Daily Mail* of March 26, 1940. The writer, bound for
Turkey, offered his attach&eacute; case full of books for inspection.
&ldquo;I was made the subject of investigation and scrutiny for a
full half-hour,&rdquo; the columnist wrote. &ldquo;At the end of that
time the three officials concerned confiscated as dangerous
literature three Baedeker guide books in English, a French
dictionary, and Roget's *Thesaurus of English Words and
Phrases.*&rdquo;

Finally, I wonder why Mr. Howard offers as a prediction
the probability that &ldquo;new dictionaries of synonyms will
give definitions and examples to explain and illustrate the
peculiar properties of each so-called 'synonym.&rdquo;' This is
precisely what &ldquo;discriminating&rdquo; synonymies purport to do;
what such collections as far back as Mrs. Thrale's idiosyncratic
*British Synonymy* (1794) attempted; what Crabb
tried to offer in 1816; and what many in the whole parade
of synonymy books to the present have claimed to provide
for their readers.

I applaud Mr. Howard's celebration of Roget's bicentenary;
I wish he had taken that opportunity to acknowledge,
however briefly, the important contributions Roget
made in a remarkable number of fields: optics, chemistry,
mathematics, comparative anatomy, physiology, the history
of science, and medicine. The image of Roget as a peculiar,
inconsequential old man who spent his life doing crossword
puzzles dies hard, and Mr. Howard could have offered
more for the cause than the single line, &ldquo;... Roget,
the sage, luminary, longhead, shining light, wizard of
synonyms.&rdquo;

## Edible Endearments
*Joan Sill Cummins, St. Charles, Illinois*

A curious feature of the English language is the frequent
utilization of edible terms as endearments. The idiom
supports this pattern in its use of variations of &ldquo;I'm going to
eat you up.&rdquo;

We asked our students and friends for their lists of affectionate
terms; the following is a compilation listed in
four relatively distinct categories.

>FOOD TERMS
>
>Angel Cake       
Baby Cakes       
Bon Bon
Cabbage          
Cookie           
Cream Puff
Cupcake          
Cutie Pie        
Dumpling
Gumdrop          
Honey            
Honey Bun
Honey Bunch      
Honey Child      
Hun (Honey)
Lamb Chop        
Lambie Pie       
Marshmallow
Muffin           
Munchkin         
Peaches
Plumdrop         
Pumpkin          
Punkin
Sugar Dumpling   
Sugar            
Sugar Bear
Sweets           
Sugar Plum       
Sweetie
Sweetie Pie      
Sweet Cakes      
Sweet Thing
Sweetums         
Sweet Potato
>
>ANIMAL TERMS
>
>Bunny            
Duckie            
Fox
Foxy Lady        
Kitten            
Lamb
Lambie           
Lambkin           
Lovey Dove
Pet              
(Pookie) Bear     
Pussy Cat
(Tweedie) Bird   
(Teddy) Bear      
Tiger
>
>GENERAL DIMINUTIVES
>
>Babe             
Baby              
Baby doll
Baby face        
Babykins          
Doll
Doll face        
Poopsie (Fr.)     
Snookums
Toy              
Toots
>
>VALUE TERMS
>
>Adorable         
Angel             
Angel face
Beautiful        
Beloved           
Cherub
Cutie            
Darling           
Dear
Dearest          
Dearie            
Dear heart
Good-looking     
Gorgeous          
Handsome
Hunk             
Jewel             
Love
Love-bug         
Lover             
Lovely
Precious         
Princess          
Sexy
Treasure

Of the four classes listed above, three seem obvious
choices as terms of endearment. This is especially true of the
&ldquo;value&rdquo; category which directly expresses the &ldquo;dear&rdquo; or
&ldquo;precious&rdquo; nature of the object of affection. Similarly, emotional
carryovers from childhood can account for the many
diminutives among these. The animal terms imbue the
loved one with the characteristics humans ascribe to each
animal.

It is more difficult to account for the paramount frequency
of food-related endearments. Although nutrients are
an essential human need, it is quite startling to note that
almost none of these food terms refers to foods which are, in
fact, essential: words in the food category are associated
with desserts or culinary treats—chiefly luxuries. Indeed,
one of the most frequent grammatical forms used affectionately-*pie*-transforms
almost any word into an edible endearment.
Thus are dearest ones reduced to sugary carbohydrates.

A similar deduction or diminution pervades the list of
affectionate terms. It seems strange and disturbing, in one
sense, to trivialize those whom we value most, using words
which diminish, depersonify, or make unidimensional. On
the other hand, the emotional force of a pet name can be so
strong that being called by his or her real (given) name is
interpreted by some as an offense.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA
*Jacques G. Richardson, Paris, France*

The subject is the word *gadget*, which is listed in my
*Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary* but without indication
of its etymology. *Gadget* does not appear at all in my
[1961-64] edition of the *Oxford English Dictionary*, making
it a much used nonword in Great Britain. [Its origin is listed
as &ldquo;obscure&rdquo; in the A-G *Supplement* to the OED.—Ed.]

Dr. Pierre Aigrain, a solid-state physicist who is bilingual
in French and English and who is currently junior
minister for scientific research (Secr&eacute;taire d'Etat aupr&egrave;s du
Premier Ministre—Recherche), tells the following story of
the origin of the English word.

During the 19th century many tourists who visited
Paris returned home with various trinkets, as is their wont
today, commemorating Paris's different monuments. A tiny
Eiffel Tower was a common item, manufactured at the
time by a small Parisian firm known as Gaget Fr&eacute;res [Gaget
Brothers]. Friends of the tourists returning to Great Britain,
according to the story, came to call the diminutive *Tours
Eiffel* and other mementoes 'Gad-jets.' Soon 'gadgets' came
to classify in a group all miscellany of unspecific nature.

Can our fellow-readers elaborate upon or reinforce this
interesting tale of the genesis of a popular expression?
*Gadget* has now re-entered the French culture, by the way
(and pronounced, somewhat &agrave; l'anglaise, &ldquo;gahd-jette&rdquo;). The
meaning in French corresponds, both concretely and abstractly,
to the American slang term, *gimmick*.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

227 DUNLOP, L. B.; DUFF, G. Pizzle dropping on
wethers at Canaway Downs. Queensland Agricultural Journal
(1979) 105 (I) 35-37 [En, 2 fig.] Sheep &amp; Wool Branch,
Department of Primary Industries, Queensland, Australia.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Evidence is presented from observations over a period of
5 years on a farm in south-western Qeensland that the
operation known as pizzle dropping prevents pizzla strike; by
blowflies [mainly Lucilia ouprina (Wled.)] and smelly bellies
and, if combined with radical mulesing and jowling,
eliminates the need to handle wether sheep between shearings,
When wethers were jowled, mulessd and pizzle dropped, but
not crutched, wigged, ringed or dipped, the saving totalled
SA417/1000 sheep annually.

[From *Review of Applied Entomology*, Series B, 1980, Vol.
68, No. 1. Submitted by Mary M. Krinsky, North Haven,
Connecticut, ...*as the worst bit of jargon we had seen in
many years.*]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. It's tough work to retain bad rum in all that uproar. (7)  
5\. Love antics can lead to lawsuits. (7)  
9\. Tangled yarn about raised scale proves true: higher wages! (9,6)  
10\. Disruption of punctilio is hardly diplomatic. (9)  
11\. Telephone call. (5)  
12\. Continent with sign of nerves, because of the Chinese, perhaps. (7)  
13\. How to make money with the sweet smell of success. (4)  
17\. Keeping a low profile while on the lam. (4)  
18\. Sex pun? Gee whiz, blue pencil it! (7)  
22\. Little diplomat the French set up to take a walk. (6)  
23\. The diplomate dined at last, getting that degree. (9)  
24\. Give false name, rank and serial number. (3, 4, 1, 7)  
25\. Of the greatest callipygian charms? (7)  
26\. Routine drill takes the set and the medal, too. (7)

**Down**

1\. Tumble, in flight. (4, 2)
2\. Various ways of raising dough. (7, 3, 5)
3\. How to constipate a computer. (8)
4\. Journey made, riding for the ultimate fall. (4,4)
5\. Shanghai a seaman on this passage. (6)
6\. Cheap attempt to cover a burnt offering. (6)
7\. Aboard a rugged old aircraft over the Middle East. (2, 1, 6, 6)
8\. Charming trickster to bewilder the bossy lot. (8)
14\. A mis-alliance with the riffraff. (8)
15\. Person with will-power. (8)
16\. Spanish gold in rich earth is enough to tickle anybody. (8)
19\. I'd come for the doctor. (6)
20\. Anno Domini, expression for the coming of the Lord. (6)
21\. A bit of latitude in claiming social status. (6)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. UPRISEBS;  
5\. C-ant-AB;  
10\. DE-vi-LED;  
11\. A-uto-PSY;  
12\. Rightmindedness;  
13\. Obs.-cure;  
14\. The-ISM;  
17\. RANSOM;  
20\. Lib-ERA-1;  
23\. ESCAPE; MECHANISM (me + chance (in) impasse);  
25\. IDEA M-a-N;  
26\. FR-iss-O-n;  
27\. D-rye-ST;  
28\. DRAGNETS.  

**Down**

1\. UNDERDOG;  
2\. RAVAGES;  
3\. Split runs;  
4\. Red wine;  
6\. ACTED;  
7\. Topless;  
8\. Boyish;  
9\. Ban(ne)d-it;  
15\. Embracing;  
16\. AL-i-ME-nts;  
18\. Archery;  
19\. Moment;  
20\. Lucifer;  
21\. Re-issue;  
22\. DENIED;  
24\. Pumps.  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v7n1_Summer_1980)