--- 
title: "VOL VII, No 2 [Autumn 1980]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Unofficial Sectional City Names
*Frederic G. Cassidy, Dictionary of American Regional English*

Within almost any city or large town we find names
that long-time residents know and use regularly,
though they are not given on maps or in guidebooks.
American cities distinguish subsections name-wise by compass
direction, by topography, by occupational, ethnic, and
other connections. Some are commonplace, repeated from
city to city; other are lively, imaginative, and reveal
people's attitudes. I remember a Madison, Wisconsin, bus
driver announcing, as we approached the crossing of Park
and Regent Streets, &ldquo;Spaghetti Corners!&rdquo;—and indeed there
were two restaurants and two Italian grocery stores at that
intersection.

Some of these nicknames are regionally distinctive.
From the field collections of the *Dictionary of American
Regional English* (1002 Questionairs completed in fifty
states) a large body of responses has been compiled from
many kinds of local informants, on which basis one can
generalize with reasonable certainty.

Question 1124 was &ldquo;Names or nicknames for the part of
a town where the well-off people live,&rdquo; and the complementary
question 1125 was &ldquo;Names or nicknames for the part of
a town where the poorer people, special groups, or foreign
groups live.&rdquo; To judge by frequency of responses alone, the
chief dividing line in any American town or city is the
railroad track—a line that separates residents economically
and socially as well as geographically. The well-off people
live on *this side or the right side of the (railroad) tracks* (61
responses); the poorer people live *on the wrong side* or
*across* or *on the other side of the (railroad) tracks* (456
responses). Not only were the tracks mentioned more than
seven times as often for the second question as for the first,
but there were four times as many variant forms. The
nucleus is *the tracks* or *the railroad tracks;* variations come
in the preceding words: usually the *wrong side*, or the *other
side*, but also the *opposite*, or *south* side of the tracks, as
well as *across, below, by, over, beyond, down by, down
across*, and *down below the tracks*. The variations
themselves are of little importance; the fact that more than
half our informants in fifty states used one of these phrases
is certainly significant. Social geographers are aware of this,
of course; it is interesting to find concurrent evidence from a
linguistic survey.

Returning to the first question, no single term for the
well-off residential area stood out over all others, but there
were 51 responses for *Nob Hill* and its variants. This name
became famous in San Francisco and has spread for over a
century all over the country—to New York, Pennsylvania,
North Carolina, Mississippi, South Dakota, and Arizona in
the symbolic sense (not to mention actual borrowings of the
name). Nob, an imported English slang abbreviation for
*nobility*, suits &ldquo;the well-off people&rdquo; and the sense of the
question. But what person living *under* the hill could resist
turning *nob* into *snob*? Exactly the same number of informants
(51) gave us *Snob Hill* and its variants *Snob's Knob,
Snob's Alley, Snob's Row, Snob's Slough, Snob's Point*, and
*Snubsville*. We have to get our social revenge where and as
we can.

As indicative of a probably world-wide pattern of
wealthier people building on high ground, the generic *hill*
appears in many other names. Among the commoner ones
are: *Mortgage Hill* (36 responses), betraying sardonic envy;
*Pill Hill* (6 responses) and *Doctor's Row* (3), where rich doctors
live; *Society Hill* (4); *Quality Hill* (3); *Millionaire Hill*
(2); *Aristocracy Hill* (1); or merely *The Hill* (21 responses).
One name puzzlingly breaks the pattern, yet it is certainly
genuine since four people from Michigan and Illinois
responded with it: *Piety Hill*. It could be ironic, implying
that the rich consider their wealth as an earned reward
from heaven. Finally, *Sugar Hill* (6 responses) apparently
uses the slang sense of sugar as money, and *Yankee Hill*
(from Wisconsin) shows the foreign-born settler's awareness
that the Easterner came first and got the choice residential
ground.

The sardonic force of *mortgage* carries beyond *Mortgage
Hill* to a whole series of variants: *Mortgage Row* (15
responses). *Mortgage Lane* (3), *Mortgageville* (2), *Mortgage
Heights* (2), *Mortgage Ward* (2), *Mortgage Manor* (2), and
one each of *Mortgage Alley*, *Flat*, *Hollow*, *Knob*, and *Mesa*,
No doubt the user of these names consoles himself by knowing
*he* won't have to pay that mortgage. (His own is certainly
much smaller!)

*Millionaire* also produces a series of variants besides
*hill: Millionaire(s) Row* (10 responses); and *Millionaire
Avenue, Lane, Ridge*, and *Street* (1 each).

*Aristocracy or Aristocratic Hill* lends itself to punning
distortions in *Ritzocrats* (New York), Roostercrats (Ohio),
and *Aristocrooked* (Pennsylvania) — there's that cynicism
again.

An interesting pair are *Striver's Row and Struggle Hill*,
somewhat on the same order as the *mortgage* names. I read
them as suggesting that the striving and struggling are overdone:
the namer seems to feel these people are too obvious
at getting themselves up in the world.

Next after *hill* the commonest generic is *row* (several
examples already given). The most frequent response of this
type was *Silk Stocking Row* (29 informants), with its
variants *Silk Stocking Avenue* (11), *Silk Stocking District*
(6), *Silk Stocking Section* (3), *Silk Stocking Ward* (2), and
one each of *Silk Stocking Area, Hill, Neighborhood, Road*,
and *Street*. The metaphor is interesting — it refers to
women rather than men, and it may be less sardonic than
some others. With the replacement more than 30 years ago
of silk hose by nylon and their accessibility to women of
almost any income level, the *Silk Stocking* names now seem
a bit dated. Nevertheless, they must have been widespread
and firmly established to have turned up in 54 of our
responses.

Another widespread name, *The Gold Coast*, dates in
this sense only from 1920 (so says Mathews' *Dictionary of
Americanisms*), but we had it in 25 responses, chiefly from
the upper Mississppi Valley.

The less common names include *Bank Row or Bankers'
Avenue*, and, with a touch of satire, *Big-Shots' Street* or
*Town, Big-Bug Hill* and *Big-Man's Street*. Three scattered
responses for the *Bon Ton Area, Section*, or *Part* of town
seem definitely old-fashioned. *Cadillac Alley* shows an interesting
clash of connotations. *Cotillion Corner* (from
South Carolina) goes back to the antebellum world —
perhaps with some nostalgia.

If the better-off people live on high ground, the poorer
ones are on low ground, down by the tracks. Railroads were
built on low ground for good engineering reasons, but the
associated noise, dirt, smells, and low-level damp made
their neighborhoods less than ideal for dwelling. However,
they were cheaper and usually handy to water, so people
who came to 'build the railroad often stayed. Among common
responses were *Shantytown* (55), *Shack Town* (4),
*Shanty Row* (2). Railroad tracks often followed river
valleys, hence the area names *Down by the River, Over the
River, Across the Creek, Across the Ditch;* similarly, the
*Other Side of the Bridge, Creek, Railroad*, and *River*. One
name recalls a popular song of the 1920s: &ldquo;Down by the
Vinegar Works&rdquo; (or &ldquo;Winegar Woiks&rdquo;). *Lower Town* and
*Lowville* bear out the same theme.

Nobody likes slums or can remain unaware of them.
Many condemn them directly or indirectly with such names
as *Poverty Row* (3), *Poverty Flats, Hill, Park*, and *Peak* (2
each); *Hungry Hill, Hollow*, and *Street* (1 each), *Needmore*
and *Lickskillet* (1 each). Of similar type are *Ragtown* (3),
*the Jungle* (2), *Scrabble Town, Scuttle Town, Scum
Hollow, Rum Row, Battle Row*, and *Brickbat Ridge* (1
each). Others suggest unpleasantness by association with
animals, the pig, with proverbial proclivity for mud or dirt,
being the favored unfavorite. Variants were *Pig Alley* (3),
*Pig Town, Pigsville, Pigtail Alley*, and *Piggy Hollow* (1
each). Then there were *Bedbug Row, Buzzard's Row, Rat
Row, Skunk Road*, and *Chinch Hill* (1 each). Though
*Dogpatch* was mentioned only once, *Dogtown* was mentioned
6 times. *Cigar-box Row* suggests the flimsiness of the
houses; *Tin Can Alley, Blood Alley*, and *Cesspool Heights*
are self-explanatory.

Others suggest that these sections are not urban at all
but intolerably countrified: *Frogtown* and *Goosetown* (3
responses each), *Gooseville, Coontown*, and *Coon Bottom*
(1 each). These refer to animals. *Briar Town* refers to
plants, and cheap foods and humble living are suggested by
*Hominy Hill, Potato Row, Cabbage Town*, and *Sauerkraut
Hill*. Names from back-country types who are looked down
on by city people include *Hillbilly Heights, Hillbilly Section*,
and *Conch Town*. I do not know what to make of
*Doodleville*, but is is certainly not favorable.

A large number of names simply refer to the foreigners
settled in a section together. Though never complimentary,
some are at least neutral. To this type, in descending order
of frequency, belong *Mexican Town* (6), *Chinatown* (5),
*Irish Town* (4), *Dutch Town* (3), *French Town* (3), *German*
*Town* (2), *Russia Town* (2), *Finn Town* (2), *Swede Town*
(2), *Swede Alley* (1), *English Town* (1). A number of others
are more or less unfavorable; *Polack Town* (4), *Jig Town*
(4), Jew Town (2), *Wop Town* (2), *Wop Flat, Dago Town*
and *Dago Center* (1 each). One type of name interesting for
its form begins with *Little* and then names the nationality
or ethnic group: *Little Italy* (15), *Little Mexico* (3), *Little
Africa* (2), *Little Canada* (in Massachusetts), *Little Chicago*
(in Ohio), *Little Cuba* (in Indiana), *Little Puerto Rico* (in
New York), and *Little Tijuana* (in California). These fall
somewhere between neutral and unfavorable — they are
certainly not strongly unfavorable. And they are a distinctively
American type.

The most conspicuously separate or segregated group of
people in American cities — no doubt because of their
numbers and racial distinctiveness which make them slower
to assimilate — are the Blacks. I regret to report it—but it is
the fact—that of ethnic nicknames by far the most frequent
response we had was *Niggertown* (34), and after that *Nigger
Quarters* and *Section* (4 each) and *Nigger Hill* (3). Avoiding
the objectionable word, the next in frequency were *Colored
Section* (8), *Colored Town* (5), *Colored Settlement* (2), *Colored
Quarters* and *Valley* (1 each). Similarly, *Negro
Quarters* and *Section* (2 each) and *Negro Town* (1). Those
using the word *black* were: *Black Bottom* (3), *Black Belt*
(2), and *Blacktown* (1). The geographic aspects of this are as
one would expect: names using the specific *nigger* were concentrated
in the South Atlantic and Southeastern states and
west to Texas; they diminish as one goes north and west,
and we received no responses using this specific from New
England, the Northwest, or the West Coast. The occasions
for its use there are fewer, and our evidence shows that the
term is now avoided by whites who know it is considered
insulting by Blacks — except when Blacks use it among
themselves, where it may be said in friendly joking without
being taken as offensive.

Do any of these nicknames for sections of towns or
cities pattern geographically? The answer is definitely *yes*.
To mention only the most striking, the *Nob Hill* type, for
obvious historical reasons, is strong in California and
Oregon; otherwise it was found chiefly in the North and
North Midland regions, hardly on the Atlantic Coast or
Gulf states. On the other hand, the *Snob Hill* type, of the
same frequency, is spread more generally except in the Inner
South. The *Mortgage Hill* type is found, in contrast,
especially on the Atlantic Coast and in the North, with no
instances at all from California or the Southwest. Could this
be significant? Don't they know what mortgages are? The
*Silk-Stocking Row* type is also clearly regional, being concentrated
in the Southeast and Mississippi Valley, and
hardly found at all in the Pacific states. That it is a rather
older term is confirmed by the fact that responses came
preponderantly from old informants (35 old, 18 middle-aged,
3 young). The informants' education may have
brought the term to them, as a fairly large proportion were
college educated. At any rate, while not obsolescent, the
*Silk Stocking* names appear to be somewhat old-fashioned.
The *Sugar Hill* type is also quite distinctive but for a different
reason: all six informants were from the Atlantic
states, and all were Black.

In sum, then, nicknames can be real names. They can
designate specific or single features such as the original *Nob
Hill* in San Francisco; they can also become generalized
and, like place-name generics, be applied wherever they
seem to fit—like *Snob Hill* and most of the others we have
dealt with. They may then attain the status of ordinary
words, in which case one might hear a sentence like, &ldquo;We're
developing quite a Millionaire's Row up there.&rdquo; Then the
initial process of place-naming may begin all over with the
definite article: &ldquo;They live in the *East End*&rdquo; or &ldquo;on the
*North Side*,&rdquo; when both speaker and hearer already know
what town or city is being spoken of.

It is also evident that these unofficial names can vary
over the country at large both geographically and socially,
in distinctive and sometimes significant patterns. Many
show the popular imagination at work, with jocular and
sometimes grotesque names, names that betray attitudes—amused,
derisive, envious, sardonic, rejective.
Public opinion expressed through adverse names may even
act as a type of social pressure leading to change—not merely
by euphemizing the *name* but by stirring public action to
remove the conditions that produced the adverse name. In
such cases, nicknames given as an emotional safety-valve
become a lever to produce change.

## Simon Says
*Martin Panzer, New York, New York*

John Simon, gentle critic of drama and language, offers
the world the following examples of the latter:

>The screenplay has two layers, both bad, but
even less together than the sum of the parts.—Esquire.
>
>Amusingly for me, they had widely divergent attitudes
toward corrections in their copy.—Esquire.
>
>. . . there are those to whom &ldquo;whom&rdquo; is sacred,
and those who have forgotten that they ever heard it,
if indeed they did.—Esquire.
>
>Nor, most importantly, is this image in good
moral taste. . . .—Esquire.
>
>Just because some people are too thickheaded to
grasp, for example, that anyone is singular, as the
one in it plainly denotes, does not mean that the rest
of us must put up with &ldquo;anyone can do as they
please.&rdquo;—Esquire.
>
>How nice it was at the recent Pula Film
Festival, in Yugoslavia, between looking at films, to
find etc.—Esquire.
>
>The discussion profited from the fact that
everyone spoke English well enough to be able to
convey that his dislike, regardless of its country of
origin, was very nearly identical with the other
fellow's. —Esquire.
>
>... it would mean having to translate only into
one other language ... —Esquire.
>
>My very title, &ldquo;Assent for Tribute,&rdquo; (a pun on
&ldquo;Millions for defense but not a cent for tribute&rdquo;)
should have been a warning. . . .—Esquire. [The
commonly quoted version is &ldquo;not one cent for tribute&rdquo;
but what Pinckney actually said was &ldquo;not a damned
penny for tribute.&rdquo;—M.P.]
>
>From what I have read by him and heard him
say, etc. . . .—Esquire.
>
>The term &ldquo;functional illiterate&rdquo; means that
although you [sic] can technically [sic] read or write,
you [sic] cannot do it well enough to be a fully functioning
member of our society.—Esquire
>
>Here let me interrupt to identify the script-writers.
The chief one was Mark Peploe, younger
brother of Antonioni's former girl friend, Clare, who
had contributed to the wretched script of Zabriskie
Point.—Esquire. [Who contributed to the wretched
script? Perhaps Clare?—M.P.]
>
>When Rachel and the police arrive, the latter [in
unison, no doubt.—M.P.] ask both women whether
they know the dead man.—Esquire. [How many of
us know dead men, by the way?—M.P.]
>
>Simple and Direct is a book that, taken to heart
and mind, might actually teach [as opposed to
mythically teach?—M.P.] people how to write correct
English. [As opposed to write English correctly?
—M.P.] . . . For many years [Barzun] taught at Columbia,
where he was at various times dean, provost,
and university professor. . . .—Esquire. [One will get
you ten that at NO time was Barzun dean, provost,
and university professor, though there were times
when he was one or another.—M.P.]
>
>Whom's kidding who?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Sign in a shop window: OPEN SOON / DEATH IN FAMILY /
PROBABLY MONDAY. [Submitted by Philip Slawsky, M.D., Plymouth, Massachusetts.]

## How to Agglutinate
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

Because agglutination is not a feature of the English
language, few English speakers except those with a
linguistic background of some sort are probably even acquainted
with the word. And if by chance the word is in
their recognition vocabulary, they probably do not know
precisely what it means. That being the case, the writer
believes it would be appropriate, before proceeding further,
to give a definition of the term, taken from the *Random
House Dictionary of the English Language* (cited hereafter
as *RHD*):

>A process of word formation in which morphemes,
each having one relatively constant shape,
are combined without fusion or morphophonemic
change, and in which each grammatical category is
typically represented by a single morpheme in the
resulting word, esp. such a process involving the addition
of one or more affixes to a base, as in Turkish,
in which ev means &ldquo;house,&rdquo; ev-den means &ldquo;from a
house&rdquo; and ev-ler-den means &ldquo;from houses.&rdquo;

It is hardly by coincidence that the *RHD* definition of
*agglutination* employs an example drawn from Turkish, for
of all the major languages of today's world, there is none
(except, perhaps, for the related Finnish) that utilizes agglutination
to a greater degree. The examples given in the
*RHD* definition, however, do not begin to illustrate the
complexities of agglutination or the extent to which it can
be carried. A better and more informative example, albeit
one much too complex for use in a dictionary, would be the
Turkish word *muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizdendirki*—a 33-letter
word built up through agglutination from an 8-letter root
by the addition of eight separate and successive affixes, as
follows:

>muvaffak 'successful'
>
>muvaffakiyet 'success' The affix iyet, which the Turks
have borrowed from Persian, is used to make an
abstract noun from an adjective that is Persian or
Arabic in origin. Muvaffak, for example, is the
Turkish version of the Arabic mawaffaq.
>
>muvaffakiyetsiz 'unsuccessful' As an affix, siz means
'without' or 'lack of,' hence the meaning here of 'unsuccessful'
or, literally, &ldquo;without success.
>
>muvaffakiyetsizlik 'failure, or unsuccessfulness' Like iyet,
lik is used, among other things, to make an abstract
noun out of an adjective. But whereas iyet is used
with words borrowed from Persian and Arabic, lik is
used when the adjective is strictly Turkish in origin
or ends in a Turkish morpheme (siz in this case).
>
>muvaffakiyetsizlikler 'failures' As indicated in the RHD
definition, ler is the Turkish pluralizing affix.
>
>muvaffakiyetsizliklerimiz 'our failures' The affix imiz
denotes the first person plural possessive.
>
>muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizden 'because of our failures' As
indicated in the RHD definition, den is the Turkish
ablative case ending. Although its literal meaning is
'from,' it is frequently best rendered into English as
'because of.'
>
>muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizdendir 'It is because of our
failures' Although the affix dir has several different
usages (see below), in this context it serves as the
copula.
>
>muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizdendirki 'It is because of our
failures that ... A finite verb form is normally the
last element of a Turkish sentence, in this case the
copula dir. However, the affix ki, here meaning
'that,' can be added to allow the sentence to be continued
with another clause.

Admittedly, very few Turkish speakers probably ever
have occasion to say &ldquo;It is because of our failures that . . .&rdquo;;
but when they do, they will use the 33-letter word cited
above and will do so without having to stop and think
about what affixes to use or in what order.

In Turkish, agglutination is used to build up verbs as
well as nouns and adjectives. A good example is the verb
form *sevi&scedil;dirilemediklerinden*, which, as some anonymous
wit is reputed to have once remarked, succinctly and accurately
sums up the cause of the Crimean War. The word,
24 letters in length, represents the addition of eight affixes
to a 3-letter base, as follows:

>sev 'to love' Sev is the root of sevmek, to love. All
Turkish infinitives end in mek or mak, depending on
vowel harmony; this ending is dropped before any
verbal tense endings are added. (It might be worth
noting that there are no irregular verbs in Turkish,
the only language I know of about which that statement
can be made.)
>
>sevi&scedil; 'to love each other' As an affix, is makes a verb
reflexive.
>
>sevi&scedil;dir 'to cause to love each other' When used as part
of a verb, the affix dir makes the verb causative.
>
>sevi&scedil;diril 'to be made to love each other' As a verbal affix,
il makes a verb passive.
>
>sevi&scedil;dirile 'to be able to be made to love each other' In
Turkish, the affix ebil(mek) or abil(mek), depending
on vowel harmony, can be added to any verb root to
make the verb's potential (or abilitative) form. If the
verb is negative, as in this case, the bil(mek) is
dropped and only the e or a is retained.
>
>sevi&scedil;dirileme 'not to be able to be made to love each
other' Me is the verbal negating affix.
>
>sevi&scedil;dirilemedikleri 'they were not able to be made to love
each other' Dikleri is a third person plural nonfinite
verb ending. (Turkish, unlike English, includes a
large number of nonfinite verb forms that depend on
and are governed by a finite form, which, as noted
above, is usually the last word in a Turkish sentence.)
>
>sevi&scedil;dirilemediklerin 'they were not able to be made to
love each other' The affix n, which is also used in
agglutinated noun forms, has no meaning and is
used, for the sake of euphony, as a glide between an
affix ending in i and a following affix beginning with
a consonant.
>
>sevi&scedil;dirilemediklerinden 'because of their not having been
able to be made to love each other' As noted above,
the affix den is the ablative case ending meaning
'from' or, at times, 'because of.'

As in the case of *muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizdendirki*, the
eight affixes used in *sevi&scedil;dirilemediklerinden* follow each
other in natural order, and no one familiar with Turkish
grammar and structure would have the slightest doubt
about the order in which they should be used. The agglutinative
process used in both examples may seem
hopelessly complex to the uninitiated; but as the writer can
testify, once a student learns basic Turkish grammar, the
host of available agglutinative affixes and the sequences in
which they can and have to be used cease to appear complex
and become quite understandable and eminently
logical — so logical, in fact, that even Mr. Spock of *Star
Trek* would approve.

## Master Malaprop
*James W. Higgins, Evans Mills, New York*

The diminutive, energetic man who managed our
newspaper for many years was a Master Malaprop. I expect
never to know his equal.

Charging forward boldly on some new advertising
scheme, he shouted, &ldquo;This plan needs a lot of hallybooing!&rdquo;
So we created the hullabaloo he demanded.

Showing his new office to a friend he said proudly,
&ldquo;I've got what I always wanted—an office with rug-to-rug
walls.&rdquo;

On his way through the city room, he stopped by the
desk of the obituary writer. &ldquo;Well, John,&rdquo; he asked, &ldquo;any
serious deaths today?&rdquo;

He was dedicated to his work and more so to his employer.
&ldquo;This is a great place to work,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Working
here is just like Ethiopia to me.&rdquo; Utopia obviously came in
second.

Fond of clich&eacute;s, he mixed them with enormous relish
and enthusiasm. When the merchant bought only one ad
and not the several he'd recommended, he smiled and proclaimed,
&ldquo;A hand in the bush is worth two.&rdquo;

His quest for advertising took him often to New York,
where he spread his blizzard of words and unwords over all.
Going to Chinatown for dinner and unable to find a taxi in
the rain, he suggested his companion find &ldquo;a Chinese
rickashay.&rdquo; Upon his return, he once told us of an elevator
encounter with the late Jim Parley. &ldquo;We exchanged the
breeze of the day,&rdquo; he said proudly.

&ldquo;How far is it from here to New York?&rdquo; someone asked
him. &ldquo;Oh, about 300 miles,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;That's by road. It's
only about 250 by crow.&rdquo;

He was impatient with those who had trouble interpreting
his words. &ldquo;That dummy!&rdquo; he said of an employee.
&ldquo;Whatever you tell him goes in one head and out the
other!&rdquo;

Now he's gone, and we remember one of his gems,
shared with us in his late years. His picture appeared in the
paper. He gazed at it and said soberly, &ldquo;I used to take a
good picture, but now I look like a dead skeleton.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Katharine S. Teetor}
*All Good Things Come to (from?) an End*

Purchasers of bottled spirits know of &ldquo;Cold Duck.&rdquo;
This pinkish-red wine, in its finer varieties, is a mixture of
champagne and burgundy; users will detect additional ingredients
in lesser brands. It is an American beverage.

Where did it get that name?

Suggestion: From the convivial language of German
restaurant and party lore. The hired help at the end of a
festivity, as is the global custom, combined all liquid remnants
from glasses and bottles for their own use. They thus
refreshed their tired souls and called it kalte Ende. This was
the &ldquo;cold end&rdquo; of the party.

Touring Americans, unwilling to be so gauche as to
make a literal translation and searching their minimal German
vocabularies, termed it *kalte Ente*. The German word
for 'duck' is *Ente*. &ldquo;Cold Duck&rdquo; was hatched.

Closing note: The German noun die *Zeitungsente* refers
to a newspaper hoax, a canard.

*[Katharine S. Teetor, Washington, D.C.]*

## Phobia Foibles
*Albert Bender, Dumont, New Jersey*

When Franklin Delano Roosevelt said at his 1933 inauguration,
&ldquo;The only thing we have to fear is fear itself,&rdquo;
he was admonishing America against &ldquo;phobophobia,&rdquo; or,
the fear of being afraid. Unfortunately for me, I was not
around on that March day, for had I been, I could have
saved myself some confusion. You see, it was not until some
years later that I first heard about &ldquo;phobophobia,&rdquo; but, I
confess, I thought it meant fear of stuttering. Suddenly it
occurred to me that many of the *names* of our many
phobias could cause as many problems as the actual phobias
themselves. Certainly we've all heard of claustrophobia
(fear of Santa?) or hydrophobia (fear of fireplugs?), but
what about others perhaps less known but equally confusing?
I give you the following examples:

| NAME            | ACTUAL FEAR             | MIGHT BE MISTAKEN FOR    |
| --------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------------ |
| bibliophobia    | books                   | fear of term papers      |
| bathophobia     | depth                   | fear of being clean      |
| Gallophobia     | France, things French   | fear of California wine  |
| crystallophobia | glass                   | fear of Gypsies          |
| cryophobia      | ice, frost              | fear of peeling onions   |
| polyphobia      | many things             | fear of parrots          |
| phonophobia     | noise, loud talking     | fear of stereos          |
| topophobia      | places                  | fear of Italian mice     |
| aichurophobia   | points                  | fear of sneezing         |
| belonophobia    | sharp objects           | fear of cold cuts        |
| halophobia      | speaking                | fear of angels           |
| tacophobia      | speed                   | fear of Mexican food     |
| phagophobia     | swallowing              | fear of becoming a sissy |
| haphephobia     | touching, being touched | fear of fractions        |
| Hodophobia      | travel                  | fear of hobbits          |
| Parthenophobia  | young girls             | fear of Greek temples    |

. . . But the list doesn't stop here. Somewhere deep
within the dark abyss of the human unconscious are yet unnamed
fears pleading for an identity. That, however, we
must leave to the psychoanalysts who, perhaps inadvertently,
have compounded our fears with confusion. And speaking
of confusion, I leave it to your imagination to figure out
the meaning of spermophobia, gynophobia, and
dikephobia. Now do you think I would leave you perplexed
as to the true identity of these actual fears? I'm afraid so.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Although the birds of Hawaii are said to be among
those hardest hit by extinction . . . &rdquo;—*The New York
Times*, December 25, 1979. [Submitted by H. W. Janson, New York University.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;WARNING: Joggers be alert for those persons participating
in other activities such as basketball, volleyball, tennis,
and badminton while using the running track.&rdquo;—Sign
in the athletic fieldhouse of the University of Bridgeport.
[Submitted by Bryan Miller, Chester, Connecticut.]

## Antipodean English: *Socko Names*
*George W. Turner*

'How did you sleep?' my son, returning to Australia
after eight years in Britain, asked a fellow passenger who
had shared his inexpensive hotel in Sydney. 'Took a couple
of trankos and went right out' was the reply. It was the
word trankos that brought the flavour of Australia rushing
back. It is what Sidney Baker (*The Australian Language*)
calls a hypocorism, a form ending in *-ie*, *-y*, or *-ey*, or
(especially in Australia) *-o*, to make diminutives or pet
forms. In England such forms are associated with children's
language (*nursie, potty*), but such forms are not always or
in all languages childish. Latin developing into the modern
Romance languages acquired many diminutives, and Russians,
Italians, or Swiss Germans, as well as Australians, use
diminutives more freely than the English do.

Potentially any word might take an *-ie* or *-o* or be
shortened. It is difficult to generalize a separate meaning in
Australian English for each of the three possibilities.
Perhaps *-ie* is more truly diminutive than *-o*, representing
standard English unstressed 'little' rather than similarly
unstressed 'old,' so that if there were a word **trankie* it
would be 'the little tranquillizer' while *tranko* is 'the old
tranquillizer,' both expressing affection. A possible shortened
**trank* would mean much the same, perhaps emphasizing
familiarity more than anything else.

In fact **trankie* and **trank* do not to my knowledge exist,
and I have encountered *tranko* only in this one instance.
But when hypocorisms become established they sometimes
show all these forms (*Com, Commie* and *Commo* all gain
entry to the *Australian Pocket Oxford Dictionary* as colloquial
variants of *Communist*). But more often the *-ie* or *-o*
form exists alone. *Schoolie* 'teacher,' *barbie* 'barbecue,'
*brekkie* 'breakfast,' *greenie* 'large wave,' or *trannie* 'transistor
radio' appear to have no *-o* variants. Neither does
*Pommy* 'Englishman,' though the shortened *Pom* is common.
Sometimes one or another of two coexistent forms
becomes established in a set phrase as *Pommy bastard* but
*whingeing Pom* 'English migrant who complains about
Australia.'

The existence of one form rather than another appears
to be unpredictable, a matter for the particularity of dictionaries
rather than the generality of grammar books. A
Presbyterian may appear as a *Presbo* or a *Pressie*, not, it
seems, a **Presbie* or **Presso*. A member of the Salvation
Army may be a *Salvo* or a *Sallie* but not **Salvie* or **Sallo*.
Some words have *-o* alone; *arvo* 'afternoon' and *nasho* 'national
service, compulsory military training' are examples of
this. Again we might take a perfectly good Scottish diminutive
*chuckie* 'fowl' and abandon it in favour of the shorter
*chook*. Sometimes there are regional variants, as Western
Victorian *blockie* and South Australian *blacker* 'occupier of
small fruit farm,' or *premie* 'premature baby,' which I
always heard as *prem* in New Zealand.

There is an unpredictable element in pronunciation as
well. *Chrissie* 'Christmas' is pronounced with [s] but *possie*
'(comfortable) position' with [z]. Similarly *Tassie* 'Tasmania'
and *Brissie* 'Brisbane' have pronunciation with [z]. This
could suggest that these words are simply formed on the
spoken full forms, which are pronounced with [z], but this
would not explain the [z] pronunciation in *Aussie*
'Australia(n)' or * mossie* 'mosquito.'

Besides phonetic and morphological arbitrariness, there
is an unpredictable element in the semantics of hypocoristic
forms, at least in Australia. A *clippie* is a female bus-conductor
but a *connie*, with otherwise the same meaning,
need not be female. The *-ie* termination often suggests
endearment as in *coldie* 'bottle of cold beer' or *sickie* 'period
of sick leave,' but it occurs in *blowie* 'blowfly' (as well as
*mossie*). And if it occurs in *sickie*, why not in *compo*
'(worker's) compensation'? There may be a phonetic explanation:
it would have been difficult to pronounce an *-o*
termination in *chewie* 'chewing gum' for instance, and this
may explain the formation of *blowie*. Sometimes etymology
(and even spelling) determines a form, as in *speedo, Abo,
choco* 'conscript' (from *chocolate soldier*), or *uni*
'university.' Terms like *smoko* 'a break for a cup of tea' and
*fleeco* 'one who picks up fleeces in a woolshed' arise from
calls such as 'Fleece oh!.'

Why do manly Australians (for we are talking especially
of male language in this) promote diminutives?
Perhaps what all hypocoristic forms have in common is an
atmosphere of familiarity. They reduce things to size.
Violet's father in Arnold Bennett's novel *Imperial Palace*
referred to the overpowering hotel of the title as the 'pally'
in order to maintain his self-respect. So *nasho* and even the
rather official *compo* and the early pejorative *reffo* 'refugee'
show a desire to acclimatize the unfamiliar, not to be impressed,
to cut down tall poppies. But familiarity is also a
warm thing and to shorten place names—*Darlo* 'Darlington,'
*Paddo* 'Paddington' (these two are Sydney suburbs) or
the *Gabba* 'Woolloongabba'—makes them sound like home.
Perhaps we need hypocorisms in a new country.


#### EPISTOLA {Sherri Tuck}

A growing trend in the Boston area is to create new
nouns by attaching the suffix -*works* to an already existing
noun in order to create a name for a commercial enterprise.
Traditionally the few compounds formed in this way referred
to the manufacturing place of a product (*ironworks,
gasworks, silkworks*). The idea of a place of construction is
maintained, literally, in *Photoworks*, a film developer;
Frameworks, a do-it-yourself picture framing store; and
Bedworks, a manufacturer of platform beds. Construction is
figurative in Danceworks, a dance studio, and *Healthworks*,
a natural foods shop. *Hairworks*, however, is not a place
where hair is manufactured but a unisex beauty salon, and
at *Griefworks*, a therapy group for the separated and
divorced, the product in question not only will not be produced,
but will (ideally) be broken down.

If these examples signal a wave of compounds that is to
come, in the future we can make deposits and cash checks at
*Moneyworks* and take our flabby bodies to be exercised at
Fatworks. Those in need of more basic services can avail
themselves of *Sexworks*. Even the cynic who scorns the influx
of help readily available will ultimately confront the
last enemy and require the conventional amenities, courtesy
of *Deathworks*.

*[Sherri Tuck, Cambridge, Massachusetts]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;In fact, and this is just a guess, one would be tempted
to say that . . .&rdquo;—Music review in *The Ann Arbor News*,
May 8, 1979. [Submitted by Bert G. Hornback.]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Hyperbole*

We all exaggerate some of the time, to attract attention.
The temptation to vivify the tale and make it walk
abroad on its own legs is hard to deny.' Brits, in their
odiously patronizing way, tend to think of hyperbole, effusiveness,
and fulsomeness as peculiarly American vices.
And it is true that for an inhibited Englishman to be greeted
and first-named like a long-lost prodigal son by an American
he has never set eyes on before can be overwhelming. It
shows that Americans are friendlier, less up-tight, more laid
back than we are. But what enthusiasms and endearments
are left when he really does meet his long-lost prodigal son
or some other intimate friend? Exaggeration weakens rather
than strengthens. 'How d'you do' or 'I am pleased to meet
you' sounds more sincere (to a Brit, at any rate) than bouquets
of 'greatests' and other superlatives.

And of course the reserved British also exaggerate in
their own way, particularly in such attention-grabbing
activities as radio and television. Most radio and television
are pretty boring about boring subjects. Give me even a
middling book every time. If the commentator cannot din it
into his audience that what they are listening to or watching
really is the greatest, their attention might wander. They
might even take the dreadful step and switch off. So fatuous
superlatives flow from the silly box.

They recently had this Horse of the Year show in London,
in which the best horses in the world are compelled by
the most arrogant riders in the world to jump over walls
and other obstacles in competition with each other. I can
hardly tell one end of a horse from another, and distrust
them both. And I agree with whoever it was who said that
they are the most stupid and stubborn of domestic animals.
However, they have my sympathy during their show.

There is a very true blue and pukka British centaur
called Dorian Williams who always commentates on horse-tests.
Before I could turn the rubbish off the other night he
had said: 'The courses are brilliantly designed.' Well, of
course they weren't. They were the customary arrangements
of painted poles and gates and brushwood. Maybe they
were well designed. It would have been more informative if
Williams had said that they were cunningly designed, or
cleverly designed, or differently designed. 'Brilliant,' 'fantastic,'
'magnificent,' and the rest of the media hyperbolics
are as deleterious as swear-words in crowding out adjectives
and adverbs that really tell us something.

The football people are rather better in this respect, I
fancy. During this year's Football Association Cup semi-finals
we heard of one match that 'it's got drama, passion,
incident—everything else.' Nonsense, but funny nonsense.

While we are on about superlatives, I have to report a
vogue for using *most* in a new way on this side of the Atlantic.
It was originally used as a superlative to mean greatest
in amount, quality, or extent (and so on). Today it is being
increasingly used to mean no more than *very*.

Here is the opening of a recent letter to *The Times*
from a member of the House of Lords: 'Mr. X's MOST interesting
article on the relations between Ministers and the
Civil Service raises several issues, also referred to by Sir
Geoffrey Howe in a speech reported on your front page.
The one which is MOST interesting concerns Civil Service
privilege.' I do not wish to be beastly to a Peer, particularly,
but it is the most glaring example available. Just how
many interesting articles did Mr. X publish on that day? I
presume (and know) that it was only one. On the other
hand, how many interesting issues did he raise? I guess that
in fact it was at least three.

'This is a MOST beautiful part of the world.' 'On
diagnostic problems there is a MOST fruitful integration between
Institute and Hospital.' Apart from their intrinsic improbability,
the indefinite article makes such statements
manifestly absurd. One is not surprised that the abominable
American double superlative *mostest* is gaining ground.
Where will it all end? When everyone's a superlative, then
no-one's anybody.

I report a sudden vogue in BritEnglish for using *that's
right* as a noise of assent or encouragement, where old-fashioned
Oxbridge academics say *quite* so. Everybody is
suddenly saying it. That's right. How about on your side of
the Atlantic?

## The Strong Sex
*Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium*

I could not help feeling a bit disappointed after reading
Gary Shroat's letter [VI, 4] on the observation that a sexual
or a scatological connotation of any word drives all other
connotations out of circulation. Whilst claiming that evidence
of this tendency abounds in the English language, he
provides us with just three examples (only two of which
have real demonstrative value), followed by the suggestion
that we trace the rest and present it to him. Further, he
wonders whether any similar phenomenon occurs in any
language besides English.

My answer is that the facts described simply are occurrences
of an ongoing, universal process that can be witnessed
in the language of any society where sex is or recently
was relegated to the taboo sphere. *Playboy's* party jokes
would never exist without it. And I shall never forget the
British editor in a UN agency who, after having perused the
first paper I ever drafted in English, kindly suggested replacing
*seduce* by *induce*, although she did admit that the
former would be semantically more correct in the given
context. The argument was settled on our agreement that I,
as a foreigner, would be forgiven anyway. She did, however,
insist on my changing the title of another document
which was &ldquo;The High Commissioner's Briefs.&rdquo; Since then, I
have also learnt to be more cautious in conversation when
using apparently harmless words like *queer, wanton, knockers,
erection*, and *lubricious*, not to speak of *intercourse*.
Even it can sound quite ambiguous if you manage to put it
in the wrong place.

However circumspect you are, you can't always win.
Between interlocutors of different social or cultural levels,
something is bound to go wrong, linguistically. In some
circles, I have been misunderstood when using vocables
whose more general meaning had precedence, I believed,
such as *moral, molest, decent*, or *rubber*, I have even come
across people who only realized after some discussion that
terms like *pill* or *climax* have full currency outside the sexual
sphere. And then there are those who consider *sex* itself
an improper word, and therefore rather refer to *gender*,
held to be more genteel.

Strictly speaking, genteelisms and euphemisms may not
be part of the phenomenon pointed to in Shroat's letter, but
the connotational problems they create are closely related to
it, especially for foreigners. It's not so difficult to find out
what your British date is really heading for when she says
she is going to *spend a penny*, but it does require experience
to foreknow that your hostess, when you accept her offer to
let you wash your hands, will usher you into a facility
where the hand-washing equipment, if any, is clearly a
secondary part of the outfit. I have also gone through a sufficient
number of misunderstandings to conclude that a
Britisher's *stomachache* may be located in any part of the
ventral cavity at large, and that any coincidence with
gastric pains is purely accidental. And I shall always remember
my bewilderment when the American lady with
whom I hiked through the New Hampshire wilderness—not
a building in sight between us and the horizon—asked
me to stop for a few minutes because her poodle had to go
to the *bathroom*.

So much for English. I could of course quote many
more examples from my mother tongue (Dutch), but I think
I had better refrain from doing so because the explanations
required for English readers would turn out rather tiresome.
Just one case: The noun *preservatief* 'preservative' has gone
in Holland the same way as Shroat's *prophylactic*, only
more so. The general meaning of the word is virtually
unknown outside the world of pharmacology and medicine.

However, since I have been living in Belgium for some
time, I can provide you with a few French treasures whose
background may be more easily accessible to an English-language
readership. The most disastrous *faux pas* a
foreigner probably can commit is connected with the verb
*baiser*. According to your always helpful dictionary, it is the
equivalent of 'to kiss.' Well, forget it. Never, never use it in
that sense when the direct object is a person, nor as an intransitive.
You may *baiser* somebody's hand or forehead,
the Pope's ring or toe, nor is there any risk in using the
word as a noun, but that is strictly all if you don't want to
be misunderstood—grossly! It is perhaps worth knowing
that the now normal connotation of *baiser* has begotten a
subconnotation which means 'to cheat.' This lineage will
easily come to your mind, should you ever feel &ldquo;screwed&rdquo; by
a French-speaking person.

Much less intricate is the case of *verge*. It really means
'rod' or 'wand,' but since it has been formally adopted as
the non-Latin medical term for the most characteristic part
of human male anatomy, you can't pronounce it any more
without provoking a snicker. It's much the same for bite or
*bitte*, which originally designated a 'bollard.' Nowadays, it
has so much become the vulgar equivalent of *verge* that its
nautical meaning is reduced to the status of, well ... a connotation.
A third synonym, *membre* 'member,' is a tricky
case because it takes the dreaded connotation only under
special grammatical conditions. You may freely comment
on the physiological qualities of a man's *membres*. The audience
would have no doubt that you are referring to his
limbs, and there is nothing singular about that. But watch
out when you use the word in singular. I understand
English speakers are familiar with the problem.

Of course, here like everywhere, some quarters of
society are more open-minded or literate than others. I once
met a Belgian girl who was forbidden at home to utter the
word *pudeur* 'shame' because it could be construed as a
genteelism for 'genitals.' But that was twenty years ago. In
those days, we also had the diverting problem of that Russian
movie whose title meant 'When the Cranes Go By.' The
literal translation would have been &ldquo;Quand passent les
grues,&rdquo; but the secondary meaning of *grue*, i.e. 'street-walker,'
was feared to produce a ludicrous effect. The
desperate film distributor finally opted for &ldquo;Quand passent
les cigognes&rdquo; 'When the Storks Go By.'

Let me end on a translingual case. In the early fifties,
the English expression *to make love* had a rather innocent
sound to most ears. It was maybe debatable which precise
grade of petting the average speaker had in mind, but the
phrase was considered inoffensive enough to fit the title of a
Marilyn Monroe movie, even in those times of great public
chastity. Well, things seem to have evolved since. If I got
my connotations right, the most daring one of those days
has now become the primary, if not the sole meaning. The
interesting thing is that the French equivalent, *faire
l'amour*, has invariably and exclusively meant just that, all
the century along. Conversely, the Italian counterpart, *fare
l'amore*, has a softer core, originally at least (it seems to be
picking up fast now). Until recently, it was mostly used in
the sense of 'to court' or 'to woo.' A few years ago still, in
the Naples countryside, I met people who even applied it
without any bodily of emotional implications. To them, it
just stood for 'to be engaged to marry.'

I am grateful to Gary Shroat for having provided the
opportunity for publishing this material. I suggest that the
point he made be subsumed under the more general linguistic
phenomenon that unfavourable connotations tend to
drive out favourable ones. As he says, it's an analogue to
Gresham's Law, which states that bad money drives out
good money. The sad consequence, however, would be that
all sexual connotations would then automatically be classified
under the baddies. Don't you think sex is far too good
for that?

## Funnin' Games

Some time ago—the clipping I have bears no date—Barry
Norman wrote an article for *The Sunday Times*[^a1] in
which he accused Bernard Levin of a nefarious bit of
treachery. Levin (or so claimed Norman) enquired in a letter
&ldquo;Have we had that Swedish assassin Dag Ersdrorn?&rdquo;

Norman reports that he and Levin were introduced to
the game &ldquo;by one Julian Holland, who now masquerades as
an editor on 'The World at One' . . . [and] who, one day,
mentioned a mythical American called *Phil D. Basket* who
used to exhort New Yorkers to throw their litter into
bins. . . .&rdquo; It is at once apparent that Norman was engaging
in that well-known journalistic ploy of &ldquo;crediting&rdquo; others for
one's own shortcomings: uncertain of how the game might
be received, Norman passed the blame for originating it on-to
two colleagues; then, realizing that he might be caught
out and become the object of their revenge, laid the entire
matter at the door of the Americans.

Readers of *The New York Times*, inured to computer-generated
hyphenating procedures that yield end-of-line
breaks that produce items like *the-rapist* (for *therapist*),
whether New Yorkers or not, can readily (if not willingly)
absorb responsibility for something as tame as *Phil D.
Basket*. A culture that can produce ecdysiasts named *Candy
Barr* and *Terna Klozoff* should be able to cope with the
likes of *Mustapha Phix*, the Turkish drug addict; a society
that can name its children *Ima Hogg* and can spawn
authors like *Seymour Haire (The Open Kimono)* and *I. P.
Dailey (The Yellow Stream)* should have no trouble coping
with Norman's British folk personalities like *Bertha D.
Blews* (the jazz singer), *Rudy Day* (a regretful husband),
and *Lottie Cairs* (his neglected wife). Other possibilities are
mentioned by Norman—*Beau Neidel*, the lazy German fop,
*E. C. Vertue*, Norman's favorite madam (by his own admission),
and *Fay Slifter*, the plastic surgeon—but he
neglects the well-known meteorologist. *Farthingale* (never
seen without his windbreaker), the naval architect. *Billy
Band*, and the headmistress of a famous finishing school, *R.
U. Dunn*. He ignored the well-known choreographer, *Les
Dantz*, the female fire-prevention expert, *Stepania Butts*,
the voyeur, *S. lan Yaneckett*, the art-gallery owner. *Sawyer
Pitcher*, and the arboretum manager, *Lyman Oakes*. Then
there are institutions in New York, like the sperm bank for
sailors *(The Seamen's Bank for Savings)*, IBM (called &ldquo;One
Bee Em&rdquo; by some), and—well, readers should be able to
supply other examples.

***

[^a1]: Once and for all, let it be set forth that in its pursuit of accuracy,
VERBATIM maintains a distinction among The Sunday Times,
published in London (on Sundays), The Times, published in London
(every day but Sundays and certain bank holidays that seem to
change as the mood strikes the editors), and The New York Times,
published in you-know-where.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The Boulevard Inn, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, offers &ldquo;a
thoughtful vegetarian plate.&rdquo; [From Reinhold Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin, who wonders. *What would be a
thoughtless one? A dish with a hunk of meat? or telling the
customer, &ldquo;The wurst is yet to come!&rdquo;?*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

On West George Street, in Glasgow, stands a pub, *The
Muscular Arms*.

## Fanguage
*Greg Costikyan, Providence, Rhode Island*

In the 1930s, writers of letters to the science fiction pulp
magazines began to meet each other and form clubs
and groups of science fiction fans. Many of these groups
became quite tightly knit, and science fiction fandom
became a genuine subculture all its own. Today, that sub-culture
continues and grows; while some fans are only occasional
fans, others see fandom as the core of their life. They
work as necessary to bring in the green, but most of their interest
and activity is involved in the production of fanzine,
the attendance of conventions, and the like. Over the years,
fandom has developed a jargon and idiom of its own, which
has been partially coopted by other &ldquo;fannish&rdquo; groups such as
Trekkies, wargamers. Rocky Horror freaks, and Creative
Anachronists.

Although the word *fan* is in general usage outside fandom,
for *fen* (plural of *fan*) it has a specific meaning. A *fan*
is 'a member of that community known as *fandom*.' *Mundane*
is the opposite of *fannish;* while one's *fannish persona*
is *Yang* the *Nauseating*, founder of the Dark Horde, one's
*mundane persona* may be *Robert Asprin*. In noun form, a
*mundane* is 'a non-fan.' A *trufan* is 'a true-blue, dyed-in-
the-wool fan'; a *fringefan* is 'one whose main interest in fandom
lies elsewhere than in science fiction'—examples are
Trekkies and wargamers. A *neofan* is 'one making a debut
into fandom'; a *BNF (Big Name Fan)* is 'the opposite of a
*LNF (Little Known Fan*,' and I'm aware the acronym
doesn't work). A *pro* usually preceded by the adjective
*filthy*, as in *filthy pro*) is 'a professional science fiction
writer'; a *one-time pro* is 'a writer who has had only one
story published' (and is stereotypically thirsty for the supposed
glories of professional status).

*BNFs* spend most of their time drinking *bheer*
(anything is more fannish if an &ldquo;h&rdquo; is inserted before its first
vowel; *Ghod* is another example). They also *smof* a lot.
*Smof* is an acronym for secret master of fandom and was
originally coined to describe those who had grandiose
dreams of &ldquo;taking over fandom&rdquo;; I have no idea how the
noun was transmuted to a verb.

Much of the fannish vocabulary deals with printing
and the publication of *fanzines*. *Fanzine* is one of the few
fannish words that has passed into general use; as originally
coined, it meant 'any fannish publication which was published
for *egoboo* ('a boost to the ego') and not profit.' As it
is used in the mundane world, it means 'any magazine that
enthusiastically supports a famous figure.' Thus, screen
magazines are, according to Bill Safire, *fanzines*; according
to fans, they are definitely mundane magazines and
anything but fanzines. Fans preserve the distinction between
mimeo and ditto, which has been lost in general
usage. Mimeography is what produces the black printing of
army orders or cheap political flyers; ditto reproduction
produces the purple printing used on high school tests and
the like. In the mundane world, both processes are now
known as &ldquo;mimeography.&rdquo;

Another term used in relation to publishing is *corflu*, a
contraction for the correction *fluid* used for mimeograph
stencils. Bad liquor is sometimes likened to &ldquo;strained
corflu&rdquo;; according to fannish tradition, it is possible to make
a potable alcoholic drink by straining *corflu*, although I
have yet to meet anyone who actually claims to have done
so. *Fanac* is a contraction for 'fannish activity' and includes
attending conventions, contributing to fanzines, and the
like. A *loc* is a letter of comment; a *poc* is a postcard of
comment. Many fanzines are available only to those who
write locs or articles or send other fanzines in trade; despite
the fact that many fen are objectivists or libertarians, *fen*
have a traditional horror of filthy lucre and will generally
ignore monetary considerations where fellow fen are concerned.
*Nexish* means 'next issue,' and *lastish* means 'last
issue.'

Conventions are also an area for which many fannish
terms have been developed. A convention is a con, a term
having no relation to confidence men; most conventions
have names like *WorldCon, PhilCon, DenVention*, and the
like. A *relaxicon* has few programming items and is mostly
'a fannish get-together.' A *GOH* is the Guest of Honor at
the convention. A *con party* is 'a party at a convention run
either by the committee running the convention or by
another committee which is bidding to run the World
Science Fiction Convention at some point in the future. A
*dead dog party* is 'a party after the end of the con, where
everybody lies around like the aforenamed animal.' Fannish
songs are *filksongs*, and a group of people singing such are
*filksinging*. (The term probably originated as a typographical
error.) The *hucksters' room* is 'the convention area
where dealers in books and science fiction paraphernalia are
rented tables where they may vend their wares.'

Fans often swear by *Ghu, Jones, Crom, Cthulhu*, and
the *Great Ghod Gestetner*. A fan who drops out of fandom
is said to have *gafiated* (*gafia* being an acronym for get
away from it all). In diplomacy fandom, 'one who drops
out of the hobby without returning subscription money to
his subscribers' is a *burn out* and has *rotated* (an acronym
for run off *to* Argentina). The abbreviation for *science fiction
is sf* (usually spelled with lower-case letters) and *never*
&ldquo;sci fi.&rdquo; &ldquo;Sci fi&rdquo; is a term used to describe bad Hollywood
science fiction movies, trashy science fiction novels, and bad
science fiction written by mundane writers. (Jacqueline
Susann's Yargo is sci fi.) ST is the abbreviation for *Star Trek*
(usually spelled with capitals); *Trekkies* are 'star-struck ST
fans who run around in Starfleet uniforms wearing plastic
Spock ears,' while *Trekkers* are 'more serious Star Trek fen.'
To a *trufan*, however, all ST *fen* are *Trekkies*, and probably
moronic scum.

*Crottled greeps* are 'a fannish food'; there is a difference
of opinion as to whether crottled greeps taste like
nectar or something more earthly. In any case, the usual
response to an inquiry as to the nature of crottled greeps is
&ldquo;If you do not enjoy them, do not order them.&rdquo; I am informed
by educated opinion that Szechwan sea slugs taste
very much like crottled greeps.

A *faan* (pronounced FAYAN) is 'an overly enthusiastic
fan,' and needs to gain some fannish savoir faire. A *slan* is *a
fannish superman' (the term derives from A. E. Van Vogt's
novel of the same name); &ldquo;He's a slan&rdquo; is the fannish equivalent
of &ldquo;He's a helluva guy.&rdquo;

In the wargaming hobby, a *grognard* is 'a hard-core
gamer, one who purchases a dozen or more games a year';
the term originally mean 'a member of Napoleon's Imperial
Guard.' *Chrome* consists of 'rules and game-systems added
to lend historical color to a game, rather than to fulfill a
needed function.' An *FRP* is 'a fantasy role-playing game
such as DUNGEONS &amp; DRAGONS'; an *RPG* is a more general
term for 'role-playing games.' *Conflict simulations* is a more
general and less controversial term for 'wargames'; it is also
more accurate, if awkward, since many &ldquo;wargames&rdquo; are
simulations of diplomatic or economic competition. *Miniatures*
are 'lead figures'; the conflict-simulations hobby
divides into the three sectors of miniatures, boardgames,
and RPG's. A *monster game* is 'a huge game with 24 square
feet of board area or more, several thousand playing pieces,
and very complex rules'; at the other end of the scale are
*microgames*, which sell for $3-$6. Wargaming rules themselves
use a complicated jargon including such terms as CRT
('Combat Results Table') and *Line of Supply*, but these are
not really part of the fannish language. In any case,
wargaming fandom is younger than sf fandom and has not
had the time to develop as rich a language. Presumably, this
will be rectified as time goes on.

In closing, may your pigs prosper; Live Long &amp; Prosper;
Nuke the Whales; *Elen Sila Lumenn Omentielvo*; and
*la, la, Cthulhu, R'lyeh Ftagn Nyarlathotep*.

## Paring Pairs No. 1

Each one of the following clues (a-x) refers to two of
the words (1-49) listed below them. After matching them
up, there will be one word left over; that is the &ldquo;answer.&rdquo;
The first two correct solutions received in Essex *and* in
Aylesbury will earn a subscription to VERBATIM-an extension,
a renewal, a new subscription, or a gift. Send answers
(on cards, please) to VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT 06426,
U.S.A., or to VERBATIM, 2 Market Square, Aylesbury,
Bucks., England, whichever is closer. Two winners will be
chosen at each office. Winners and answers will be
announced in the next issue. (These puzzles are based on the
Elimination Puzzles originally published by *The Sunday
Telegraph* and copyright by them. They are used by
permission.)

(a). Growing pile of rubbish.  
(b). Sound metallically.  
(c). Two connected with pipe.  
(d). But not press cutting?  
(e). Two cities.  
(f). A book.  
(g). Venus for Communists?  
(h). Two suggesting baked.  
(i). For a tiny professor?  
(j). 16 oz. of silver  
(k). Two synonyms.  
(l). Two that are black.  
(m). Having the opposite effect.  
(n). Two suggesting mine.  
(o). Where to teach the wealthy.  
(p). Two with bone.  
(q). A proverbial weapon?  
(r). Two sauces.  
(s). Two connected with blue.  
(t). Wimbledon assizes?  
(u). For Trojan gymnasts?  
(v). Grammatical error?  
(w). Two going with breaker.  
(x). A novel.

1. Horse.
2. Gun.
3. Heap.
4. Clip.
5. Star.
6. Farm.
7. Clay.
8. Intercourse.
9. High.
10. Half.
11. Maxim.
12. Funny.
13. Ebony.
14. Drain.
15. Wooden.
16. Chair.
17. Beans.
18. Split.
19. Ice.
20. China.
21. Infinitive.
22. Pound.
23. Paper.
24. Cobalt.
25. Women.
26. Proper.
27. Animal.
28. Limpet.
29. School.
30. Copper.
31. Seemly.
32. Tabasco.
33. Counter.
34. Compost.
35. Bottle.
36. Sweeper.
37. Morning.
38. Private.
39. Tennis.
40. Bottomed.
41. Paris.
42. Sterling.
43. Court.
44. Worcestershire.
45. Anthracite.
46. Productive.
47. Tie.
48. Little.
49. Classical.


#### EPISTOLA {Mary M. Tius}

In Sterling Eisiminger's interesting article, &ldquo;Colorful
Language&rdquo; [VI, I], there appears the following: &ldquo;A Turk
who is *saricizmeli* 'yellow' is a nobody. ...&rdquo; The full expression
in Turkish is *saricizmeli Mehmet Aga*, which,
translated literally, means 'yellow-booted Mr. Mehmet' and,
translated more freely, 'John Doe,' Mehmet being a very
common name and yellow boots being equally common. In
short, *sari* 'yellow' is the least important element in the
phrase and comes into it only coincidentally. A truer
translation of the expression might be, 'Looking for yellow-booted
Mr. Mehmet is like looking for a needle in a haystack.'

Elsewhere in his article, Mr. Eisiminger mentions that
Turkish *kizilbas* means 'red woman' and is the equivalent of
English *scarlet woman*. In this, he (or Messrs. Berlin and
Kay) is surely mistaken. *Kizilbas* (literally, 'red or ruddy
head') is defined in one dictionary as &ldquo;a partisan of a wicked
Moslem sect&rdquo; and, in another, as &ldquo;the name given to Shiite
Moslems.&rdquo; No meanings other than the literal ones are given
in any of the five dictionaries in my possession nor have I
ever heard the word used to refer to anyone but a member
of the Moslem sect.

It might be interesting to note that in Greek, too, as
well as in Russian, *red* and *beautiful* are nearly synonymous;
that a gray-striped tiger—or tabby—cat is invariably
described as *black*; that *sour* means 'green or young.' (Incidentally,
*langue verte* 'any tart response' surely refers less to
color than to the unripeness of fruit.)

Finally, it seems to me that the use of &ldquo;*yellow* and
*yellow-bellied* meaning 'cowardly&rdquo;' stems from medieval
medical theories: the liver was considered to be the seat of
passion and desire; yellow bile, or choler, was one of the
four humors (blood, phlegm, and black bile, or melancholy,
being the other three) and was thought to be the cause of ill
humor, a choleric temperament, or irritability. A *white*-
livered person was a coward; diseases of the liver produce
not merely jaundice but extreme depression, lassitude, and
&ldquo;lack of courage.&rdquo;

*[Mary M. Tius, Kavala, Greece]*


#### EPISTOLA {W. M. Woods}

I refer to Sterling Eisiminger's &ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo;
[VI, 1] and Charles N. Faeber's letter [VI, 3] about the
meaning *redline* in connection with military aircraft,
specifically during WW II.

As so often happens, both are correct. The meaning of
the term depends on the context. To refresh my understanding,
I called three friends at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
who had been in the Air Corps (now the Air Force)
during WW II. Frank Rogers was Crew Chief on a B-24,
stationed in England. He flew on missions and was responsible
for his plane's maintenance. Robert M. Farnham was
Maintenance Officer with a bombardment squadron stationed
in North Africa and then in Italy. Frank Harrington
was a fighter pilot, first in England and then in France and
Germany. They all confirmed my understanding.

In the context of maintenance: A diagonal red line in a
particular square on the check sheet indicated that this item
had something wrong, but that the plane was fit to fly with
due precautions. There was no particular term for this sort
of *redline*. &ldquo;Give it a diagonal red line,&rdquo; the Maintenance
Officer might say.

However, in the context of actually flying a military
plane, certain instruments had a red line at a critical value:
air speed, engine rpm, oil pressure, intake manifold
pressure, etc. These values were not to be exceeded in non-emergency
operation. Of course, in an emergency there
were no rules. Frank Harrington gave me a spontaneous example
when I finally got him to recount an incident from
his service. There were two German fighters on his tail. He
was in gunsights whether he turned right or left. &ldquo;I dove the
son-of-a-bitch 'til the wings were ready to come off. I
*redlined* everything—air speed, rpm, manifold pressure. At
a thousand feet I throttled back, pulled up. They flew over
me so close I could read the print on their tires. One of
them hit a smokestack and burned. I got the other with a
burst right in the belly.&rdquo;

According to Frank, when a pilot *redlined* any instrument
or function in an emergency, he was supposed to
report it to the maintenance people so the plane could be
checked out, so it could be *redlined* if anything important
had been damaged.

There is a third usage of *redline* in the military. In the
Army, payday is a formal affair at which each soldier
presents himself in turn at. the pay table, salutes, announces
his name, signs the payroll, and is given his pay. But if a
soldier does not present himself for whatever reason—
AWOL, in the hospital, on detached duty, etc.—or if there
is anything wrong with the entry on the line containing his
name, he is redlined by having a horizontal red line drawn
completely across the entry. In that event, he is not paid
then and there, though he can usually get at least part of his
pay before the next payday. But that provides slight immediate
comfort, and being *redlined* can be a real tragedy
in a young soldier's life.

*[W. M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ronald Mansbridge}

Ray Russell's article, &ldquo;The 'Wicked' Bibles&rdquo; [VI, 4], lists
some interesting and amusing examples of Bibles which he
describes as &ldquo;marred by bloopers.&rdquo;

But Mr. Russell himself perpetrates one blooper which
I cannot permit to pass uncorrected. He states that the 1653
&ldquo;Unrighteous&rdquo; Bible was printed at Cambridge. Not so. It
was printed in London.

A. E. Housman, Kennedy Professor of Latin in the
University of Cambridge, told us that accuracy is not a virtue
but a duty. Nevertheless, Cambridge men can take justifiable
pride in the fact that the list of Bibles with notable
misprints is largely made up of books printed in London,
and subsequently at Oxford, which came to printing Bibles
somewhat belatedly, in 1675.

It was the accuracy of Cambridge printing that enabled
the University successfully to challenge the monopoly
of the London printers in 1588; later, in 1629 and again in
1638, the Cambridge University Press produced editions of
the Bible that corrected literally hundreds of errors that had
crept into the London editions. The printers of the beautiful
folio edition of 1638, Thomas Buck and Roger Daniel, were
so proud of the accuracy of their book that they posted a
notice on the door of Great St. Mary's Church in Cambridge
challenging readers to find a misprint in it and offering
a free Bible to anyone who did so.

*[Ronald Mansbridge, Weston, Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {Marc Drogin}

In regard to &ldquo;The 'Wicked' Bibles,&rdquo; the writer struck,
perhaps unknowingly, directly upon the cause for all the
typographical errors when he wrote, &ldquo;Depending upon your
point of view, these howlers might be considered . . . the
work of the Devil. ...&rdquo;

All the errors cited were indeed inspired by the Devil,
but as in any good corporate structure, the work was delegated
to a subordinate. His name was Titivillus, and he has
been known to have been at his task since about the middle
of the Middle Ages.

He was probably created by the whimsy of the medieval
monks who decried the carelessness of their fellows in
the monasteries of Europe. Monks lulled by the repetitiousness
of life, recitation, and work were prone to mumble the
words of the service, jumble the words of the hymns, and
make atrocious spelling errors in the works they copied in
the scriptoria. Titivillus was a demon who reportedly lurked
about monasteries and made notes on all these errors.
Obliged by the Devil to collect 1000 sacks of such notations
daily, Titivillus carried them to Hell, where each transgression
was recorded against the erring monk for consideration
when he died and would be considered for relocation in
Heaven or Hell.

Titivillus apparently had difficulty locating so many
transgressions and hit upon the idea of enticing scribes into
making recordable errors, whereupon his success surpassed
all bounds. In fact, late in the 14th century, he became (in
a manner of speaking) the Patron Demon of professional
scribes in London. Overworked, the guild of scribes claimed
that the inordinate number of errors in their work was the
result of Titivillus' spell—thus exonerating themselves from
any responsibility.

Titivillus was forced to diversify when printing came
into full fashion and the number of scribes decreased. He
became fascinated with the possibilities available in print-
shops. If Mr. Russell is collecting Bible bloopers, he may not
be aware of his monument to Titivillus' skills:

>Sixtus V, pope from 1585 to 1590, apparently unaware
of Titivillus, authorized a printing of the Vulgate Bible
translated by Jerome. Taking no chances, the pope
issued a papal bull automatically excommunicating any
printer who might make an alteration in the text. This
he ordered printed at the beginning of the Bible. He
personally examined every sheet as it came off the
press. Yet the published Vulgate Bible contained so
many errors that corrected scraps had to be printed
and pasted over them in every copy. The result provoked
wry comments on the rather patchy papal infallibility,
and Pope Sixtus had no recourse but to order
the return and destruction of every copy.[^b1] 

Titivillus is, or course, still with us, as any scribe or printer
will testify.

VERBATIM readers who are interested in a quite serious
and detailed study of Titivillus might turn to Margaret
Jennings' *Tutivillus - The Literary Career of the Recording
Demon, published in Studies in Philology - Texts and
Studies,* 1977, Vol. LXXIV, No. 5, University of North
Carolina Press, Dec. 1977. There are other, more obscure
references to this delightful demon, which I'd be happy to
share with anyone interested.

By the way, the two variant spellings of the demon's
name are not the latest examples of his handiwork: his name
has traditionally had a multiplicity of spellings (or misspellings?).

*[Marc Drogin, Exeter, New Hampshire]*

***

[^b1]: *Medieval Calligraphy - Its History &amp; Technique, Marc Drogin. Abner Schram Ltd., New Jersey, and George Prior Associates, London*

[*Editor's Note: Readers of VERBATIM who are moved to consternation
by the inordinate number of typographical errors in a
given issue will be relieved to know the reason for them. In the
future, please direct correspondence concerning same to P. D.
Titivillus or to his employer, the Archfiend himself*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Raymond Harris}

In the 1966 edition of the Jerusalem Bible, published in
London by Darton Longman and Todd, there is an interesting
misprint: on page 912, Psalm 122, there appears &ldquo;Pay
for Peace in Jerusalem&rdquo; instead of Pray.

*[Raymond Harris, London, Englad]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jerrold S. Jensen}

To Joann Karges' rhymes and jingles I add the following:

>*argy-bargy*                     
*bigwig*                         
*boob tube*                      
*chalk talk*                     
*claptrap*                       
*ding-a-ling*                    
*hootchie-cootchie*              
*hustle-bustle*                  
*jet set*  
*leadhead*  
*mellowyellow*  
*mukluk*  
*okey-dokey*  
*ragbag*  
*super-duper*  
*zoot suit*

As for Ms. Karges' &ldquo;Accidental&rdquo; category, why not
*downtown* and, my very favorite, *Okefenokee?* To her &ldquo;Intentional&rdquo;
category, how about *legal beagle* and, in the
category of &ldquo;Contrived&rdquo; names, how about *Rosanna Rosanna
Dana?* If *Henny Penny* can be included, why not the
other names from *Chicken Little: Cocky Locky, Ducky
Lucky,* and *Turkey Lurkey?*

There is another form of reduplicatives sometimes
referred to as &ldquo;ricochet&rdquo; words. Though I have never seen it
in print, my wife insists that there is a distinct difference
between a ricochet word and a rhyming reduplicative: a
ricochet word bounces, or glances off its twin word, as in
chitchat and crisscross; in a sense, it *flip-flops*. A rhyming
reduplicative, on the other hand, merely rhymes, as in
*hanky-panky* and *willy-nilly*.

Here is a list of ricochet words, to which I earnestly invite
additions:

>*bric-a-brac*  
*chitchat*                       
*click-clack*                    
*crisscross*                     
*ding-dong*                      
*fiddle-faddle*                  
*flimflam*                       
*flip-flop*                      
*heehaw*                         
*King Kong*                      
*knickknack*                     
*mishmash*  
*Ping-Pong*  
*rickrack*  
*riffraff*  
*shilly-shally*  
*ticktack*  
*ticktock*  
*tittle-tattle*  
*topsy-turvy*  
*wishy-washy*  
*zigzag*
                   
*[Jerrold S. Jensen, Salt Lake City, Utah]*

[*Editor's Note: Here are a few more—I couldn't resist—to
help you get started: cookie, FIFO, gewgaw, riprap, see-
saw, shipshape, slipslop, tontine.*]


#### EPISTOLA {Priscilla R. Feigen}

A few additions to Joann Karges' &ldquo;Rhyme and Jingle&rdquo;:
*hotchpotch*, *titbit* (*source of tidbit*), and *rumdum*.

*[Priscilla R. Feigen, Palo Alto, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Benjamin Keller}

A special set of reduplicatives consists of words in
which the first and second parts are identical. Some years
ago I assembled the following lists:

>*ack-ack*                        
*baba*                           
*barabara*                       
*beriberi*                       
*bonbon*                         
*booboo*                         
*cancan*                         
*cha-cha*                        
*chichi*                         
*chowchow*                       
*cocoa*                          
*couscous*                       
*divi-divi*                      
*dodo*                           
*dumdum*                         
*froufrou*                       
*go-go*  
*go-go*                          
*goo-goo (eyes)*  
*juju*  
*mahi-mahi*  
*murmur*  
*muumuu*  
*no-no*  
*nulla-nulla*  
*pawpaw*  
*so-so*  
*ta-ta*  
*tartar*  
*tch-tch (tsk-tsk)*  
*tom-tom*  
*toto*  
*tut-tut*  
*ylang-ylang*  
*yo-yo*  

Plus a special baby-talk group, mostly devised by adults:

>*bye-bye*                        
*ca-ca*                          
*din-din*                        
*doo-doo*                        
*mama*                           
*nana*  
*papa*  
*poopoo*  
*turn-turn*  
*wee-wee*

*[Benjamin Keller, Harbor City, California]*

[*Editor's Note: We received a huge number of letters in
response to &ldquo;Rhyme and Jingle&rdquo;-far too many to reproduce
in any issue of VERBATIM. The letters above have been
edited to avoid repeating the same words in lists sent in by
several correspondents.*]


#### EPISTOLA {Jay Ames}

&ldquo;Rhyme and Jingle&rdquo; [VI, 3] reminds me of the following
piece of doggerel I ventured to commit to paper one wet
Saturday afternoon some long time ago:

>This cus cus  
never makes a fuss  
where aye-aye goes to sleep,  
though tsetse  
hums a hymn of death  
where dik-dik tends to leap.  
The bulbul  
sings bright nightly lays  
no motmot ever hears  
while matta matta  
slowly swims  
in a wet, warm water sphere.  
Though lava-lava  
might be worn  
where kava kava's grown,  
you'll find more  
Mau Mau on the moon  
than tutus in Tyrone.  

...which pales into significance alongside such duplicated
place names as the Australian toponymies: *Goonoo Goonoo*
'plenty water'; *Bulla Bulla* 'four hills'; *Walla Walla* 'lots of
rain.' (Strangely, the American place. *Walla Walla*, in
Washington, is interpreted as 'place of much water, place of
streams' by many authors.)

Aussie *Willie Willie* is akin to American 'Possumtrot,'
and *Mil Mil* means 'place of many eyes.' I've yet to discover
the meanings of names like *Bora Bora* and *Pago Pago*; I
have been told that *Sing Sing* is for Ossining, which seems
logical, so I can only hope it is also factual. *Wagga Wagga*
'place of many crows' is also Aussie in origin, but I doubt
that our Crow Indians came from there, whatever the
powwow.

*[Jay Ames, Toronto, Canada]*


#### EPISTOLA {Joseph Claro}

In &ldquo;Obiter Dicta&rdquo; [VI, 2], the charge that *an* preceding
*h* must be chalked up to affectation seems a little harsh. The
&ldquo;rules&rdquo; of *an* (the quotation marks are yours) specify its use
before a vowel sound, not a vowel. In words beginning with
*h*, where the first syllable is unstressed, the sound of the initial
consonant is relatively weak. Ease of pronunciation,
not affectation, marks the difference between a *history book*
and *an historical work*.

*[Joseph Claro, Scholastic Scope New York City]*

[*Similarly from James Storrow, New York City, and
Charlton Ogburn, Oakton, Virginia; generally agreeing
with the Editor were Daniel T. Holbrook, Arlington
Heights, Illinois, and John J. Menaugh, Bloomingdale, Illinois,
who pointed out that H. W. Fowler decried the use
of an before has being &ldquo;pedantic&rdquo; in the very first article in
A Dictionary of Modern English Usage.

*That may be comforting to others who follow Fowler
slavishly, but I have found so many instances in which
modern (good) usage is at variance with Fowler (simply
because of the passage of time) that there is little solace to
be found there. From a purely descriptive point of view,
Messrs. Claro, Storrow, and Ogburn are perfectly right:
that is why speakers use an before h. From another point of
view-namely, the careful articulation of (American)
English-such &ldquo;weakening&rdquo; of the h to allow the attraction
of an would be considered sloppy. Fowler, of course, was
faced with another problem: dropping haitches in England
marks a speaker as a Cockney, whose style of speech was
somewhat at variance with Fowler's standards*.]


#### EPISTOLA {T. S. Terrill}

In response to Sgt. Maj. Dan Cragg's belief that a 1907
reference to &ldquo;Bucket, G.I. on strap near axle under body&rdquo;
substantiates his contention that *Gl* means 'galvanized iron,'
I suggest that if the Army had been acting true to form (in
being so slow to change its ways) those buckets would have
been wooden.

When I was a flying cadet at Randolph/Kelly Fields in
'34/'35, we referred to enlisted men as *GI men*.

*[T. S. Terrill, Carlsbad, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {John S. Hogg}

The derivation [of *GI*] from 'galvanized iron' is certainly
interestingly unexpected, if not absurd, but there are
probably a million eyewitnesses now living who were there
and who remember it. 'General Infantry' doesn't cut it
because there was not, in fact, any such phrase in use.
Maybe &ldquo;German Infiltrator&rdquo; would be a possibility, or conceivably
Mr. Hereford's father was a &ldquo;Green Inductee.&rdquo; Or
maybe he was in Ouagadougou while I was at Fort Jay,
cleaning *GI* cans when I pulled *KP* (which means 'kitchen
police' but has nothing to do with the cops).

*[John S. Hogg, Hamilton, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Stanley Hubbard}

No doubt other readers have written you taking (non-governmental)
issue with Mr. William Hereford's statement
[VI, 3] that &ldquo;noninfantry combatants were not ordinarily
referred to as *GIs*&rdquo; during WW II. As a WW II artillery-
man, I can testify that they most certainly were, in the
Army, at least. And Government Issue was certainly the
universally understood source of *Gl* at the time—and for
the most obvious of reasons: once you'd been poured into a
uniform and had your hair cropped short, that was exactly
what you were-a depersonalized article, stamped with a
number, and ready for consumption.

*[Stanley Hubbard, Romanshorn, Switzerland]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dan Cragg}

My preference [VI, 1] for the origin of *GI* from 'galvanized
iron' via 'general issue' remains firm. Since writing
that article, I have discovered further information that
strongly reinforces the origin of *GI* from 'General Issue.' . . .
The first piece is from William Manchester's biography of
General Douglas MacArthur (*American Caesar*, Little,
Brown &amp; Co., 1978, pp. 320-21), where, in response to a
casual reference to the troops under his command as *GIs,*
the general is quoted as having said, &ldquo;Don't ever do'that in
my presence. . . . GI means 'General Issue' . . . call them
soldiers. . . .&rdquo; And who will question a five-star general?

A check of the glossary published in *Bugle Notes* (the
handbook of the Corps of Cadets at the U. S. Military
Academy at West Point) for 1939 reveals that even then *GI*
was in use at The Point for the full form &ldquo;enlisted man&rdquo; and
adjectivally for 'General Issue.' . . . Jonathan Lighter
(*American Speech*, 47, 1/2, Spring-Summer 1972) refers to a
cartoon of 1918 (in the *Stars* &amp; *Stripes?*) captioned &ldquo;A G. I.
Christmas.&rdquo; That is the earliest occurrence I have yet seen
of the abbreviation replacing the full form, but I don't
know whether this was influenced by 'galvanized iron,'
'government issue' (or 'garrison issue,' which is interesting
but unattested), or the &ldquo;General Infantry&rdquo; of Mr. Hereford's
father.

I am unfamiliar with &ldquo;general infantry&rdquo; as an official
military term, although obviously it was in use at least conversationally
in Mr. Hereford's day, and it is entirely clear
that artilleryman Hereford and his comrades believed that
*GI* was derived from it. Remember how *doughboy*, an ancient
and venerable word for an infantryman, was eventually
applied to all the members of the AEF in WW II, infantrymen
as well as signalmen, artillerymen (even
*Marines*)? So, for an ex-gunner, perhaps the elder Mr.
Hereford is not really that much off target and, although
not exactly in the bull's-eye, he hasn't drawn &ldquo;Maggie's
drawers&rdquo; or an &ldquo;artillery bull,&rdquo; either.

*[Dan Cragg, Arlington, Virginia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Lt. Scott McCarthy}

I have a minor correction to make to Charles Faerber's
explanation of *redding* out [VI, 3]. Although the phenomenon
does in fact occur when &ldquo;pushing&rdquo; through an outside
loop, it is the result of excessive *negative* Gs. The loss of
consciousness caused by positive Gs (a blackout), on the
other hand, may be encountered while pulling through an
inside loop. If the pilot releases back stick pressure before
loss of consciousness, he will probably have experienced
*gray-out*, characterized chiefly by tunnel vision and reduced
sensitivity to external stimuli.

*[Lt. Scott McCarthy, USN Fighter Squadron Thirty One]*


#### EPISTOLA {William M. Bean, M.D.}

The term *red-out* is spread over a clinical manifestation
of an unusual medical condition. It occurs when people who
have an obstruction of the superior vena cava, the large
vein that conveys blood back to the right side of the heart
from the head and arms and upper chest. When a person
with this form of obstruction leans over or lifts, he literally
sees red and may feel faint or actually have a fainting spell.
A fairly characteristic way in which this is produced is in
changing tires, when the person leans forward and lifts a
fairly heavy wheel.

*[William M. Bean, M.D., University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Nancy W. Feinstein}

Further to Edgon Margo's follow-up [VI, 3] to Eisiminger's
and Gass's colorful contributions, I propose the
following additions:

>*We, the purple*                 
*Forever Amber*  
*love, honor ando beige*         
*Mount Carmel*  
*Point Sienna*                    
*Claudia Cardinal*  
*Cyd Cerise*                     
*caca teal*  
*clean slate*                    
*the impossible cream*  
*quite all white*                
*gang green*  
*meady ochre*                    
*the wind blue*  

*[Nancy W. Feinstein, Petaluma, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Toni Snow}

The list of &ldquo;Complementary Colors&rdquo; [VI, 3] inspired
my family to join in the game with the following results;

>*infer red*                      
*don't-it-make-your-brown-eyes blue*  
*agent orange*                   
*flying-people-eater purple*  
*figure's peach*                 
*village green*  
*orang-u tan*                    
*shipwreck maroon*  
*Governor Brown*                 
*unprovoked violet*  
*post-partum blue*               
*monster-eyed green*

*[Toni Snow, Rindge, New Hampshire]*


#### EPISTOLA {W. K. Viertel}

Regarding &ldquo;Short Cuts,&rdquo; by David Galef [VI, 4], of
course it is true that what we call gas the British call *petrol*.
But *petrol* is not a shortened form of petroleum, it is a derived
word. *Petroleum* is literally 'rock oil,' that is, crude oil
as it comes from the ground, before refining into motor fuel
and other products.

*[W. K. Viertel, Canton, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman W. Schur}

In her excellent article, &ldquo;Preposition Pollution&rdquo; [VI, 2],
Barbara R. DuBois deals with the ominously growing
misuse of prepositions. The article, presumably, deals solely
with American English. The subject becomes more complicated
when one takes into account the fact that there are
wide differences between correct American and British
usages in the matter of the preposition. That is especially
true of the prepositions *in* and *on*; Britons live *in* such-and-
such a street (although they do live *on* a road); in Britain,
animals are *on* heat rather than in it, predictable events are
on the cards rather than *in* them, athletes are *on* (not *in*)
form, and things that are on the way ('in a stage of development')
are *on* train as well as *in* train.

*Different from* is heard in Britain, but *different to* is
more common; *other* to (for American *other than*), not frequently
met with, is sometimes used. Here are some others:

| AMERICAN                 | BRITISH            |
| ------------------------ | ------------------ |
| *nervous about*          | *nervous of*       |
| *advantage over*         | *advantage of*     |
| *increase over*          | *increase on*      |
| *frontage on*            | *frontage to*      |
| *at auction*             | *by auction*       |
| *membership in*          | *membership of*    |
| *dry out*                | *dry off*          |
| *chat with*              | *chat to*          |
| *cater to ('pander to')* | *cater for*        |
| *sit for ('pose')*       | *sit to*           |
| *snowed in*              | *snowed up*        |
| *mad/crazy about*        | *mad/crazy on*     |
| *visit to London*        | *visit of London*  |
| *Monday through Friday*  | *Monday to Friday* |

There are, of course, many others. The &ldquo;rule&rdquo; governing
*among* and *between* is regularly ignored in Britain: *between*
is overworked while *among* rusts, for *between* is used most
of the time when more than two persons or things are involved.
For example. *There is very little choice between the
many alternatives*. In America, we defend the usage the
*War Between* the States on the grounds that there were only
two *sets* of states involved, but the handbooks and usage
books clamor for *among* when three or more things or people
are involved-unless it is clear that the relationship
under consideration is *between* only two of the members of
the set at any one time.

*[Norman W. Schur, Hawkhurst, Kent, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {Alan Berson}

I disagree with Kirkham P. Ford's observation with
regard to what one does with a form in England [VI, 2].
I've been living in England for 22 years, and, after sampling
some of my friends' views, I discovered that the
preferred order is *fill in, fill out,* and *fill up* (definitely non-
U) a form. But one friend had the last word: &ldquo;Actually,&rdquo; he
said, &ldquo;we *complete* a form.&rdquo;

*[Alan Berson, London, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

[We received a number of letters commenting on &ldquo;Why
*'Butterfly'?*&rdquo; [VI, 4], and lack of space prevents us from
printing more than the following, which are representative
of the spirit of other remarks.]

In reply to Axel Hornos's question, &ldquo;Why *'Butterfly'?*&rdquo;
folk etymologists (not to mention folk entomologists) would,
I think, answer that it is not &ldquo;the product of unbridled fancy,&rdquo;
but rather a delightfully apt metathesis of *flutter by.*
(This, of course, in brazen defiance of stodgier authorities,
like the *OED*, that persist in spoiling the fun by tracing it
back to *ca* 1000, with analogies in other sundry Germanic
tongues.) All of which recalls an old piano solo by Zez Confrey,
composer of *Kitten on the Keys*, entitled *Flutter By,
Butterfly.* For all that, I think few will deny that *butterfly*
is, at least, more attractive than *caterpillar*, whose etymology
is a whole other can of worms.

On a more substantive note, I am also prompted to
point out how ironic it is that English-which usually turns
nouns to verbs with reckless abandon-is the only of the
languages mentioned by Mr. Hornos whose name for this
creature isn't regularly transformed into a verb meaning 'to
flutter; flit here and there,' etc. A Spaniard can *mariposear,*
from *mariposa;* a Frenchman can *papillonner*, from
*papillon*; a Portuguese can *barboletear*, from *barboleta*; an
Italian can *sfarfallare* (or even, less commonly, *farfalleggiare*),
from *farfalla*; a Rumanian can *flutura*, from *fluture*
(though in this case the noun may well come from the
verb). But who ever goes &ldquo;butterflying about&rdquo; in English?

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ronald Grimes}

In a periodical the very rubrics of which appear in
Latin, it might be expected that admirers of Latinate polysyllabicity
would from time to time descend upon unfortunate
vocables of humble Anglo-Saxon origin and attempt to
do them violence, but Axel Homos goes too farl He writes
that &ldquo;... as a rule, English words of Latin ancestry [*sic*]
bear a close resemblance to their equivalents in Romance
languages.&rdquo; Yet *butterfly*, according to Mr. Hornos, &ldquo;makes
a mockery of this rule.&rdquo; But what evidence is there for his
claim that the English word derives from Latin *papilio?*
The Old English form *buttorfleoge* shows that this is no upstart
neologism, *pace* Mr. Hornos, but rather a venerable
member of the English language. Also of interest here is the
German *Schmetterling* (etymologically 'cream-licker'), certainly
more relevant for *butterfly's* semantic origins than
Mr. Homos's speculations.

Instead of wringing his hands in dismay over the existence
of Anglo-Saxon morphemes, Mr. Homos should rejoice
in the impulse that keeps even Romance languages
from fading to mere etiolated epigones of Latin. *Verbum
sap*.!

*[Ronald Grimes, Silver Spring, Maryland]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A high-ranking state Alcoholic Beverage Commission
official said Friday that Wednesday's retroactive renewal
and transfer of the beverage permit of the rural Bloomington
Liars' Lodge by the Monroe County Alcoholic Beverage
Board was 'unique but not uncommon.&rdquo;' —*The Herald-
Telephone*, Bloomington, Indiana, undated issue from
autumn, 1979. [Submitted by Annabel Wolfson, Worcester,
Massachusetts.]

## Oklahoma! Okay!
*Dick Mayo*

For most of my adult life I really have tried to speak as
well as I could. It may be that I don't speak the King's
English, but I at least have attempted to employ the President's
English.

I was one of 17 U.S. newspaper writers and publishers
on a June, 1978, study mission to Scandinavia. We had just
concluded a 45-minute interview, in English, with Mr. Per
Kleppe, Norwegian Minister of Finance. Our delegation
leader. Bob Bailey of the Buhl, Idaho, *Herald*, said to
Kleppe, &ldquo;We have been asking you questions for close to an
hour. Do you have questions you would like to ask any of
us?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes, how did it come to be that not everyone speaks
English in the U.S.?&rdquo; inquired the Norwegian. Bailey
assured him that everyone in the U.S. does, in fact, speak
English.

&ldquo;Then how can it be I can't understand anything that
gentleman over there says?&rdquo; I was crushed when he pointed
directly at me.

&ldquo;Oh,&rdquo; Bailey said. &ldquo;He's from Oklahoma. Very few of
us understand him, either.&rdquo;

Now, thanks to Mrs. Neome Pratt, my problem is
defined. Mrs. Pratt sent me a handy little reference book entitled
&ldquo;The Good 01' Boy Okie Dictionary.&rdquo; Compiled by
Daniel Hudgins and published by the Chase Organization
of Tulsa, it contains over 250 entries, spelled phonetically,
which are representative of the language characteristics of
Oklahomans—eastern variety in particular. Thumbing
through its pages, a story of squashed (that's just to get you
in the mood) love came to mind:

Fred was in his room, trying to study his aljibur. He
had a sody in his hand. His eyes kept staring at the big ol
ellum tree and the winner, jist outside his wender. He was
thinking about winner, but xpeshly he was wushing Mary
Lou would give him a break and go to the raglar Sattidy
night daince with him.

He looked at his paper, which was full of urras.
&ldquo;Humm, I wonner why I cain't be more ackrit?&rdquo; he axed
hisself. &ldquo;It's that gurl. My mine is on her alatime.&rdquo;

&ldquo;I shore cain't go on lak this,&rdquo; he thought. &ldquo;I shore do
hait to baig her; but if there's a chaince she'd go, I'd doll
her up in a secont. I lak that gurl so much, I'd lak to be her
shadder and foller her everywhur.&rdquo;

So he ris up and went to the Frigidaire an fixed hisself
a samich an another sody. After he finished eating, he went
to the phone and dolled up Mary Lou.

&ldquo;Wadja doin, Mary Lou?&rdquo; he axed her.

&ldquo;Nothin. I was jist sittin here waiting for word from
my uncle Joe, who had a cardiact attackt yistidy. I ain't had
an ainser yit, an I'm tremlin all over. I have an idy he's
about to xpar.&rdquo;

&ldquo;He's yore spashal uncle, ain't he, Mary Lou?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes, he's the one that grows brammers. Uncle Joe has
a real strong bidey; but when he rassled that big ol brammer
bull an they wound up in the bobwar, I think it started
this bresh with death. He was cut up fierce and than had
this attackt. They carried him to the hospital in an
amlance.&rdquo;

&ldquo;I'm shore he'll get well soon, Mary Lou.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Say, I'm jist desprit to take you out. Watcha say about
going to the daince with me Sattidy night? You shore do
make my heart thob. I promise I won't get frash. We can
get some vaneller ice cream an eat it on the vydock on the
way to the daince.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well, Fred, I've always thought of you as being sorda
exter, but I speck I'd better not. I'm foolin round with
Leroy an he don't lak you. He called you a stripped some-sort-of-thang,
and I'm skiert he'd get vilent if I went out
with you.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Mary Lou, are you pullin my laig? That sprizes me,
about Leroy.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Not one liddle bit.&rdquo;

&ldquo;I guess I'd better row my boat somers else. I'd hate to
wind up at the kwarpractor's. But, Mary Lou, you've jist
stomped on my heart an smashed that sucker flat.&rdquo;

&ldquo;I can't hep that, Fred. I've got to study my joggerfee
now. Bye.&rdquo;

Perhaps Mr. Kleppe was right.

## A Place for Everything ...

Paul Jennings, who writes a column for *The Guardian*
called &ldquo;Oddly Enough,&rdquo; provided a valuable source for
onomasticians in an (undated) article on English place
names. Selecting the names of real places in England, Jennings
pointed out how many had acquired semantic overtones.
A selection follows:

>*Bewdley*, *adv*. with the words replaced by others of a
bawdy nature; hence *bewdlerized*.
>
>*Blackpool*, n. a mood of despondency.
Bodmin, n. a unit of work. 60 bodmins = 1 man-hour.
See worksop.
>
>*Chislehurst*, n. 1. a carpenter's shop. 2. (joc.) the Stock
Exchange.
>
>*Didcot*, *n*. a maternity ward.
>
>*Edgware*, *n*. cutlery.
>
>*Letchworth*, *n*. a libertine.
>
>*Purfleet*, *n*. a racing cat.
>
>*Tring*, *n*. a timed telephone call (in towns).
>
>*Truro*, *n*. an untimed telephone call (in rural areas).
>
>*Virginia Water*, *n*. a perfume used in the eighteenth
century.
>
>*Wadhurst*, *n*. affluence.
>
>*Wantage*, *n*. penury (&ldquo;from wantage to wadhurst&rdquo;).
Worksop, *n*. the minimum legal amount of work in a
day. It varies from country to country. In Japan it is
10 man-hours, in Germany 8 man-hours, in England
143 bodmins.

Jennings could not be expected to cover American place
names, so we provide some here. Readers may wish to offer
their contributions as well.

>*Wichita*, *n*. a code word used in Salem, Mass., for
black magic.
>
>*Athol*, *n*. an affectionate, if dysphemic term for his
home town of Terre Haute, Indiana; said to have
originated with a lisping mayor at the turn of the
century.
>
>*Ashtabula*, *n*. from an exhortation, misread by a besotted
Biblical scholar who urged his nagging wife
&ldquo;Get your Ashtabula.&rdquo;
>
>*Paramus*, n. former marine camp in New Jersey.

## Confusion Compounded
*J. D. Sadler, Sherman, Texas*

We have three perfectly good words in English,
*guarantee, warranty*, and *guaranty*, all of the same origin
and having the same meaning. Now some people are trying
to add a fourth, *warrantee*. A TV salesman says, &ldquo;We have
a great warrantee on this product,&rdquo; while the word *warrant*
is on the screen. The word *warrantee* of course exists, but it
means 'someone who receives a warranty.' Perhaps this new
*warrantee* is related to the *trustee* at the jail, a term which
can be both heard and seen.

A missing *e* can make a difference in the following examples.
A recent headline stated HUNDREDS KILLED IN
REFUGE SLAUGHTER. And the sports page contributes with
this quote: &ldquo;That victory was certainly good for our moral.&rdquo;
One more that I have seen: &ldquo;I loath doing this&rdquo;.

Simple misspellings frequently occur, as in &ldquo;copywrite&rdquo;
and &ldquo;playwrite.&rdquo; One that rarely is spelled correctly is
&ldquo;straight-laced.&rdquo; &ldquo;He has a real flare for this kind of work,&rdquo;
runs the news story. And the fact that the work was difficult
didn't &ldquo;phase&rdquo; him one bit. When I was teaching Latin and
the students had to write &ldquo;he led,&rdquo; half the class would
write &ldquo;he lead.&rdquo; &ldquo;Lead&rdquo; makes a fine sinker but not a very
good past tense verb.

Blunders such as these are not limited to newspapers,
television and the like. Confusion can be found even in the
groves of academe. A professor of my acquaintance never
knew the difference between *spectrum* and *specter*. He
would cheerfully &ldquo;raise a spectrum&rdquo; and &ldquo;go through the
abstentia.&rdquo; Another once spoke of &ldquo;skewered&rdquo; data, in
which I had to visualize the data as ready for the barbecue
grill.

When gold first became available to the public, more
than one newscaster spoke of the selling of gold &ldquo;bouillon.&rdquo;
Gold soup doesn't sound very appetizing. A quite common
mispronunciation is &ldquo;whelp&rdquo; for &ldquo;welt&rdquo;: &ldquo;He has some big
whelps on his arm.&rdquo;

Finally, three that refuse to be classified. A certain
politician, in a speech here, said, &ldquo;That was simply incredulous.&rdquo;
With that statement he lost my vote. A
newspaper story about coin collecting caught my attention
with a reference to the &ldquo;pneumismatic&rdquo; market. And there
was the strange tale of the couple on vacation who returned
home to find their house &ldquo;ramshackled.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

On June 12, 1980, *The New York Post* quoted John
Anderson as saying, &ldquo;I'm not going to stand up and genuflect
to the Ayatollah Khomeini.&rdquo; [Submitted by Martin
Meyers, New York City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;More than most, the gang over at Scali, McCabe,
Sloves knows that if you work hard, keep your nose to the
grindstone, care diligently for clients and maintain high
honesty and moral terpitude good things will happen to
your business.&rdquo;— *The New York Times*, July 22, 1980, in
Philip H. Dougherty's column. Advertising. [Submitted by
Henry C. Maguire, Killingworth, Connecticut.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Words On Words*
John B. Brenner, (Columbia University Press, 1980), xii + 406pp.

Subtitled &ldquo;A Dictionary for Writers and Others Who
Care About Words,&rdquo; this chunky book contains a great deal
of useful information about language. It is in alphabetical
order, which means that you have to know what you are
looking for before you can find it, and it seems unlikely to
me that a user will ever be looking for entries like
HEADLINESE, MNEMONIC, or PENTAGONESE. Therefore, in
order to derive the best use from this extremely sane, useful
work the reader must first look through it to familiarize
himself with its contents, then go back to use it as a
reference guide; when the appropriate occasion arises, he
may be fortunate enough to remember what it contains
(e.g., MNEMONIC).

The information in the entries is clearly set forth. I do
have a few objections, however. Under ALLOTTED, where
the author lists some verbs (like *cancel, benefit*, etc.) that do
not double their final consonants for their various oblique
forms, he fails to indicate that those that *do* double them
are characteristically stressed (wholly or in part) on the final
syllable of their base forms. Also, *kidnaped, kidnaping,*
because of the secondary stress on the -*nap of kidnap*, are
more often spelled with double p (Brenner to the contrary).
And what of *cancellation* and the many other words like
*cancel and benefit?* It isn't apparent that the author has
given a role with some illustrations, but that opacity may be
owing more to the style of the book than to its writing.
Besides, emphasis that such a rule is followed in American
English but not in British would have been useful.

Generally, the entries cover topics traditionally treated
in usage books and manuals; but it is the extra added attractions
that make the book interesting, even though I am not
always sure why they have been included. For example,
why an entry on COSMO- (as in *cosmetic, cosmology,* etc.)
unless it is because Brenner likes it? And the entry
COSELLISM is amusing and to the point, but I have never encountered
the word, hence would never think to look it up.
Similarly, the entry EDUCANTO/EDUCATIONIST offers some
telling comments, but who ever heard the term outside of
Koerner's book (which I never heard of and which seems to
be missing from the credits in the introduction)?

The book's style has a friendly, though admonitory,
practical ring to it, and it contains a lot of solid information
and advice. If you can afford it and/or like to collect such
works, it is a worthwhile book to have around.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

GIFTS FOR SAVING - FREE OR AT SUBSTANTIAL SAVINGS.
-Sign in a savings and loan office window in Chicago.
[Submitted by Alex J. Pollock, Northbrook, Illinois, who
remarks, *Some gifts you have to pay for!*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

THIS STORE IS PROTECTED AGAINST SHOPLIFTING BY
SECURITY PERSONNEL.—Sign in a local supermarket in
Thunder Bay, Ontario. [Submitted by Robert S. Dilley, Thunder Bay, Ontario who comments. *So much for their opinion of the local forces of law and order!*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Heard on Boston radio, week of June 21, 1980, in an
obituary for a nonagenarian millionaire, whose rags-to-
riches career was characterized as a &ldquo;modern-day Alger Hiss
story.&rdquo; [Submitted by Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University
who suggest, *Whittaker Chambers please take 
(posthumous) note*.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Thrill to the Gallic life around the enfant terrible. (7)  
5\. Moisture not confined to its normal wet season. (7)  
9\. Move by legislatures to raise their own salaries, so it seems. (9,6)  
10\. Ready for some old-fashioned fun? This provides it. (10)  
11\. Ice water ... (4)  
13\. ... would be wrong, in short, when serving wine. (6)  
14\. Constitutional start with an early walk? (8)  
17\. Concerning voiced speech sound, it should be distinctly audible. (8)  
18\. Not exactly a girl's best friend. (6)  
20\. Adequate nut to set up two small firms. (4)  
22\. Bent out of the way as the Ripper slashed. (10)  
25\. Ways and means behind the scenes. (8, 7)  
26\. Out-of-work journalist to give her opinion . . . (7)  
27\. ... about being cut and calling her a Red! (7)  

**Down**

1\. Veep needs aid, being flat broke. (5)  
2\. Eggs. (9)  
3\. Doing extra to mask self-serving purpose. (3, 2, 5)  
4\. Don't get mad, get even. (6)  
5\. It's the very devil to lose five at one birth. (8)  
6\. Eyeshades dispensed by swindlers? (4)  
7\. Dogface, down in the drink, yet lively enough. (5)  
8\. Good money to be made in the great putting stretch. (4, 5)  
12\. One matter I handle on my busy lines is that amusing little doll. (10)  
13\. Take recruits to tea, despite adverse criticism. (9)  
15\. A sweat, when the game is afoot, especially with a desire to make money. (4,5)  
16\. Elected and of great renown, but still disgraceful. (8)  
19\. MP caught in surreptitious kiss gets away cheaply. (6)  
21\. Sharp comic? (15)  
23\. Treated, perhaps not too pleasantly. (5)  
24\. Broken open on the reef. (4)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. T-urm-OIL    
5\. Acti-0-ns    
9\. INCREASED SALARY (anagram of YARN in RAISED SCALE)  
10\. UNPOLITIC  
11\. Hello  
12\. Asia-tic  
13\. Mint  
17\. AWOL  
18\. (s)EX PUN GE(e whiz)  
22\. Amb.le  
23\. Doctor-ate  
24\. Lie like a trooper  
25\. Endmost  
26\. Ro-SET-te  

**Down**

1\. Trip up  
2\. Recipes for bread  
3\. Overload  
4\. Last trip  
5\. A.B.-duct  
6\. TR-ash-Y  
7\. On a flying carpet  
8\. S-1-YBO-ot-S  
14\. CANAILLE  
15\. Executor  
16\. HUM-oro-US  
19\. Me-DI-co  
20\. A.D.-vent  
21\. Degree  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v7n2_Autumn_1980)