--- 
title: "VOL VII, No 3 [Winter 1980/81]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Blends, Blands, and Blunds
*Robert A. Fowkes, Yonkers, New York*

*Brunch* and *Mexicali* are, as is well known, &ldquo;blends,&rdquo;
intentional combinations of parts of *breakfast &plus;
lunch and Mexico &plus; California)*, respectively. These are
transparent formations, and it might prove possible to find
the original coiners. James Joyce is notorious for his prolific
blends, which range from the banal to the ingenious (with
more of the latter than the former). Not many of his blends
have entered the English vocabulary in any lasting way,
although they may intrigue and even delight us. They are
often bound to the not-too-intelligible context of the individual
book (*Finnegans Wake* more than the others), but
many of them can be appreciated out of context, for example:
*Lipoleum (linoleum &plus; Napoleon)*; astoneaged
*(astonished &plus; stone age)*; *madison man (medicine man &plus;
Madison (Avenue) = advertising man)*; *roaratorio* (a type
of musical work in which Handel excelled, performed with
gusto by scores of local choruses); *hantitat (hafujnt &plus;
habitat*, the stamping ground of a particular ghost); *anthrapologise
(anthropology &plus; apologize)*; *traumaturgid (trauma
&plus; German Traum 'dream' &plus; (possibly) dramaturgy &plus;
turgid)*; *continuarration (continued &plus; narration)*; *queenoveire
(Guinevere &plus; Queen of Eire)*; *muddlecrass* pupils
(analysis not needed); and, especially relevant here, *verbaten*
words (*verbatim &plus; verboten*). Joyce's blends are, to
my mind, masterful. A member of a church in Mount Vernon,
N.Y., almost deserves to be ranked with Joyce for one
blend: in referring to the energetic motions of the choir
leader, he coined the term *hymnastics*.

A great number of blends, some of venerable age, are
less brilliant but have achieved a relatively secure place in
the lexicon. Often they are not as transparent as the ones
just cited and offer either too many or too few possibilities
for analysis. At any rate, writers of dictionaries use
numerous question marks in their attempts at explanation.
*Splotch*, for example, has been called a blend of *spot &plus;
blotch* (but the latter may = *blot &plus; patch*-or may not).
*Splurge* has been explained as a blend of *splash &plus; surge*.
*Splutter* may be *splash &plus; sputter*, with overtones of *mutter*,
*utter*. But what is *splash* itself? (Perhaps it doesn't matter-but
that yields splatter.) *Clash* could be a blend of *clap
&plus; dash*; and *flash* has been said to be from *flow &plus; dash*, or
*flood &plus; dash*, or *flame &plus; dash*. *Sprawl* may be *spread &plus;
crawl*; *smash* can be *smack &plus; mash*; and *trudge* is conceivably
*tread &plus; drudge* (hardly *trot &plus; fudge*). There
seems to be little doubt that smog = *smoke &plus; fog*.

All of these blends, or most of them, are probably effective
as onomatopoeia, but they are otherwise not particularly
distinguished. We could call them *blands*, though I
doubt we'd get away with it. I would also include *brunch*
and *Mexicali* (as well as *Texarkana* and all the rest) under
that heading.

When, however, a sports announcer (Bill Stern) said
several decades ago that some award was *symblematic* of
the highest excellence in college football, he was using a
*blund*. That is, it was a blundering combination of the
elements of *symbolic &plus; emblematic* with undertones of
*symptomatic*, if not other words too, and he was using it
with an arrogance that implied assurance that it was an extant
word.

Blends come from blenders; blunds are from
blunder(er)s. I am not sure that sports broadcasts generate
more blunds than other sources, but they do seem to be
highly productive of them. &ldquo;The Knicks' *dwaning* chances&rdquo;
were bewailed a year or two ago by a usually careful
speaker (Peter Roberts, radio station WOR, New York), and
he did not pause to correct the utterance (presumably a
blund of *dwindling* and waning). But sometimes the blund
is caught aborning and is corrected, cf., e.g., &ldquo;Scall—er,
call—a skycab,&rdquo; which was not a very promising blund
anyway. The *word floundering* must have started as a fishy
blund (not too infelicitous) *for foundering (with blundering*,
according to the *American Heritage Dictionary*), but it has
survived and has not completely supplanted the word
*foundering* itself.

A blund can also occur in the semantic realm without
involving telescoping or combining of phonic elements. This
leads to less dissectible formations. I regard the common
misuse of *aggravate*, in the sense of 'annoy, irk,' (instead of
'make worse,' etc.) as constituting a sort of blund, resulting
from semiconscious associations with such words as *exasperate*
, *irritate*, and the like. The analysis is risky, for it
involves mind-reading, assuming a mind is present.

*When inchoate* is used in the sense of &ldquo;confused, disordered,
entangled' by even fairly learned colleagues (with,
however, usually no Latin and less Greek), there must be
some sort of semantic blund that imparts the sense of
chaotic and adds it to the meaning 'incipient.'

I am not sure how *lackadaisical* acquired the blundering
sense of 'listless, languid, careless, apathetic,' but there
are echoes of such words as *lax*, *laxity*, *lack*, *lassitude*, and
maybe *lazy days* that must have helped to oust the 'lackaday'
of the original. And *connive* in its normal misuse may
involve a blund with *contrive or conspire* (or even *confide*,
with reference to confidence men).

Years ago, when the Yorkville section of New York City
was largely German, I used to eat in a restaurant that had
German cuisine but menus printed in what passed for
English. Some customers were astonished when they
ordered one item on the menu: *shellfish*, which turned out
to be haddock (German *Schellfisch*). This was a blund, perhaps,
of English orthographic shape plus German semantics
(a metaglottal blund, perhaps, but not a flounder).

When Ira Levin was thinking of a title for what
became his successful play *Deathtrap*, he briefly contemplated
calling it *A Better Mousetrap*, since it does parody
Agatha Christie's style a bit (as well as that of one or two
others). Agatha's play has, of course, run for well over .a
quarter of a century in London. Levin decided, however, to
observe decent piet&eacute; and called his piece *Deathtrap* instead.
Both *A Better Mousetrap and Deathtrap* are blends—not
blunds— one with obvious allusion to the superior product
for which an avid world will allegedly beat a path to one's
door, as well as with the implication that the new play
would surpass Agatha's; the other, less obviously, blending
*Mousetrap*, the play, with implications of suspense and terror.
Brant Newborn (!) in &ldquo;A Long Life (!) for Deathtrap,&rdquo;
*Playbill*, Oct., 1980, pp. 12-17, informs us that, of all the
many places where *Deathtrap* has played, Miami alone saw
attendance suffer because the prospective audiences &ldquo;in that
predominantly geriatric community&rdquo; evidently misinterpreted
the title in a depressingly subjective way.

*Dioressence*, the name of a Dior perfume, no doubt a
&ldquo;blend&rdquo; of various ingredients, may be &ldquo;essentially&rdquo; a compound
(if it were an Indian scent, it might be a Tatpurusha),
but it emits vague suggestions of *diorama* or
*diorite*, neither of which has any logical association with
*Dioressence*—but associations do not need to be logical.

*Skinned milk* was the term used by the woman next
door years ago for *skim milk/skimmed milk*. I recall hearing
my mother ask the woman why she said &ldquo;skinned milk,&rdquo;
and the reply was, &ldquo;They skin the fat off it, you see&rdquo; (and
*skinny* is, no doubt, the opposite *of fatty*). I'm not sure that
this qualifies as a blund or is merely a blunder, but it does,
in a way, blend *skim and skin*.

People on radio station WFAS, White Plains, New
York, making a conscious effort to pronounce *White* with
initial [hw] (which is, of course, not a characteristic of the
speech of the region), more than once have brought us a
&ldquo;whether report,&rdquo; which is a blund of sorts. And *The New
York Times* for October 17, 1980, p. CL, tells us that the
leaves age, &ldquo;whither,&rdquo; and fall. Possibly they &ldquo;whither
away.&rdquo;

The vast majority of the blends, blands, and blunds
treated here fall into the category of Alice's portmanteau
words. Some of them seem to originate in Blunderland.


### OBITER DICTA: *Scrutinizing the Matter in Hand*
*R T. Rosin, Sonoma State University*

One scratches the head, runs a hand through the hair,
leans forward and, with a deep sigh, scrutinizes again the
matter in hand. We must rethink the issue, with a
thoroughness not achieved on our first effort.

We must search with a *fine-tooth comb*. Let *us get
down to the nitty-gritty*. (A pause to reflect, marked by a
downward glance at one's fingernails.) To fail is to feel
*lousy*. The very idea *makes my skin crawl*. Yet, without *nitpicking,*
our only recourse is to lean back and accept the
endless scratching of head and feel a bit of a *nitwit*.

Such are my reflections on the imagery of the mental
process after a half-year residence in rural Asia—where the
grooming of one another's head for both lice and their eggs,
nits, is a task involving concentration, repeated effort, and
thoroughness. I find it remarkable that several of our
English expressions for getting down to the fundamentals,
for thinking a matter through for a second time, and for the
excessive attention to detail, as well as the gestures to convey
the process of mental engagement—the scratching of the
head, running the fingers through the hair—may derive
from the speech about and gestures of grooming and the important
role of the nails in this process.

(Proud of the task well accomplished, he buffs his nails
on his lapel.)

## Before I Am Too Late
*By the present Richard G. Lillard, Los Angeles*

>&ldquo;I'm 'retired,' 'former,' even 'ex.' But, please—
I'm not 'late.&rdquo;'
>
>-Ernest E. Debs, January 11, 1981, objecting to
being called &ldquo;the late Supervisor Ernie Debs.&rdquo;

On June 14, 1970, I read in the *Los Angeles Times*
that &ldquo;unlike the sonorous tones of the late Nelson
Eddy . . . the humpback whale sings an incredibly haunting
and eerie song.&rdquo; Now, look. Eddy sang only when he was
alive. The comparison gained nothing by the fact that Eddy
was dead. The point is to compare the voices of Nelson
Eddy and of the whale. It did not matter that on June 14,
1970, Eddy was dead; it does not matter now. It does—and
did—matter that the whale was, allegedly, the more
memorable singer. Unlike the sonorous tones of Nelson
Eddy, the song of the humpback whale is incredibly haunting
and eerie.

In a 1971 *TV Times* a writer said, &ldquo;The cast is headed
by the late Van Heflin.&rdquo; I don't believe it. I am confident
that he was alive when he appeared before the camera. This
obsession to announce or reannounce deaths, to seem privy
to morbid news, or to write finis particularly afflicts literary
and journalistic professionals. In 1972 *J. Mitchell Morse*, an
advocate of correct English, wrote in his *Irrelevant English
Teacher* that &ldquo;back in the 1940s the late Aldous Huxley . . .
was preaching the joys of chemically induced mystical
states. . . .&rdquo; I don't believe that either. Huxley was alive
when he preached those joys, with many years ahead-until
1963.

I know that in a biographical context the word *late*
means recently deceased, though *recently* seems to have
quite a stretch to it. In 1976 an Associated Press item from
Tubac, Arizona, referred to &ldquo;the late American cowboy
humorist. Will Rogers.&rdquo; Rogers died in 1935. The usage in
the Tubac dispatch suggests that the more you like a person
the longer you cling to the memory by saying *the late*. The
phrase is sometimes informative if you have missed an
obituary notice. Yet most of the time *the late* is worse than
useless: it is ambiguous and distracting. Either we know the
person is dead or we don't need to know. To keep bringing
up people's deaths is a logical or stylistic fault, if nothing
more. I'd say let it be taken for granted that people were
alive when they did or said things. It does not matter except
in obits that they died later. We all die later.

Does *late* or *the late* help in any of the following?

>After World War II the late Lucius Beebe rediscovered
the town [Virginia City, Nevada] and transformed
it into one of the greatest tourist traps in the
Far West. [W.H. Hutchinson, 1969]
>
>. . .a great turning point came-or should have
come-in 1941 when the late Arthur Hobson Quinn
published his important Edgar Allan foe: A Critical
Biography. [Stuart Levine, 1965]
>
>Some 25 years ago the late James V. Forrestal,
then Secretary of the Navy, became concerned over
the future of fuel supplies for the Navy. . . .
[Benard Brodie, 1970]
>
>This time New Jersey's innocence was upset by that
champion disturber of the racket peace, Estes Kefauver.
The late Senator from Tennessee was bearing
down hard on the mob. [Fred J. Cook, 1969]
>
>Ballinger's action was defended in recent years by
the late former Secretary of the Interior, Harold
Ickes. [Harold T. Pinkett, 1970] Ickes was former
when he defended but not late.
>
>The late W. C. Allee studied and wrote extensively
on the subject of protocooperation. . . . [Howard
Odum, 1963] Allee published in 1961. Did it matter
that two years later he was dead? Does it matter
now?
>
>The late Justice Harlan wrote a vigorous dissent,
concurred in by the late Justices Frankfurter and
Whittaker, charging the court's majority with a lack
of judicial self-restraint. [Pendleton Howard, 1975,
referring to a Supreme Court decision of 1961]
Clearly the three justices were not deceased in 1961,
especially the vigorous Harlan.
>
>It is not an attitude shared by the late Enid
Starkie, the distinguished Oxonian biographer of
Rimbaud and Baudelaire, who completed this
biography of Flaubert shortly before her death in
April, 1970. [Richard Freedman, 1971] Why in
effect bury Ms. Starkie twice?

The problems with *the late* parallel those with *former*
and *ex*- and phrases that deal with demise or termination.
For instance: &ldquo;Former Attorney-General James A. Maloney
filed suit in U.S. District Court last December . . .&rdquo; [*Albuquerque
Journal*, 1971]. Maloney was on the job, not out of
it. Or: &ldquo;Then, in 1972, former President Nixon banned the
use of predicides on public land . . .&rdquo; [*University of
Montana Profiles*, 1976]. No, Nixon was still securely in
office, somewhat east of Watergate, when he stopped the
use of predator-control poisons.

Also: &ldquo;During the long administration of former Prime
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau, provincial leaders continually
complained of the growing power of Ottawa&rdquo;
[Stanley Meisler, 1979]. At the time, Trudeau was preformer;
as an ex-executive he could not have been prime
minister. The update is that in 1980 Trudeau became
ex-former or once-again prime minister. In 1977 the ornithologist
Alexander F. Skutch wrote in his *A Bird Watcher's
Adventures in Tropical America* that his &ldquo;Chapter 10, on
the Cecropia tree, first appeared ... in the long extinct
*Scientific Monthly*. ...&rdquo; The *Monthly* was alive when
Skutch's piece appeared in it in 1945, and only about thirteen
years later did it become extinct, as if it were a species.

Part of the problem comes from trying to write compact
summaries and neglecting to keep the narrative chronology
straight. Consider this item, which deals with Robert
Vesco, Thomas P. Richardson, and a detective named
Robert Duke Hall: &ldquo;Using the slain private detective as an
emissary, Richardson tried to force Vesco to help him, then
threatening to go to federal authorities if the onetime financial
wheeler-dealer refused&rdquo; [*Los Angeles Times*, 1976]. At
the time of publication, September 11, Hall was dead, but
the journalist, who avoided *the late*, turned Hall into a
corpse at the time Hall was indeed living, creating an
unlikely, ghastly intermediary.

I'm not forgetting that some disk jockeys have troubles
with death. They'll say in 1980 that the symphony I'm
about to hear is conducted by the late Otto Klemperer, the
song is sung by the late Bing Crosby, or the Nicolo Paganini
violin caprice, as arranged for the piano by Franz Liszt, is
played by the late Sergei Rachmaninoff. Query: If Rachmaninoff
(1873-1943) is *the late*, is Liszt (1811-1886) *less
late*, and is Paganini (1782-1840) *least late*, that is, farthest
back? Or in this instance is the Russian the least late, the
last one to be late? I have a positive proposal. Instead of
saying *the late*, an inexact term, give the absolute final
date. &ldquo;Played by Sergei Rachmaninoff, who died in 1943.&rdquo;

To show how confusing it all can be, I cite statements
by distinguished men of letters. In 1962 in an introduction
to Mark Twain's *Letters from the Earth*, Henry Nash Smith
wrote of Albert B. Paine, the first literary executor of
Twain's estate, and of Paine's successor: &ldquo;Shortly after
Paine's death. Harper &amp; Brothers recommended to the Trustees
that the late Bernard DeVoto . . . should be asked to
take over the task of preparing for publication further
material . . . from the . . . unpublished writing by Mark
Twain.&rdquo; The dead Paine was to be replaced by the dead,
but less dead, DeVoto? Not at all. Though Paine really died
in 1937, DeVoto continued on productively until 1955.

In 1942, in the scholarly quarterly *American Literature*,
Lawrence dark Powell published for the first time an
important letter by Mark Twain. In his introduction Powell
said: &ldquo;In 1897, when he was a professor in the Free Church
Training College at Glasgow, the late Sir John Adams
(1857-1934) sent a copy of his newly published work on the
psychology of J. F. Herbart to his favorite author, S. L.
Clemens.&rdquo; In 1897 Adams was about as early as late, with
almost half of his life remaining. Indeed he had 28 years to
go before he became Sir John.

*The late* lends itself to irony, as during World War II
when I. F. Stone in one of his columns in *The Nation* referred
to Hitler as the worst villain since &ldquo;the late Judas
Iscariot.&rdquo; On occasion prominent persons like Lewis Mumford
see themselves prematurely interred. In one of the closing
years of the 1970s a book reviewer in *The New York
Times* alluded to &ldquo;the late Alfred A. Knopf.&rdquo; Writing
promptly from Tucson, Knopf reported his good health and
protested the premature announcement.

Best of all as a gag, I suppose, would be to declare
yourself as deceased. I know only of an example in fiction.
In Chapter 19 of *The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn* the
old man, a king of frauds, confides to the Duke of Bilgewater,
&ldquo;I am the late Dauphin . . . your eyes is lookin' at
this very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy
the Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette.&rdquo;

## More Turkish Agglutinative Delights
*Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University*

For any who might have thought that &ldquo;Turkish agglutination&rdquo;
was a confectioner's process for the manufacture
of *loukoum*, Robert Devereux's article [VII, 2] was most
instructive, with its awe-inspiring and jaw-inspiring *muvaffakiyetsizliklerimizdendirki*.
(Turkologist friend Clive Foss
assures me that a more &ldquo;legitimately Turkish&rdquo; expression of
equal length would be *turkle&scedil;tiremediklerimizdenmisiniz*,
meaning &ldquo;Are you one of the people we couldn't turn into a
Turk?&rdquo; But who's going to quibble?) It immediately set me
to looking for other worthy examples. What language could
rival such a protracted yet utterly logical construct? Perhaps
several Amerindian and Eskimoan tongues, but they are on
the fringes of the Occidental ken and are spoken by relatively
few. Perhaps German? I recalled once seeing, years ago,
in a Ripley's *Believe It Or Not*, a gargantuan German word
allegedly meaning 'handkerchief.' But it was really only a
factitious invention meaning something like 'manually-held
nasal-passage-mucosa-evacuation square-fabric-receptacle,'
all agglutinated in characteristically Teutonic wordchaintogethergathering.

Then it hit me. There is perhaps no other widely
known language as potentially rich in agglutination as
Esperanto. Turkish had flung down its 33-letter gauntlet,
and, staunch defender of the Internacia Lingvo, I could not
let it lie there. Fifteen minutes and a cup of strong coffee
produced the resounding *fimalsamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;ideco*,
proudly surpassing its upstart Turkish antagonist
by a full four letters. (For non-Esperantist readers, it is, of
course, pronounced exactly as written, as long as one
remembers that j = y, &ccirc; = ch, c = ts, and that the accent,
as always, is on the penult.) Another cup of coffee would
have surely let me agglutinate still further.

An exegesis of the term will help illustrate Esperanto's
limit-stretching agglutinative genius. It all begins, appropriately,
with sex:

>*seks(o)* 'sex.' Note that the ending of all Esperanto nouns
is -*o*. (Other endings being used for other grammatical
functions, I parenthesize the endings to indicate
the root.)
>
>*seksem(a)* 'sexually inclined.' The suffix -em(a), with the
adjectival ending -*a*, denotes inclination.
>
>*samseksem(a)* 'homosexual.' The prefix *sam*- (the root of
the adjective *sam(a)*, 'same') produces the usual Esperanto
word for 'homosexual,' literally 'same sex
inclined.'
>
>*malsamseksem(a)* 'heterosexual.' The prefix *mal*- regularly
denotes the opposite of the word to which it is
appended. Hence *malsam(a)*, 'different.' (Purists
might object that, in everyday Esperanto, the word
for 'heterosexual' is *aliseksem(a)*, literally 'other sex
inclined'; but *malsamseksem(a)* would be easily
understood.)1
>
>*malsamseksemul(o)* 'heterosexual person.' The suffix
*ul(o)* indicates an individual characterized by the
word to which it is added.
>
>*malsamseksemulin(o)* 'female heterosexual.' Esperanto
regularly forms the feminine by adding the suffix
-*in(o)* to the masculine.
>
>*malsamseksemulinar(o)* 'female heterosexual group.' The
suffix -*ar(o)* indicates an association or grouping of
individual persons or things.
>
>*malsamseksemulinarej(o)* 'female heterosexual group
quarters.' The suffix -*ej(o)* indicates the characteristic
place of action.
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarej(o)* 'brothel.' The prefix *fi*- adds
the idea of shamefulness to what follows, thus producing
this easily understandable result, synonymous
with the more usual Esperanto term *bordel(o)*. (By
one of those ambiguities rarely encountered in Esperanto
—*ipso facto*— the *fi*- could logically refer to
the *ulin(oj)*, 'female persons,' or to their *ar(o)*,
'group,' as readily as to their *ej(o),* 'place of operation.'
But given the context, it's as broad as it is
long.)
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarejestr(o)* 'brothel keeper.' Esperanto
adds the suffix -*estr(o)* to denote leadership of an
operation.
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarejestrin(o)* 'madam.' As before, the
suffix -*in(o)* feminizes the noun.
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarejestrineg(o)* 'large madam.' The
suffix -*eg(o)* is an augmentative.
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;(o)* 'slovenly large
madam.' The suffix -*a&ccirc;(o)* is used to imply disparagement
and general disgust.
>
>*flmalsamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;id(o)* 'slovenly large
madam's offspring.' The suffix -*id(o)* denotes progeny.
>
>*fimalsamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;idec(o)* 'quality of a
slovenly large madam's offspring.' The suffix -*ec(o)*
(like English -*ness,* -*ship,* etc.) indicates the abstract
characteristics of its referent.

Who will deny that being told one possesses &ldquo;the
characteristics of a gross bordello madam's offspring&rdquo;—
*fimalsamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;idecon*, with an extra -n at
the end for the objective case, adding yet another letter—is
more picturesque than being called a pedestrian &ldquo;no-good
sonofabitch&rdquo;? (Or even &ldquo;no-good daughterofabitch&rdquo; if
another feminine -*in* is inserted after the -*id*, thus raising the
grand total to forty letters: *fimakamseksemulinarejestrinega&ccirc;idinecon*.)
Surely such withering invective is more satisfying
both to give and to receive.

I hasten to add that, Esperanto existing to facilitate
communication, few adepts would have occasion to use this
word in casual conversation. It would not spring trippingly
to the lips of even the most fluent. Still, it is comforting to
know that it, and countless potential others like it, can be
summoned up into existence whenever the need for a supersesquipedalianistically
imposing term arises.


### OBITER DICTA: *Watching Our g's and q's*
*Richard Bauerle, Ohio Wesleyan University*

As skills in writing and proofreading continue to
decline, the similar shapes of lower case g and q seem to
cause more problems. Often the letters are switched, with
results that can be quite amusing. Witness three errors committed
recently.

A college student, describing the chaotic last hours of
the war in Vietnam, wrote, &ldquo;As the refugees from the war
flooded into Saigon, there was an outbreak of bubonic
plaque.&rdquo; (Our family dentist commented that this new
disease had not yet been reported in the medical journals.)

Reversing the two letters the opposite way in the same
word. *The Chronicles of Higher Education* (Jan. 7, 1980,
p. 2) reprinted a news item containing the word from the
University of San Francisco *Foghorn,* &ldquo;The winner of the
[Distinguished Teaching] Award will receive between
$1,000 and $1,500. There will also be a plague in the
hall. . . .&rdquo;

Perhaps such bloopers will be eliminated by newly
developed electronic writing systems, but the advertisement
for one such system, reprinted by *The New Yorker* (July 14,
1980, p. 59), suggests we should not be too optimistic:

Our system is 100% error-free. It is an electronic
impossibility for it to make a typographical error. Also,
it can never experience 'fatique'—as a secretary often
has been known to experience.

It appears that we must continue to watch our g's and
q's, or one day we may pick up Shakespeare's *Romeo* and
*Juliet* only to find Mercutio praising the young lovers'
families, &ldquo;A plaque on both your houses.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Four Held Over Bomb Are Freed&rdquo; [headline in *The
Times* (London), June 7, 1980. Submitted by Kenneth L.
Karst, UCLA.]

## Philip Howard on English English
*The Family Talpidae*

The London evening newspaper (we have only one in
these hard times) announced portentously the other day on
a placard: *STEEL MOLE SPEAKS*. It was referring to an
employee of British Steel who had furtively passed confidential
documents of his employers to a television programme.
This vivid new metaphor, made popular by the craze for
the spy thrillers of John le Carr&eacute;, has burrowed its way into
the public imagination and the Balaam-baskets of subeditors
over here.

A Mr A. J. Mole wrote engagingly complaining about
the way that le Carr&eacute; and Sir Alec Guinness (who played
Smiley brilliantly on the box) have abused his surname to
mean sneak, spy, or even informer. He asked me to redress
the balance.

Apart from Kenneth Grahame's *The Wind in the
Willows*, from which Mr. Mole is imprinted as an endearing
if bumbling goody into the subconscious of British children,
the mole has always had a bad press. In the Authorized
Version, Leviticus lists the mole as an unclean abomination,
along with the ferret, the snail, and others. The translators
of the *New English Bible* are, no doubt, more accurate, but,
again no doubt, more boring when they render the Hebrew
with pedantry about the jerboa, the sand-gecko, and the
wall-gecko. In one of his testy fulminations, Isaiah prophesies
that when the Lord comes to shake the earth, a
man, not surprisingly in the circumstances, shall cast his
idols of silver and his idols of gold to the moles and to the
bats. The gnomes of the *New English Bible* spoil the poetry
again by explaining smugly that Isaiah meant dung-beetles,
not moles.

King William IV is supposed to have caught his death
of cold from a fall caused by his horse stumbling over a
molehill. Jacobites toasted &ldquo;the little gentleman in black
velvet&rdquo; for toppling the king they regarded as the usurper.

Dr Kenneth Mellanby's book *The Mole* states firmly:
&ldquo;Moles hate their own species,&rdquo; and quotes from W.G.
Lewis (1828): &ldquo;This solitary, mischievous animal appears
adapted to a life of darkness. Although it is doomed to hunt
its prey under ground, and usually denied the cheering light
of the sun, yet no animal appears fatter nor has a more sleek
and glossy skin.&rdquo;

Mole proverbs are generally unflattering and concerned
with short-sightedness, as in *blind as a mole; Argus abroad,
mole at home; king of a molehill;* and *making mountains
out of molehills*.

Leonard Woolfs volume of autobiography entitled
Sowing contains the following mole-lore: &ldquo;Lytton nicknamed
him [E. M. Forster] the Taupe, partly because of his
faint physical resemblance to a mole, but principally
because he seemed intellectually and emotionally to travel
underground and every now and again pop up unexpectedly
with some subtle observation or delicate quip which
somehow or other he had found in the depths of the earth or
of his own soul.&rdquo;

The relevant British Government departments designate
the mole as a pest and even as vermin.

The new metaphor of mole as labyrinthine and secret
&ldquo;sleeper&rdquo; burrowing away inside the Establishment has a
certain seedy glamour for the Brits, who are obsessed with
spy stories. Moles might consider it an improvement on the
previous proverbial and literary image of the mole as merely
a half-blind, worm-snuffling, king-killing, idol-worshiping
ravisher of lawns.

Le Carre himself, the mole-maker, gives a precise date
and definition for the metaphor of mole as spy who builds a
legitimate cover over a period of years by not engaging in
spying activities until he is tapped for an important mission.
The date when mole impinged on the British consciousness
was 1976. Le Carr&eacute;'s definition: &ldquo;A mole is, I think, a genuine
KGB term for somebody who burrows into the fabric of
a bourgeois society and undermines it from within—
somebody of the Philby sort who is recruited at a very
tender age. . . . They're people about whom, at a certain
time, you guess the pattern of their ideological development,
if you're a talent spotter working for the Russian
Secret Service, and you winkle them into a corner and say:
'We appreciate your feelings about this, but just keep very
quiet—sooner or later we will need you and when we do we
will tell you.' &rdquo;

Well said, old mole! Canst work i' the Foreign Office
so fast? What with the British passion for spies and the
other British passion for comfortable old cliches, I am afraid
that Mr. Mole is going to have to resign himself to the
extension of his name.

When people called Howard become snobbish about
their ancient name, which some of the sillier ones do, the
way to take them down a peg is to remind them that their
name is derived from Hog-ward, or pig-keeper. It is not
strictly true, since the Hog in the name was a sheep, but it
generally shuts them up.

As for Messrs Mole, Eliza Cook, the pious poetaster
whose verse appealed strongly to the Victorian middle
classes, shall have the last word:

>There's a mission, no doubt, for the mole in the dust,  
As there is for the charger, with nostrils of pride;  
The sloth and the newt have their places of trust,  
And the agents are needed, for God has supplied.

## Troy Romps—Hector Blanks Creeks on Two-hitter
*Charles N. Faerber, Woodland Hills, California*

In &ldquo;Score-bored&rdquo; [VII, 1] Clair Schulz bemoaned the
lack of variety shown by wire service baseball writers
in describing the manner of a victory or defeat. If variety is
his taste, I would guide him to locally written sports columns
in community newspapers and counsel that there likely
are many sportscasters with a flair for colorful language
in range of his radio. Following this advice, he would be
dazzled and delighted, as I constantly am, to find there is
always a sparkling new way to say, &ldquo;The Phillies beat the
Cubs.&rdquo; And he might pay more attention to football, the
most fertile field for sports metaphor. Mr. Schulz limited his
focus to the transitive verbs that use the winning team as
subject and the losing team as direct object. There are many
other transitive phrases (and some prepositional) that he
failed to list.

*Conquered, vanquished*, and *defeated* have a military
connotation. So do *annihilated, massacred, routed, overran*,
*rolled over, bombed, blitzed, wasted*, and *wiped out* in
reference to one-side victories, and *ambushed, shot down*,
and *bushwacked* (albeit with a western flavor) to unexpected ones.

There are terms equating a thorough defeat to criminal
assault *(bludgeoned, brass-knuckled, pistol-whipped, poleaxed*,
*mauled, victimized*, and, of course, *murdered*—as in
the Brooklyn Dodger fan's exhortation, &ldquo;*Moiduh* duh
bumsl); to a physical beating *(flailed, walloped, throttled*,
*thrashed, cuffed, buffeted, drubbed, dashed, lashed, belted*,
*bashed, savaged, lambasted*, and *whipped up on);* to an
uneven fist fight *(took apart, tore into, socked it to, laid
out*, and *sucker-punched);* to grinding under one's heel
*(trampled, stomped, walked over*, and *ran roughshod over);*
or to just general bullying (*manhandled, overpowered*).

There is a whole genre of destructive terms at the disposal
of the sportswriter, beginning with the ubiquitous *destroyed*
and *demolished*. Some have a Tom-and-Jerry flavor,
as *cracked, crushed, crunched, thumped, dumped, riddled*,
*spattered, splattered, smashed, pulverized*, and *dismantled;*
others, an explosive quality (*blasted, blew apart*).

There are many unexpected sources for terms. Food
preparation: *butchered, shelled, basted, creamed, pureed*,
*cut up, made mincemeat (or hamburger, or hash) of*, and
*cooked the goose of*. Housework and odd jobs: *mopped up
the floor with, cleaned the clock of, swept aside, polished
off, pulled the rug out from under, shellacked, plastered*,
*hammered*, and *trashed*.

Whitewashed might seem to be in the last category, but
it is baseball jargon referring (as far as anyone knows) to the
blank appearance of a scoreboard when a team is held
scoreless. *Goose-egged, skunked, shut out, closed down*,
*zipped*, and *zilched* also indicate no score by a losing team.

There are polite verbs: *bested, mastered, thwarted*,
*dominated, finished off*. Punishing verbs: *spanked*,
*pilloried, scolded*. Verbs indicating a trial by fire *(burned*,
*blistered, scorched, singed)* or by cold *(iced, cooled)*. Construction
site verbs; *bulldozed, buried*. Nautical verbs: *deepsixed*,
*scuttled, swamped, trimmed the sails of*. Barnyard
verbs: *fleeced, cut the tail feathers of*. Weather verbs: *blew
away*. Show biz verbs: *tap danced over*. Math verbs: *solved*.
Verbs to describe the defeat of a front-runner of champion:

*upset, knocked off, toppled, unseated, dethroned*. Verbs to
indicate the loser can barely comprehend his defeat *(jolted*,
*stunned, shocked, dazed)* or that he doesn't want to show
his face *(embarrassed, humiliated)*.

Constructing new verbs by prefixing *out*- offers numberless
additional possibilities, starting with *outplayed, outscored*,
*outpointed, outhustled, outmanned, outclassed*, and
*outlasted*. *Outcoached, outmaneuvered, outfinessed, out*
*foxed* refer to a victory by brains, and *outmuscled, outslugged*,
outhit, *outfought* by brawn. *Outtoughed* and *outquicked*
are gaining popularity among football writers.

Incestuously, verbs may be borrowed from other
sports: boxing *(kayoed);* track and field *(hurdled);* horse racing
*(left at the gate or nosed out);* and swimming *(touched
out)*.

The transitive phrase (&ldquo;Cowboys beat Redskins&rdquo;) is
used most often by the summarizing sportscaster, since it
succinctly imparts both winner and loser. Intransitive
phrases (&ldquo;Cowboys *win, triumph, prevail, emerge victorious*,&rdquo;
et al.) require further explanation and are more
common tools of the sportswriter, who is usually focusing
on one game only, without an overriding need for terseness.

There are innumerable formulaic intransitive expressions.
The phrase &ldquo;Lions roar to 20-3 *victory*,&rdquo; for example,
is one of hundreds of variations on the basic to *a victory* (or
*win)* formula. The Lions could also have *marched to a*,
*stampeded to a, bulled to a, battled to a, stormed to a, exploded
to a*, or *clawed to a victory*, depending on how they
won. An easy win they might have *coasted, cruised*, or
*cakewalked to*. A less than artistic win they might have
*skidded to or backed into*. In the *parlay* formulation, the
Lions might have &ldquo;*parlayed* four fumbles into *a* 20-3 *victory*.&rdquo;
In place of &ldquo;four fumbles,&rdquo; anything that pops into
the sportswriter's head may be substituted.

Jargon (&ldquo;Seaver *no-hits* Giants&rdquo;), puns (&ldquo;Eagles *skin*
Washington&rdquo;), and nicknames (&ldquo;Tide *swamps* Troy&rdquo;-i.e.,
Alabama's Crimson Tide beats Southern Cal's Trojans) offer
limitless possibilities to the enterprising sports journalist.

Headline writers seem to have the most fun. Many, for
instance, become giddy when Atlanta pitcher Tommy Boggs
wins a game: &ldquo;Dodgers Bogg down,&rdquo; &ldquo;Braves Boggle Reds,&rdquo;
etc. Some may have puns burning in their craws for years;
imagine the euphoric release of the head man who learned
of Twin outfielder Bobby Darwin's homerun outburst and
wrote, &ldquo;Darwin goes ape!&rdquo;

Of all the terms used to impart the fact that Team A
beat Team B, my favorite is *romp*. For me, *romp* always
evokes delightfully anachronistic images. &ldquo;Steelers romp&rdquo;—
I picture &ldquo;Mean Joe&rdquo; Greene and a host of black-jerseyed
275-pound defensive tackles skipping about hand-in-hand
like frolicsome schoolgirls. *Romp*, in fact, often inspires me
to surreal silliness: &ldquo;Troy romps&rdquo; (Hector blanks Greeks on
two-hitter?); &ldquo;Tide romps&rdquo; (Oxydol held scoreless?).

## The Exception That Proves the Rule
*Weldon Ellis, Nashville, Tennessee*

In *The Exception That Proves the Rule* [VI, 4], Steve
Coughlan offered an explanation as to why the cliche is so
frequently misinterpreted. According to Coughlan, the
theory first offered by Richard Grant White in 1870 provided
a logical explanation based on the word *exceptio* in
the Latin phrase *exceptio probat regulam*. White's theory
was that the difficulty arose from the mistranslation of the
word *exceptio* to mean 'exception' rather than 'excepting.'

These comments offer to show how, during the 110
years since White offered his theory, the natural evolution
of the English language has further aggravated the situation.
It is my theory that the other two terms, *probat* and
regulam, are also being mistranslated. The divergences in
the meanings are logical, in that Latin is a dead and almost
unchanging language, whereas English is still very much
alive and changing.

There are now two misinterpretations of the phrase
*The exception proves the rule*. One carries the meaning that
'if there is an exception to a rule it does not invalidate the
rule—to the contrary—it establishes the validity of the rule.'
The other meaning is 'unless there is an exception to a rule it
is not valid.' The first is illogical enough, but the latter is
even worse. To many, a concern over the misinterpretations
may seem to be academic nit-picking. On the other hand,
they could have serious consequences.

As a preface to the development of the thesis of possible
&ldquo;serious consequences,&rdquo; I shall first assume that all automobile
manufacturers have a rule that the cars they produce
must be safe and dependable. To assure compliance with
their rule, pre-production new models are exhaustively
tested on proving grounds. Yet, despite their rule and the
&ldquo;exhaustive&rdquo; testing, many thousands of production models
have been recalled to correct various deficiencies. Somehow,
the supposed compliance with the rule and the later
recalls do not seem to be in accord. Surely, there must be
some logical reason for the discrepancies.

According to the &ldquo;Ellis Theory,&rdquo; which supplements
the &ldquo;White Theory,&rdquo; the current misinterpretations and
misuses of the phrase *The exception proves the rule* stem not
only from the initial mistranslation of the word *exceptio* but
also from the gradual changes in the meanings of words that
are descendents of *probat* and *regulam*. The word *probare*
once meant 'to probe or to test to determine the validity or
strength of that being probed.' The word *probe* still retains
the original denotation, but its close relative, *prove*, has
changed in spelling, pronunciation, and meaning. Rather
than to probe or to test,' the accepted meaning of *prove* is
'to find true, correct, or to give sanction,' a very different
meaning.

Regul&amacr;re once meant 'to regulate, to control, or to
rule.' Today *rule* often carries with it the connotation or
meaning of being a generalization. Such a usage is illustrated
when we say, &ldquo;As a rule that is true, but there are exceptions.&rdquo;
Yet, in contrast, we often go to great lengths to
assure the precision of the length and markings on the type
of &ldquo;rule&rdquo; that is used in making measurements. The use of
the human foot to measure even the most mundane product
is no longer tolerated.

So, in addition to the earlier mistranslation of the Latin
word *exceptio* to mean 'exception' rather than 'excepting,'
we now have the other two, *probat* and *regulam*, with
meanings that differ from the original. All of this means
there are three variables in one short sentence. Even mathematicians
have trouble with three variables in one equation.
It is no wonder that the rest of us have trouble with our
language and its wealth of meanings.

Perhaps a more precise translation of *exceptio probat
regulam* might be 'the exception tests the validity of the
rule.' On second thought, perhaps we are better off with
our rather amorphous and often ambiguous language.
While it is true an &ldquo;Automobile Proving Ground&rdquo; could be
called by a more appropriate name, such as &ldquo;Automobile
Testing Ground,&rdquo; and its purpose clarified, there would be
some counterbalancing disadvantages. Such a degree of
specificity might deprive the already beleaguered American
automobile manufacturers of a certain degree of flexibility
regarding defects uncovered during the testing of preproduction
models. They could not say, in good conscience,
that the defect was the exception that proved their rule of
producing only safe and dependable cars.

There could be even more grave consequences of this
specificity. What would happen to our social relationships if
we could no longer look at a baby that was not pretty and
say to its proud mother, &ldquo;My, your baby has a most interesting
face!&rdquo; Think about the drastic rise in unemployment if
all laws were written so clearly and precisely that there
would be little or no need for lawyers and judges to interpret
them. Then, too, what would happen to international
relations if diplomats could no longer speak in ambiguous
terms? The only alternatives might be either to return to
isolationism and sulk in private or to resort to nuclear warfare
and suffer in public.

Yes, after thinking it over, I have decided that, as a
rule, we are better off as we are. There are, of course, exceptions
to that rule.

## Street Names Fun Game
*Axel Hornos, Pittsford, New York*

Going over city streets' names brings many surprises.
Take Rochester, N.Y. There are *Daxota, Joiner, Le Frois*,
*Rugraff* streets, *Hecia Alley* and *Bob Rich Drive*. There is
*Circle* street, which runs in a perfectly straight line. One
wonders what these names stand for: a loving if misplaced
tribute? a posthumous memorial? an outburst of unbridled
fancy? revolt against stifling conformity? *(Emanon*
street-'No name' in reverse-may be an example of the
latter.)

But I found that *Presque* Street was the most baffling
of the lot. *Presque* means 'almost' in French, yet almost a
street *Presque* street certainly is not. With wide sidewalks, a
smooth pavement and regulation lights, it is flanked by duly
numbered homes and a public school. In short, it is an
honest-to-goodness, 100 per cent city thoroughfare.

Why, then, the demeaning qualifier? Did the person
who named the street have a secret grudge against it—perhaps
his mother-in-law made her home there—and vented
his spleen in this fashion? Was he one of those individuals
who believe in the relativity of all things, full-blown streets
included? Or did he want to show his superior (?) knowledge
of French and picked the wrong word?

I submitted my quandary to a local newspaper, hoping
for illumination. It came in the shape of several letters and
phone calls, all unanimous in their reply: *Presque* Street,
pronounced &ldquo;Presscue&rdquo; by the locals, was thus named by
one of the street's first residents after *Presque Isle* County in
Michigan, which had just been visited by him, captivating
him by its beauty. Like millions of other Americans, he assumed
that *Presque* was the name of an island, when in fact
it is just part of the word presqu&icirc;caple (literally, 'almost an
island'), French for 'peninsula.'

## Additional &ldquo;Odd Couples&rdquo;
*Elton F. Henley, Tampa, Florida*

Eric Winters [VII, 1] supplied a useful list of Latin derived
English words with their Greek equivalents. For example,
the Latin-derived *circumlocution* has two roots: *circum*
'around' and *locut*- (from *loquor)* 'to speak.' The roots
of the Greek-derived *periphrasis* (be careful of its pronunciation),
*peri* and *phras*, are translated identically.

At the end of Mr. Winters's note is an invitation for
readers to supplement his good listing of words based upon
corresponding Latin and Greek roots. Here are my suggestions.
(I translate the equivalent roots within quotation
marks.

Words Containing Two Basic Roots  
(Latin-derived words appear first.)

>*atrabilious*    —    *melancholic*  —  'black/bile'  
*benediction*     —   *euphemism*   —   'well, good/speak'  
*circumambulatory*  — *peripatetic* —   'around/walk'  
*circumcision*  —     *peritomy*   —    'around/cut'  
*circumference*  —    *periphery*   —   'around/bear'  
*circumspect*     —   *periscopic*   —  'around/look'  
*collaboration* —     *synergism* —     'together/work'  
*compassion*     —    *sympathy*   —    'together/feel'  
*component*       —   *synthesis*   —   'together/place, put'  
*concurrence*      —  *syndrome*     —  'together/run'  
*conductor*         — *synagogue* —     'together/lead'  
*consonance*    —     *symphony*   —    'together/sound'  
*contemporaneous* —   *synchronous* —   'together/time'  
*duplex*    —         *diplomat*     —  'two, twice/fold'  
*election*   —        *eclecticism* —   'out of/choose'  
*illegal*     —       *anomalous* —     'not/law'  
*imposition*   —      *epithet*    —    'upon/place, put'  
*inscription*   —     *epigraph*    —   'on, upon/write'  
*manufacturer*   —    *chiropractor* —  'hand/do'  
*omniscient*      —   *pansophic*  —    'all/wise'  
*precursor*        —  *prodrome*    —   'before/run'  
*preface*    —        *prolegomenon*, *prologue* —  'before/speak'  
*prescience*  —       *prognosis*  —    'before/know'  
*recantation*  —      *palinode*    —   'again/sing, song'  
*recurrence*    —     *palindrome*   —  'again/run'  
*superjacent*    —    *hyperbolic*  —   'above/throw'  
*supernatural*    —   *metaphysical* —  'beyond/nature'  

Words Containing One Basic Root

>*canine*  —    *cynic*   —     'dog'  
*febrile*  —   *pyretic*   —   'fever'  
*lingual*   —  *glossal*    —  'tongue'  
*peculiar*  —  *idiotic*   —   'one's own, private'  
*popular*   —  *demotic*   —   'people'  
*position*  —  *thesis*    —   'place, put'  
*rabies*    —  *mania*     —   'madness'  
*regal*    —   *basilic*   —   'king'  
*risible*  —   *gelastic*  —   'laugh'  
*scientism* —  *gnosticism* —  'know'  
*stellar*   —  *astral*   —    'star'  
*terrene*   —  *chthonic*  —   'earth'  
*testis*    —  *orchid*    —   'testis'  

NOTE: Permit me to correct some of Mr. Winters's examples.
In the pairing *aversion-antipathy*, the Latin prefix
a(b)- &ldquo;away from&rdquo;; the Greek prefix *anti* 'against'; the Latin
equivalent to *anti*- is *contra*-. The Latin verbal root -*vers-'to
turn*'; the Greek verbal root -*path*- 'to feel.' In the pairing
*projection-hyperbole*, the verbs are equivalent, but the
prefixes have no relationship: the latin *pro*- 'in favor of.'
and the Greek *hyper*- 'over,' or 'above.' Finally, the prefixes
in *resolution and analysis* are unrelated.

## Ormonyms/Junctures 
*Brian Dibble, Western Australia Institute of Technology*

Ormly Gumfudgin writes of &ldquo;Ormonyms&rdquo; [IV, I],
which, he says, Laurence Urdang claims are &ldquo;junctures.&rdquo;
Whatever the correct term, Gumfudgin means &ldquo;that they
read differently but sound the same.&rdquo; On reading the article
in Australia, I was immediately reminded of our own well
known book *Let Stalk Strine: A Lexicon of Strine Usage*, by
Afferbeck Lauder. There are two possible junctures there:
&ldquo;Let's talk Strine&rdquo; (i.e., Australian English), by &ldquo;Alphabetical Order.&rdquo;

Since then I have come up with an example of my
own, which may interest, amuse, and/or edify readers of
VERBATIM. It is a French sentence, phonemically represented
as follows: &sol;ilav&emacr;kylot&sol;.

Though French is theoretically a non-accentual
language with respect to polysyllabic words, phraseal
rhythms nonetheless are superimposed. The sentence represented
above could be read in a rather straightforward
way*: &sol;2&igrave;l a 3v&#92;?&#92; &plus; 3ky l&oacute;t1 &darr; &sol; = *Il a vingt culottes* 'He has
twenty pairs of pants.' With different accenting it can be
made to read: &sol;2&igrave;l a v&#92;?&#92; 3ky &plus; 3l&oacute;t1 &darr; &sol; = I*l a vaincu Lotte*
'He has conquered Lot.' A slight variation on this would be:
&sol;2&igrave;l1 a v&#92;?&#92;3ky &plus; 1l&oacute;t1 &rarr; &sol; = *Il a vaincu, Lotte* = 'He (Lot) has
conquered.' There is, alas, still a fourth possibility: &sol;2&igrave;l a 3v&#92;?&#92;
&plus; 3ky &plus; 1l&oacute;t1' &rarr; = *Il a vingt culs, Lotte*, which I won't
translate, for it is obscene, but will gloss by saying that it
perhaps accounts for why, in the various versions, a man
has twenty pairs of pants or Lot loses or wins!

Mr. Gumfudgin says: &ldquo;Maybe what I'm doing is taking
junctures and making a sentence with them and that's what
an ormonym really is. Anyway, it's fun and maybe serves to
crack a smile here and there; if so, it's worth it.&rdquo; I am
reminded of James Joyce's response to the charge that in
*Finnegans Wake* he was trivial. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he responded. &ldquo;And
sometimes I am quadrivial.&rdquo; So, to go beyond Joyce, I'll
add a fifth example: *Il l'a vaincu, Lotte* = &sol;2&igrave;l &plus; la v&#92;?&#92;3ky
&plus; 1l&oacute;t1 &rarr;&sol; 'He (Lot) has conquered it.'

I have no idea if what I've put forward are ormonyms
or junctures. But, whatever they are, I hope that, with
these five examples, I have conquered them. By the way,
*jointure in* French is feminine. I still wonder what Ormly
is!

[I am indebted to my friend and colleague Dr. G.K.
deHeer, Head of WAIT'S Department of Asian Studies,
for the phonemic transcriptions and the fifth example I
give. He says, &ldquo;Since accent, at least primary accent,
coincides with juncture, it is really redundant to mark
both and &plus; .&rdquo; I do so for emphasis. Assume the existence
of a primary accent '., a secondary accent ', and a
weak or nonaccent.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The fact that no consumer advocate has yet strode
forth to defend and protect the interests of those who can
afford a $30,000 coupe is probably not the least bit surprising.&rdquo;
[From an advertisement for BMW in *The New Yorker*,
March 24, 1980.  Submitted by D. L. Emblen, Santa Rosa,
California.  *It is surprising, though, that no advocate of
proper English has stridden forth to replace that
copywriter*.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Language-The Loaded Weapon*](https://www.routledge.com/Language---The-Loaded-Weapon-The-Use-and-Abuse-of-Language-Today/Bolinger/p/book/9780582291089)
Dwight Bolinger, (Longman), ix + 214pp.

As all linguists and too few nonlinguists know, Dwight
Bolinger, Emeritus Professor of Romance Languages and
Literatures at Harvard, is one of the most important
scholars in his field. Unfortunately, the further establishment
of his reputation among nonlinguists will be seriously
hampered by the publisher's determination to make this
excellent book available to too few people by pricing it at
an unforgiving (and unforgivable) level. That is too bad, for
there are not many scholars of Bolinger's repute who are
capable of writing comprehensible English, and his writing
can be compared with that of Otto Jespersen, whom I have
always considered the Santayana of linguistics. Unless one
has read a great deal in philosophy and in linguistics, that
metaphor is meaningless: suffice it to say that when as good
and clear a writer as Bolinger writes a book on as important
a subject as modern English usage and misusage, it ought to
be made available to as wide, not as narrow an audience as
possible.

Well, I have my copy, for which I am grateful.

There have been many articles and an increasing number
of books published dealing with &ldquo;The Use and Abuse of
squibs in VERBATIM and the bottom-of-the-page quotations
in *The New Yorker* call attention to instances of distortion
by poking fun at them. (*The New Yorker* caught me
nodding on one occasion.) But very little cogent analysis of
the problem has appeared in print, and certainly nothing
that I know of written by a linguist of Bolinger's stature. In
*Language—The Loaded Weapon,* Bolinger describes the
more insidious byways of propaganda, from mystery ingredients
(*irium, hexylresorcinol*) to the couching of simple
ideas in recondite jargon in order to give them the patina of
harmlessness or of great importance.

As Bolinger points out, &ldquo;The most consistent feature of
jargon is SEMANTIC. It is elevated, ameliorative, euphemistic
in the most general sense. It tries to improve appearances,
both in what the message is about and in the message
itself.&rdquo; [p. 132] It also serves another purpose, namely, to
create an impression in the mind of the listener or reader
that its creator knows far more than he does. Jargon is an
essential ingredient in disciplines like sociology and
psychology: practitioners trade jingling jargon with one
another as a matter of course, and at certain levels in certain
circles proficiency at using the latest shibboleths
commands respect. If you can give something a complicated
sounding name, even if the concept is absurdly
simple, you are an accepted member of the club. Professionalism
seems to be measured more often by the ability to talk
about a problem than by the ability to solve it—provided
that the proper code language is used.

Bolinger describes the affliction in detail and analyzes
the lexical and grammatical techniques used to create noun
compounds; VERBATIM comes in for occasional mention,
especially in the bibliographical citation of Bruce Price's
article, &ldquo;Noun Overuse Phenomenon Article&rdquo; [11,4].

For the penultimate chapter, &ldquo;School for Shamans,&rdquo;
the author reserves his comments about the various levels at
which language is criticized, from the self-styled purists,
who appear on national television shows to voice their contempt
for the language used by almost anyone under 30 and
for the 3rd Edition of the *Merriam Unabridged,* to the &ldquo;permissive&rdquo;
linguists, who evade all responsibility when they
insist that the proper function of a &ldquo;scientist&rdquo; is to describe
the way the language is used, not interfere with its use or
usage. To them I would say that their description is incomplete
because they avoid describing an essential fact about
language, namely, the attitudes of its speakers toward it.

The best illustration of Bolinger's approach is this
passage from the beginning of his chapter, &ldquo;Guns don't kill
people, people kill people&rdquo;:

The folkloric title of this chapter is the standard argument of the gun
lobby in the United States against efforts to restrict the possession of
firearms. Other interests and occupations have their own versions.
There used to be a saying about the automobile: 'It isn't the nut on the
wheel but the nut behind the wheel' - speaking of responsibility for the
annual slaughter in automobile accidents, now running close to fifty
thousand lives a year in the United States alone. A spokesman for the
Coors Brewing Company tells us that it is not beer cans but people that
are responsible for littering parks. Some careless groundskeeper must
have said at some time or other, 'It wasn't the hole on the course that
broke your leg, it was your stepping into it.' As it would be convenient
for governments anxious about their food supplies to say. 'Food doesn't
nourish people, eating does.'


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;FLAMING TOILET SEAT CAUSES EVACUATION AT HIGH
SCHOOL&rdquo; [From *The Philadelphia Bulletin*, December 15,
1980.  Submitted by Oliver G. Ludwig, Villanova University].

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: 

### [*The Book Of Surnames*](https://www.biblio.com/book/book-surnames-origins-oddities-popular-names/d/814893383) and [*The Origin Of English Surnames*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/the-origin-of-english-surnames/author/reaney-p-h/used/)
Peter Verstappen, (Pelham Books, London, 1980), and P.H. Reaney, (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980).

The first of these two books on surnames was written
by a journalist, the second by an academic philologist, and
the difference between them can therefore be imagined.
Peter Verstappen is an American publishing executive now
resident in Britain. His approach to surnames begins statistically,
for he chooses to deal with the seventy-six commonest
names in Britain. These are shared by some fourteen
million people in Britain alone, all of them potential buyers
of the book because it deals with *their names*.

I'm sure that's how it seemed to the author when he
first had the idea for this book, but unfortunately things
aren't that simple. People certainly are interested in surnames,
usually their own or ones they have come across
while researching their family history, but the surnames
that interest most are invariably unusual ones. As Secretary
of the Names Society, I receive letters every day from people
all over the English-speaking world asking about the origins
of particular names, but never those names which appear in
Peter Verstappen's book. The Smiths and the Joneses, the
Jacksons and Johnsons feel little pride in their names, it
seems, perhaps because they know they share them with so
many others. The various companies who supply so-called
coats of arms which can be displayed on fancy plaques in
the hallway will confirm this fact. They are more likely to
do their business with the Verstappens of this world than
those with more usual family names.

One question that might be asked, then, is whether this
Book of *Surnames,* which contains the meaning of each
name, together with a miscellany of facts and figures,
would make the bearers of the names concerned proud
enough to buy a book which mentions their name. What
would they get for their money? A *Jackson,* for example,
would learn that a *Jagger* and *Jakes* were amongst those
related to him etymologically (his etymological cousins once
removed, as it were). He would be told that his nominal
ancestor was 'son of Jack,' but would be left to decide for
himself whether *Jack* derived in its turn from *John* (via *Jan,
Jankin, Jackin*) or was an Anglicization of *Jacques,* which
goes back to Latin *Jacomus,* our *James*. (The pure
etymologist, such as E.W.B. Nicholson, who wrote a
treatise about the derivation of *Jack* in 1892, would insist on
the *John* explanation. But it seems clear that in former times
ordinary Englishmen, noting that *Jacques* was the commonest
French name, must have equated it with our commonest
name, *John*.)

Various famous *Jacksons* are mentioned, together with
statistics about families and places bearing the name in
different parts of the world. The article on this name then
informs us that it was President Andrew Jackson who originated
the ubiquitous American slang expression 'O.K.' by
abbreviating his illiterate &ldquo;Oil Korrect,&rdquo; a subject not
unknown to readers of VERBATIM.

The *Book of Surnames* is typical of books about names
written by authors who, in true journalistic fashion, pass
from one subject to another in rapid succession. It is no better
or worse than any similar book. It says rather little
about its professed topic, but will presumably satisfy those
who have a superficial interest in surnames.

The late Dr. Reaney (who always maintained, a la
Ronald Reagan, that his name should correctly be pronounced
&ldquo;rainy&rdquo;) had studied his subject extensively at
source, and his works—he also compiled *A Dictionary of
British Surnames*—remain by far the most authoritative
statements in print on the origins of English surnames. It
was the Normans who introduced the idea of hereditary
family names to the English, but it took a century or so for
names to become truly fixed. Until roughly 1400 a man was
likely to have a *by-name,* a last name that described *him*
but which his descendants might change. Thus, the son of
*Jack* who became *Jackson* might have a son who was a
*Smith* and a grandson who was *Large* (because he was
generous). By 1400, most of the names had become the
identifying labels we bear today, though naturally the
modern forms of our names often bear little resemblance to
their medieval forms. In the intervening centuries, most
names were rarely written down, and those who wrote
them used their own orthographic systems. Those American
surnames imported from a wide variety of non-English-speaking
countries also underwent fairly brutal changes
when they were brought into line with Anglo-Saxon
linguistic conventions. The modern forms of surnames need
not, therefore, be taken very seriously, though the spelling
they chanced to have when they became fossilized is often
thought, in this highly literate age, to be very important by
the name-bearers.

By origin, surnames are transferred placenames, describe
occupations, or are link names of the *Jackson, Nixon*
type. They can be descriptive nicknames, pleasant or unpleasant,
and, indeed, those people who think they have
rather unfortunate names probably have little to complain
about compared to their ancestors. As Dr. Reaney rightly
remarks:

>The language of the time [the Middle Ages] was
much less inhibited than that of today and much that
we regard as indecent or obscene was to them
normal and natural. In an age where sanitation was
nonexistent, the normal functions of the body and
its various parts were referred to openly and without
shame by their ordinary everyday terms. . . .

This is why an innocent looking name such as Orcas reveals
itself to be from Old French *Oriescuilz,* Latin *aurei
testiculi*. It also occurs in the form borne by a fourteenth-century
Englishman, Roger Gildynballokes.

For that matter, that most illustrious of surnames,
*Shakespeare,* is likely to conceal a bawdy reference. There is
little doubt that the Richard Wagetail whose name was
recorded in 1187 was either known for his sexual prowess
himself or was descended from such an ancestor. The names
*Waghorn, Wagstaffe,* and *Wagpole* probably had the same
meaning, and from there to *Shakestaff* and *Shakespeare* is
but a short step. The more blatantly crude nicknames that
were at one time fastened on unwilling bearers have long
been quietly allowed to fall by the wayside. It is now only
researchers into medieval documents, rather than the
modern readers of telephone directories, who come across
such unfortunates as *John Fillecunt, Richard Scittebagge,
Roger Louestycke,* and *Bede Wydecunthe*.

Dr. Reaney pauses at each name (not just the bawdy
ones) to say in which document he discovered it, so that
other researchers can check for themselves. Such scrupulousness
makes for a densely packed page of print, through
which there runs an economically written narrative of fact
piled upon fact. *The Origin of English Surnames* is not a
light bedside reader, but it is a book which I and many
others have gratefully turned to for reference purposes during
the last ten years. It is now available as a paperback,
and can be recommended most heartily to those who appreciate
scholarship of the highest order.  Leslie A. Dunkling
Thames Ditton, Surrey

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Legal Thesaurus*](https://www.ebay.com/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_trksid=p2047675.m570.l1313&_nkw=Legal+Thesaurus+William+C.+Burton+1980&_sacat=0)
William C. Burton, (Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1980), xii + 1058pp. 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

In his Introduction, the author of this book explains
that it was born of a need for a Roget-type work geared
specifically to the needs of lawyers. To nonlawyers, it may
be comforting to learn that a very large percentage of the
words listed here are common in ordinary English. Thus,
one finds (in the index, which occupies fully half the book)
words like *borrow* 'adopt, copy' and phrases like *get temporary
use* of 'borrow.' Looking under *borrow* in the main
part of the book, we find

>'accept the loan of, apply for a loan, ask for
credit, get on credit, get temporary use of, *mutuari,*
obtain a mortgage, obtain the use of, take an
advance, take on credit, take on loan' ASSOCIATED
CONCEPTS: 'borrowed capital, borrowed employees,
borrowed servant, borrowing statute' FOREIGN
PHRASES: '*In satisfactionibus non permittur amplius fieri
quam semel factum est*. In settlements more must not
be received than was received once for all.'

Leaving aside the Latin phrase and its cryptic translation,
it can be seen that the usefulness of the book lies not so
much in the near-synonyms it provides as in its resource as a
promptory: too often synonym dictionaries dwell on oneword
equivalents that may or may not be substituted for the
word looked up, depending on the context; the *Legal
Thesaurus* provides a great deal of collateral material-that
is, not only words but phrases and ASSOCIATED CONCEPTS
that enable the user to paraphrase his text to accommodate
the *ideas* he is trying to express rather than to follow
slavishly a pattern of synonymies that may not yield suitable
results.

As David Mellinkoff wrote in *The Language of the
Law* [Little, Brown, 1963], &ldquo;The law is a profession of
words. . . . [The] main objectives suffer when the principal
tool of the whole process is neglected. ... To be of any use,
the language of the law (as any other language) must not
only express but convey thought.&rdquo; Mellinkoff's book, which
is a gem of thoughtful analysis and should be read, studied,
and referred to by any lawyer who does any writing at all,
treats in some detail a number of common terms of law,
such as *civil death, heir, last will and testament,* and the
ubiquitous *whereas*. On this last, the *Legal Thesaurus* is
remarkably silent; of the others, only *heir* is listed. That is
not necessarily a shortcoming, but one would have expected
Burton to have had *The Language of the Law* at hand in
his editing of the *Thesaurus*.

As one who has always considered the redundancies
and cliches of legal language as essential to the avoidance of
ambiguity, I find the very publication of the *Thesaurus*
refreshing: perhaps we shall soon be seeing legal documents
written in less boring and better English. Now that consumer
law demands clarity and down-to-earth language
where obfuscating legalese earlier prevailed, the *Legal
Thesaurus* should find many users among those who prepare
loan agreements, warranties, insurance policies, leases, bills
of sale, and other legal agreements that must be made
understandable to the general public. It seems unlikely that
this book would serve solicitors and barristers in England
without entries like *gazump, ancient lights,* and other legal
terms that, as far as I know, are peculiar to British usage.
Notwithstanding, the *Thesaurus* should go a long way toward
explaining, in a rather subtle way for English lawyers,
the language of American law.

[L.U.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Compleat Cruciverbalist Or How To Solve And Compose Crossword Puzzles For Fun And Profit*](https://www.amazon.com/Compleat-Cruciverbalist-Compose-Crossword-Puzzles/dp/0442257384) and [*Crossword Puzzle Compendium*](https://www.amazon.com/Crossword-puzzle-compendium-Norton-Bramesco/dp/0517294656)
Stan Kurzban and Mel Rosen, foreword by Will Weng, (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1980), xvi + 167pp. and The editors of Consumer Guide, (Publications International, Ltd., Publisher Skokie, IL 1980), contributing authors: Norton J. Bramesco, and Jordan Lasher, 192pp.

Because there were no crossword instruction books like
*The Compleat Cruciverbalist* and *The Crossword Puzzle
Compendium* before, aspiring puzzlemakers had two paths
to follow. One was to inhale the know-how and technique
by osmosis, as most of the better-known constructors did,
and the other was to appeal to an established crossword expert
for help. Up to now, there has been very little written
for rising crossword constructors. I wrote a brief article for
*Writer's Digest* in 1959 (October issue) telling how to make
crossword puzzles. An occasional subsidy-press book has appeared
on the subject. None of this is readily available. In
1980, as luck would have it, two books appeared, both
covering the same ground and performing the identical service:
explaining how to solve crosswords and imparting the
secrets of crossword puzzle construction.

They are of approximately equal value, as both are sensibly
written, without difficult language, and give detailed
information on the use of word structure in making words
lie down amicably together to form a crossword puzzle. On
the point of language, the *Compendium* is a shade more
down to earth and thus more understandable, but if you are
a word person already, this difference won't matter. And I
believe only a word person is motivated to become a constructor.
Both books have similar items of puzzle lore and
amusing tales of crosswording; in this area the *Compendium*
has more and better material. For detailed instruction
and painstaking care in guiding you step by step through
your first attempt at making a crossword, on the other
hand, the *Cruciverbalist* is better, and that's the main idea
of it all, anyway. Both books have a section on marketing
your product; again, the *Cruciverbalist* is more complete.

The word compleat should be considered poetic license.
I can think of at least two popular puzzle variations
overlooked by the *Cruciverbalist,* and others, like skeleton
puzzles, that are merely mentioned. One omitted form
widely used now is the word-hunt or word-find crossword,
an unlined layout of letters in which words or names are
traced in some continuous or broken line, most often continuous.
*People* magazine's Cerard Mosler does this type,
with famous names to be found in the maze of words. Entire
magazines are also devoted to this game, which requires
no thinking, just good vision, and appeals to semiliterates.
The other one overlooked is the multiple-answer crossword,
which showed up in this country some years ago as the &ldquo;Little
Fooler&rdquo; in the *New York Daily News,* having been
invented by the British, probably in the 1930s. Because winning
it was about a one-in-a-million shot, it was ideally
suited for large-circulation newspaper and magazine contests.
It even spread to India and Australia and in fact
wherever English was printed. The reason it was almost impossible
to win was that every clue gave the solver a choice
between two or even three obvious answers, each arbitrary
and capable of being defended. Thus, when 20 or more
such choices had to be made, it would take over 2 million
different puzzle solutions to cover all the possibilities. In
fact, I recall seeing the same clue used at different times,
with different words given as the correct answer. Enough
about compleatness.

Where the *Compendium* shines is in its lore of puzzles
and the personalities of constructors and editors. This far
outstrips the *Cruciverbalist's* treatment of the subject, which
includes only the three *New York Times* crossword editors
(Margaret Farrar, Will Weng, and Eugene T. Maleska),
Elizabeth Kingsley, creator of Double-Crostics, E. Powys
Mathers (Torquemada of British puzzledom), and Lewis
Carroll, who didn't make crosswords but did make word
puzzles. However, the *Compendium* handsomely makes up
for this, listing the &ldquo;best&rdquo; constructors alphabetically: Hume
Craft, Herbert Ettenson, Anne Fox, Frances Hansen, Henry
Hook, Maura Jacobson, Joseph La Fauci, Jordan Lasher,
William Lutwiniak, Jack Luzzatto, Alfio Micci, Tap
Osborn, Herb Risteen, A. J. Santora, and Mel Taub. Pagelong
biographies accompany each listing, with an outstanding
example of each constructor's crossword performance to
challenge the reader. To give you the chance to learn by
osmosis, there are some twenty crosswords by Jordan
Lasher, who specializes in white space and cerebral exercise,
including his &ldquo;world's most difficult&rdquo; contest crossword,
a *rompecabeza* if there ever was one. This all makes
the *Compendium* a marvelous buy.

The *Cruciverbalist* points out that the *Random House
Unabridged Dictionary* has handy French, Spanish, Italian,
and German vocabularies in the back of the book. They do
warn you to use foreign words with discretion, but my own
feeling is that, if foreign words crop up in general reading
with some frequency or our good dictionaries give them entry
space, then we can use them. One example of using
foreign words indiscreetly is on my desk right now. Clue:
*Prostitute* (German) Answer: HURE.

A few quibbles: because it is a book written and proof-read
by two puzzle experts, I'll point out two typographical
errors in the *Cruciverbalist*—a remarkably good percentage.
On page 49 is the spelling ALLOTED; on page 157 is
PRIMATIVE. Furthermore, the authors are responsible for
repeatedly spelling *Ximenes* XIMINES. Ximenes is the name
assumed by the cryptic crossword expert of England, D. S.
MacNutt, called Derrick Macnutt (a further error?) in the
*Cruciverbalist*. MacNutt borrowed the name of Jimenez
(variant, Ximenes) de Cisneros, Spanish prelate and Queen
Isabella's confessor and the Inquisitor General of Castile
and Leon, when he succeeded &ldquo;Torquemada,&rdquo; the original
cryptic crossworder of *The Observer*. Their choices of pseudonyms
indicates the diabolical difficulty of their puzzles.
The *Cruciverbalist* says Ted Shane, Albert Morehead, and
Jack Luzzatto were pioneer constructors of &ldquo;crazy crosswords.&rdquo;
Albert Morehead was not a constructor; he introduced
British-style clues to Americans in 1941 [IV, 3].
Charles Erienkotter, now deceased, and I were his constructors.
Ted Shane was employed by *Judge* magazine, for
which I made both cartoons and &ldquo;cockeyed&rdquo; crosswords in
the 1930s. The *Cruciverbalist* says that Frank Lewis, *The
Nation's puzzlemaker,* beat out another aspirant for that
job. True: I was the other aspirant. He received more
reader votes than I did after readers did six each of our
respective cryptics.

*[Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;VIOLATIONS WILL BE ENFORCED.&rdquo; [from the list of rules
posted at the swimming pool in Eldorado at Santa Fe, New
Mexico.  Submitted by Reginald E. Dunstan of that city.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary Of Visual Language*](https://www.biblio.com/book/dictionary-visual-language-philip-thompson-peter/d/1405801530)
Philip Thompson and Peter Davenport, foreword by George Lois, (Bergstrom and Boyle Books Limited), vii + 258pp. + 5 unnumbered pages of Index and Credits.

For several years a quarterly periodical called VISIBLE
LANGUAGE has been published by Merald Wrolstadt, curator
of the Cleveland Museum of Art. As a linguist with more
than a passing interest in art—especially graphic design—I
have long been fascinated by the subject of visible/visual
language and take this opportunity to commend that publication
to the readers of VERBATIM.[^a1] 
VISIBLE LANGUAGE covers many aspects of the subject, ranging from the more
or less popular and conventional to the experimental and
bizarre. As the authors of *The Dictionary of Visual
Language* are quick to point out, their book deals for the
most part with the popular and conventional, emphasizing
the visual cliche. However, in the nearly 2000 illustrations
(for about 1200 entries), I found many that are too subtle
for ready identification and was grateful for the explanatory
captions.

Consideration of the symbology of language and, indeed,
of visual symbolism received scant attention from
linguists until relatively recently; under the active, scholarly
persistence of Professor Thomas Sebeok of Indiana University
and others, the subject of semiotics has become a topic
for serious study by those who believe that language creates
its own symbology and psychological effects quite apart
from its employment as a medium for a message. In other
words, Marshall McLuhan's &ldquo;the medium is the message&rdquo;
has acquired status. I cannot agree that the medium is the
message; but it would be foolish to deny that it affects the
message to a great extent, in that it *affects* the recipient(s) of
the message.

Although, as a casual examination of it may indicate,
this book seems superficially to deal with pictures, it deals
also with the symbology of words and with the rather odd,
relatively modern phenomenon of the symbolic effect of
words printed in various typographic styles. I often find
that such treatments carry with them such an overburden of
cliche as to make them corny. However, as the authors
point out, it is their very nature as cliches that makes them
meaningful. The trouble with many cliches is that they are
often neither cross-cultural nor cross-linguistic. For example,
the use by the Milk Board in Britain of the word *pinta*
is symbolic to residents but not readily meaningful to
visitors from, say, America, where milk is usually sold in
quarts, not pints, to whom *pinta* may look more like a
female *pinto* (horse) than a &ldquo;pint o' milk.&rdquo;

Certain typographic symbols appear often in advertising
and other forms of promotion (e.g., trademarks). For
example, the British firm *Balding* &plus; *Mansell* uses a plus
sign in place of an ampersand (or the word *and*) in its name
(as on letterheads), but a telephone call revealed that the
company refers to itself as &ldquo;Balding *and* Mansell.&rdquo; On the
other hand, when the Scottish publishers, William Collins
Sons &amp; Co., Ltd., bought the World Publishing Company,
an American firm, it represented the new company as *Collins* &plus; *World,*
but in this case the name was read as &ldquo;*Collins* 
&plus; *World*&rdquo; and so mentioned, as they say, in
dispatches.

At the more pictorial level, one can find the *Mona Lisa*
with a mustache and with the faces of numerous (readily
recognizable) people inserted. President Lyndon B. Johnson
among them. Likewise, Botticelli's *Birth of Venus* (often
referred to as &ldquo;Venus on the Half-shell&rdquo;), has seen Jane
Fonda's head in place of Venus's, Venus wearing a bathing
costume, and many other variations. These seem to me to
be more in the order of cartoons than symbology, but then I
suppose that certain kinds of cartoons are themselves a form
of semiotics. For example, Escher's drawings may be looked
upon by some as humorous cartoons or, on a different
plane, as ironic philosophical comments. I refer, in particular,
to his hands drawing each other, his monks marching
along the walls of the cloister, his waterfalls flowing
downhill in an ever-rising context. These are spoofs of art:
they satirize the techniques of perspective.

I have always admired good poster art and have long
wondered why European poster art has consistently, on the
whole, been better than that produced in America. Does it
have something to do with literacy? In earlier times in
America, poster art flourished; except for certain companies'
promotion (e.g., Wrigley's posters by Shepard), the art has
languished in America. Perhaps Americans lack the kiosks
where posters normally appear in France and elsewhere in
Europe. The board walls of construction sites in America
usually carry only the message *Post No Bills* unless the client
for whom the building is being built chooses to advertise
itself.

Most of *Visual Language* concerns itself with advertising.
What I found especially interesting were the headwords
selected by the authors: after all, the book is a series of
entries in alphabetical order, each with one or more illustrations.
How does one decide that art for a record sleeve in
which the key word is *Eroica,* made by cutting out each of
the letters from magazines, should be called *Blackmail Lettering?*
I cannot think of a better heading, but I am unsure
of how one using this book can refer to it: alphabetical
order is a retrieval system for those who know the words
they are looking up; it is only rarely conceptual. I have no
idea where I might have looked for *Blackmail Lettering*
since I cannot imagine having thought up such a headword.
(I &ldquo;lost&rdquo; the entry showing Jane Fonda's face stuck over that
of Venus and looked for it under *Botticelli* and *Venus,*
without success; I found it again under *Art*.)

As example of what I should consider symbols that are
too subtle (I daren't say &ldquo;too subtle for words&rdquo;), are a trademark
for batteries, &ldquo;Pb&rdquo; (the chemical symbol for lead), and
a darkened window on a jacket for a book on the subject of
bereavement. Some of these are surrealistic, to be sure, and
one can understand them merely as attention-getting
devices. But a symbol, it seems to me, ought to be almost
universally symbolic of the same thing (at least within a
culture), and I doubt that the chemical symbol for lead and
a darkened window carry the same impressions to all who
view them.

These are merely quibbles. The book stands as an extremely
interesting and useful commentary on symbolism in
communication, though one must read through it and cannot
use it as a reference book for looking things up till after
it has been studied. A few minor slips (fan dancers are more
closely associated with American burlesque than with
vaudeville, and I wonder how &ldquo;deeply rooted in the
American psyche&rdquo; is the image of *Ice Tongs* any longer) do
not mar the value of this book, which emerges as a major
work on the subject of visual metaphor.

***

[^a1]: 'Visible Language. Merald E. Wrolstad, Ph.D., Editor and
Publisher, P.O. Box 1972VB, Cleveland, Ohio 44106.
$15.00/yr. (Foreign subscribers add $1.00 for postage.)

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Second Barnhart Dictionary Of New English*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Second-Barnhart-Dictionary-New-English-Clarence/7431664950/bd)
Clarence L. Barnhart, Sol Steinmetz, and Robert K. Barnhart, (Barnhart/Harper &amp; Row, 1980), xv + 520pp. 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

There can be little doubt among those who know his
work, which has spanned some 40 years—the most important
period in the development of modern lexicography—
that Clarence L. Barnhart is one of the most important lexicographers
in the field of English language. Unless I am
mistaken, it was entirely through his persistent efforts that
Scott, Foresman, whose dictionaries he compiled and edited
along with Edward L. Thorndike, became the first American
dictionary publisher to employ the schwa (that is, the
inverted *e* used in pronunciation respellings as the symbol
for an &ldquo;indeterminate&rdquo; vowel sound, like the *a* in *alone,* the
*e* in *flutter,* the *i* in *handily,* the *o* in scallop, and the *u* in
*cup*). The schwa, named for a point mark that indicates a
missing vowel sound in written Hebrew, had been adopted
for this purpose by the Association Phonetique Internationale
in the development of the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA); but publishers, who are slow to change,
lest they alienate book-buyers, were reluctant to use IPA
and its symbols, because they looked unfamiliar. Publishers
of popular dictionaries (in particular) seemed to prefer what
I call the Moo Goo Gai Pan brand of respelling (to which I
sometimes refer as the &ldquo;Ah-oo-gah&rdquo; system). Some, who do
not believe that dictionary users will make the effort to interpret
unfamiliar symbols like the long s (&#92;?&#92;), IPA for the
*sh* in *shoot* and other spelled forms, the theta (&theta;), for unvoiced
th as in *thing,* the edh (&#92;?&#92;), for voiced *th* as in *this,*
the agma (&#92;?&#92;), for the *ng* in *thing,* and others, continue to
use Moo Goo Gai Pan transcription, arguing against the
principle, adhered to by phoneticians, that each of the distinctive
sounds in a language should be represented by a discrete
symbol. As I should be reviewing the subject book
here, this is not an appropriate place for engaging in that
argument: it may suffice to say that Barnhart won his
case—at least for the schwa.

Employing, essentially, the principles set forth by the
planners of the *Oxford English Dictionary (OED)*, Barnhart
has long been gathering citations for new words and senses
in the English language. The first compilation, *Barnhart
Dictionary of New English,* was published in 1973; the present
work is the second in what we must hope will be a continuing
series.

Although it is generally true that modern dictionaries
of any importance are carefully kept up to date on a
periodic basis, either by the inclusion of supplements or by
the integration of new words and senses in their proper
place in the text, the nature of most dictionaries precludes
devoting space to extensive citations and, hence, to the
documentation of what may be their earliest appearance in
writing.

It should be emphasized that the *Second Barnhart Dictionary
(SBD)* does not confine itself to the recording of new
words: new senses are also covered. For example,
*agoraphobia* is accorded nearly three quarters of a column
of citations and explanation.

Many of the terms reflect the obsession with the
coinage of jargon to which speakers of English are prone;
we can see this propensity for novelty in a string of words
having the previx *agri*- 'agricultural': *agri-argument,
agribiz, agribusinessman, agrichemical, agri-corporation,
agricrime, agri-industrial, agrindustry, agripower,
agriproduct, agri-proletariat*. This is followed by a group of
neologisms with *agro*-, an older form of the same prefix.

Through the reading of English language materials on
a worldwide basis, the editors have summoned a collection
of entries that cannot be said to be confined to American
English. In addition to the American publications reviewed
and cited we find *The Times, New Scientist, Nature,* and
other non-American periodicals. Nonetheless, if I have one
criticism of the book—and that of not too serious a
nature—it is that the citations have been drawn in very
large part from a relatively small number of publications,
and most of those reflect a predisposition toward reading
matter popular with the Eastern Establishment. Also, I am
surprised to find *ball park* and *ball-park figure* here, for
they appear in the *Random House Unabridged* (1966), and I
encountered them as early as 1960.

But these are nit-picking comments and cannot detract
from the value, importance, and quality of the *SBD*. It is
far more interesting and useful to examine some of the entries
that are listed. Where else could one find representatives
of Western culture like *group grope, grunge* ('something
bad, inferior, ugly, or boring'), *gyro* (&ldquo;a type of Greek
sandwich made from thin-sliced beef and lamb on pita'),
*hair implant, I.R.A.* ('individual retirement account' in the
U.S.; obviously only metaphorically the same thing in
Ireland), *pump iron, muggee* ('one who is mugged by a
mugger'), *quango,* and the ubiquitous *legionnaires' disease*?
Of particular interest is the thorough treatment at *person*
(followed by entries for *person*-, as in *personhole,* and
-*person*, as in *businessperson*). Useful is the entry at *Pinyin,*
which provides a partial table of the system. Social comment
can be seen in *rent-a-crowd* and *rent-a-mob* (in their
very coinage, not in the *SBD* treatment), and the dictionary
is replete with the scientific and technical terminology that
will probably dominate any list of neologisms in the future.
It is hard to find a term relating to fine arts, but I should
think that *Art Deco* might be one: as far as I know, the style
was called *moderne* when it was fashionable, with *Art Deco*
emerging only with its resurgence about a decade ago or
less. *Collectibles* is there, but I quibble with its definition,
given as &ldquo;items suitable for collecting, especially rare or outdated
objects of little intrinsic value.&rdquo; As I understand it,
*collectibles* (or *collectables*) refers specifically to those items
that are not genuine antiques, though they may be rare;
&ldquo;intrinsic value&rdquo; has little to do with it when one considers
that the *intrinsic* value of a da Vinci drawing may be less
than a dollar—for the relatively high-quality paper on
which it is drawn. VDU ought to have a &ldquo;Chiefly Brit.&rdquo;
label.

Sprinkled here and there are longer discussions (as at
*person*) that are short articles in themselves. Under *Coinages*
one finds almost a full column of comment about the ways
in which words (and phrases) are made and enter the
language. *Nonce Words, Technical Terms, Acronyms,
Trademarks,* and *Blends* are other topics among the 22
covered by essay-length entries.

Barnhart continues to enhance his own and his staffs
reputation by producing worthwhile works of lexicography
like this one; anyone who already has a dictionary should
have the *SBD* as an interpreter of what is going on in the
English language.

[L.U.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Mental Health Prevention Office Opens&rdquo; [headline in
The State Scene June 1980, p. 15. Submitted by R. J.
Gualtieri Amston, Connecticut. *So much for the mental
health of the residents of Connecticut*.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Falcon's New Illuminated Dictionary Of Ornithology*
W. F. Hollander, (Falcon Diversified Co., 1979), 46pp.

This work firmly straddles two stools (not the pigeon
kind) by providing what I assume to be useful text (I'm no
ornithologist, despise city pigeons, and prefer birds of the
featherless biped variety) punctuated by sketches of *rarae
aves* like *night owls, young turks, no-left terns,* and other
outrageous fauna. It would be best, for the serious (text)
side of the book, to pick up the following from Hollander's
prefatory notes:

>It has been estimated by reputable taxonomists
that there are over 8000 species of birds in the world
despite man's heroic drive to make them extinct like
the dodo. Most of us see very few of these even at
the zoo. In addition, people who cultivate domestic
birds-poultry, pigeons, parakeets, canaries, etc.—
have created a multitude of breeds and varieties,
with proper names. The fanciers don't know the wild
species, and the taxonomists don't know the &ldquo;artificial&rdquo;
or man-made types. We have tried to bridge
the chasm a bit. Only a hint is provided, however,
of the astounding adaptations in behavior, anatomy,
ecology, and whatnot.

The alphabetical list includes mainly common or
non-scientific terms except for Order names. After
such terms come synonyms, then usually names of
scientific genera (some probably out-of-date), and
finally an indication of world distribution.

W. F. Hollander, Professor Emeritus of Genetics at
Iowa State University (Ames), has not let anyone forget his
state's reputation for corn. He certainly hasn't laid an egg
with this book, which you can buy for chickenfeed from
The Ink Spot, Burrton, Kansas 67020. It may leave you
'owling with laughter or drive you cuckoo, all of which you
will agree are pretty cheep ways of selling something.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The 4 \* Puzzler*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Four-Star-Puzzler-September-1981-Issue-Puzzles/14516154363/bd)
Will Shortz, ed., (Game), 8-1/2" &times; 11", 12pp. 

Readers of VERBATIM know that we rarely review
periodicals. We are making an exception in the case of the
4 * Puzzler because it is new (only the first two issues have
appeared) and because we feel that there are many VERBATIM
readers who are puzzle buffs. (We assume you already
know about *Games,* which has been around for a few
years.)

The 12 pages, printed clearly in two colors and with
(for a change-*N. Y. Times* please note) enough space to
write in the answers, are packed with all kinds of word and
picture puzzles, from crosswords (cryptic and normal),
acrostics, logic games, cryptograms, and cartoon rebuses to
competitions and other miscellaneous fun. Not everyone
likes every kind of puzzle, and there are quite a few to
choose from in a given month's selection. Certain old standbys
appear in each issue, but each issue of *The 4 * Puzzler*
offers new delights. For puzzle fans. *The 4 * Puzzler* is just
their meat; for those who want to try their hand at a good
variety of quality puzzles, there is no better place for them
to start.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Pleasure In Words*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/a-pleasure-in-words-a-fireside-book_eugene-t-maleska/895033/#edition=2250270&idiq=2163429)
*Eugene T. Maleska, 549pp.,Simon &amp; Schuster, 1980.* 

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Mr. Maleska is well known to puzzlers who see *The
New York Times,* where he is the puzzle editor. This
chunky book contains much information about the English
language and its origins, with some chapters on etymology
(indeed, most of the book deals with the various sources of
words in English), some on names, and a relatively short
section called &ldquo;How to Construct Crossword Puzzles.&rdquo; The
text reflects the author's personal biases—which is as it
should be—and the style of writing is somewhat dull, at
least if one compares it with that of a Willard Espy. The
20-page section on crossword-puzzle construction is neither
as complete nor as helpful as *The Compleat Cruciverbalist,*
reviewed elsewhere in this issue, and, since I am looking at
uncorrected page proofs, I cannot tell what sort of illustrations
are likely to be included in the final work.

I generally view with approbation any work that offers
new and different ways of looking at English, and Mr.
Maleska has organized his book so that all the words of
Creek, Latin, Italian, and other origins are discussed in
their respective chapters. Obviously, none of these treatments
is exhaustive, and most of the book reads pretty much
like a list of etymologies that have been rewritten in readable
language, rescued from the abbreviated style found in
most dictionaries. Thus, there isn't very much here that is
novel, and some of it is a bit misleading: what, for instance,
is the point of going into long descriptions of words like *fettucine,
fra diavolo, gnocchi,* and so on, when they are
clearly loan words? Giving definitions of these words is not
particularly helpful, and learning that the (Italian) meaning
of *fettucine* is 'little ribbons' is not particularly revealing.
This sort of thing goes on page after page for the various
languages covered, and if that is your cup of tea, you will
want to buy the book. An appendix lists words with definitions,
some roots with their derivatives, and answers to
quizzes that appear here and there. The bibliography
(promised in the table of contents but not shown in the
proofs received) should prove interesting. There is no listing
for an index in the table of contents, and I hope there will
be one, for without one it would be difficult to find again
the information contained in this book once it has been
read.

[L.U.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*N'heures Souris Rames*](https://www.amazon.com/NHeures-Souris-Rames-Manuscript-1980-05-03/dp/B01FIYGRQ8)
Ormonde de Kay, trans. and annot., (Clarkson N. Potter, Inc., 1980), 40pp. (and several unnumbered pages).

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

The author's debt and dedication to Luis d'Antin van
Rooten *(Mots d'Heures: Gausses, Rames)* are acknowledged
and the former, at least, is evident throughout this work.
Like all great poetry, these examples must be read aloud for
their full pleasure. Rather than clutter up this review with
tiresome explanations, we reproduce here a brief sample of
one piece, complete with annotations. Before leaving the
reader to savor this morsel, it should be pointed out that this
little book reflects the publisher's efforts to appeal to the
reader's eye as much as de Kay's efforts to appeal to his ear.


#### EPISTOLA {Patrick J. O'Connor}

The opening paragraph of Axel Hornos's article on
*butterfly* would lead the reader unversed in etymology to
presume that the six English words in the list that follows
are &ldquo;English words of Latin ancestry.&rdquo; Such is not the case.

Three of the words—*hour, machine*, and *flower*—are
indeed borrowings from Latin. But the other three are most
certainly not. Their resemblance to Latin is the result of
English and Latin being related languages, descended from
the same ancestral language. The difference between these
two relations is crucial to the comparative linguist, since it
is only the latter kind of words, descended independently
from the ancestor language, that can be used to show
genetic relation among languages.

*[Patrick J. O'Connor, Yale Alumni Magazine and Journal]*


#### EPISTOLA {W. R. Edwards}

Mr. Axel Hornos, in his article &ldquo;Why Butterfly?&rdquo; [V, 4],
draws attention to the curious departure from tradition by
the Romance languages in the naming of this insect. One's
wonder grows on investigating the equivalent in other European
languages. It appears that this frail and ephemeral
creature impressed almost every country with the need to
find a separate name for it, unlike that in even related
languages:

>German  —    *Schmetterling*   
Finnish —     perhonen  
Dutch    —   *vlinder*         
Swedish   —   *fj&auml;ril*  
Russian  —   *b&aacute;boshka*  
Danish    —   *sommerfugl*    
Polish   —   *motyl*           
Norwegian —   *sommerfugl* — *i&acirc;r fach yr haf*  
Greek    —   *petalo&uacute;da*             
Hungarian —  *lepke*           
Welsh     —  *gl&ouml;yn byw* — *pili-pala*
                                                      
Can one detect, in *pili-pala,* an echo of the Latin *papilio*?

Most of these names do not suggest, to my ear, at least,
the flutter of wings or the delicate poising on a flower, as do
*farfalla, mariposa,* and *fluture* (but not the borborygmous
*borboleta*), yet all members of my class of foreign students
claimed that their native word conveyed such an association;
and not one of the German speakers connected
*Schmetterling* with the verb *schmettern,* meaning 'to bray
or blare' (of a trumpet)' or 'to come down with a crash.&rdquo;
Students of all nationalities agreed in disliking our word, as
they laughingly translated it as *Butterfliege, mouche de
beurre* or *mosca de mantequilla!* I remembered Stephen
Leacock's mock Ibsen sketch with its love-song in mock
Norwegian beginning, if I remember correctly:

>Was ik en butterflog  
Floeg ik den brust entswog.

To return to the question &ldquo;Why Butterfly?&rdquo;: as a
schoolboy I had a theory that the word was a corruption of
*flutterby*. The dictionary dispelled that naive notion by giving
*buttor-fl&eacute;oge (OED)* as the earliest form, establishing
the oleaginous connection which Mr. Hornos rightly resents.
The *Oxford English Dictionary* plainly states that the origin
of the word is unknown. An explanation sometimes offered
is that certain species are the colour of butter. It is true that
conspicuous amongst the earliest to appear in the English
spring is the handsome brimstone butterfly (*Gonopteryx*—
the 'angle-winged'). The male is indeed the colour of butter;
but why extend the name to the many other species, not one
of which is truly yellow? Lepidopterists must have been rare
in the Dark Ages, and perhaps, after the first pleasure of
seeing the brimstone, the Anglo-Saxon ignored the later
varieties. Yet there was a persistent association of butterflies
with a golden colour. King Lear planned to &ldquo;laugh at gilded
butterflies,&rdquo; Drummond of Hawthornden wrote of
&ldquo;golden butterflies,&rdquo; and the naturalist John Ray
(1628-1705) when asked &ldquo;What is the use of butterflies?&rdquo;
replied &ldquo;To adorn the world and delight the eyes of men, to
brighten the countryside, serving like so many golden
spangles to decorate the fields.&rdquo;

Another suggestion is that the first butterflies reappeared
at the same season as butter. In the days before
bovine dietetics, cattle, cropping the sparse winter pasture,
may well have become thin and have ceased to yield milk
until spring renewed the lush grass, bringing with it the
early butterflies.

But enough of speculation: let it remain an Anglo-Saxon
mystery. In the words of Chaucer: &ldquo;Swich talkyng is
nat worth a boterflye.&rdquo;

*[W. R. Edwards, Chesham, Buckinghamshire]*


#### EPISTOLA {Hugo von Rodeck}

I have taken unusual interest in the discussion of the
origin of the name *butterfly,* being an entomologist by
training. My first teacher in the subject was Professor
Theodore Dru Alison Cockerell, a British-born entomologist
of some fame, who used to refer humorously to &ldquo;butterfly/
flutter-by&rdquo; as a possible origin of the name, but he always
did so so lightly as to suggest that he did not take the derivation
very seriously.

Seeing how seriously my colleagues who express
themselves in VERBATIM are taking the problem, I am
almost impelled to suggest that we may be going too far
afield for an origin for *butterfly*.

I have taken a popular and elementary book on insects
(Swain, *The Insect Guide*) off my shelf as an indication of
our almost universal tendency to call all insects which fly
*flies*. Eliminating the scores (nay, hundreds) of members of
the order Diptera, the two-winged flies, most of which are
properly called one or another kind of &ldquo;flies,&rdquo; the rest of the
insect kingdom in our country includes *alderflies, bat flies,
caddisflies, damsel flies, dragonflies, fireflies, dobsonflies,
lacewing flies, louse flies, mayflies, sawflies, scorpion flies,
snakeflies, stink flies, stoneflies,* and many others the mention
of which would become tedious here, and none of
which is a true fly in the technical sense.

In the face of such a widespread tendency to term any
flying insect a &ldquo;fly,&rdquo; I am driven to the assumption that
since the commonest diurnal lepidopteran in the European
area is the *yellow* cabbage butterfly, *Pieris* spp. one might
comfortably suppose that the group derived its name in this
fashion.

The &ldquo;butterfly/flutter-by&rdquo; coincidence is then a pleasant
linguistic accident to bemuse us who delight in playing
with the sound of words. We might note that no insect has
ever been named a &ldquo;byfly&rdquo; because it flies by.

*[Hugo von Rodeck, Northglenn, Colorado]*


#### EPISTOLA {Richard Hanser}

Victor Margolin's piece on punning [VII, 1] was, as
they say, worth the price of admission all by itself, and I
will probably be stealing from it for a long time to come.
Having opened prettily, I will now proceed to become
irritating. Why don't you identify your authors? I don't give
a damn that Victor Margolin comes from Evanston, Illinois
(pedantically spelled out), and knowing it adds nothing to
my knowledge of him. But I would like to know who he is,
and so with your other writers.

In his first paragraph, *Witzelsucht* doesn't mean 'witseeking'
but 'wit-mania.' He (and you) have taken *Sucht*—mania,
passion, rage'—for *Such-e*—'search, quest.' *Blumlese*
doesn't mean 'flowers of reading' but 'flower gleanings
or collection.' Here *lese,* which he takes to refer to reading,
actually is *Lese,* a selection or harvest or, as I say above,
gleaning. Also *Raumlehre* doesn't mean 'space gauge'—
where does 'gauge' get into it? —but 'space study'—as
*Krankheitslehre* means 'study of illness.' One more observation
before I retire to curses and anathema: I emitted a
small gasp when I read of Bierce's &ldquo;gentle humor.&rdquo; Oh,
boy! If there is life after death, look out. Bierce will come
back and tear your ears off. It's like speaking of the &ldquo;winsome
charm&rdquo; of Dean Swift.

*[Richard Hanser, Mamaroneck, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {Paul Pascal}

In Victor Margolin's erudite, amusing, and (almost)
comprehensive survey of the pun [VI, 1] I do find two imperfections
which I am moved to comment on. One is the
spelling *paronomasia* (*Sic! Sic! Sic!*) both in the subtitle and
in the body of the article. An evil spell, indeed.

The other is the author's dismissal of a whole fascinating
millennium with the words, &ldquo;Medieval literature is
almost devoid of puns. . . .&rdquo; The fact is that the pun reigned
in torrents in the Middle Ages, particularly in its
voluminous Latin literature.

The literature of medieval England practically begins
with a series of pious puns attributed to Pope Gregory I and
dubiously reported by the Venerable Bede in his *Ecclesiastical
History of the English Nation*. In Rome, before he
became Pope, Gregory is said to have seen some unusually
handsome slaves for sale in the slave market. Being informed
that they were Angli, he compared them to *angeli;*
further, when told that they were of the tribe called *Deiri*
(roughly, Northumbrian), he replied happily that they were
now rescued *de ira* (&ldquo;from wrath&rdquo;); finally, when it was reported
that their king was named Aelli, Gregory's comment
was, &ldquo;Alleluia!&rdquo; Thereupon he proceeded to plan the
evangelization of England.

Towards the other end of the Middle Ages, the satires
of the wandering scholars or Goliards, represented for us
largely by the Carmina Burana, are replete with word play
of all kinds. In one of them, for example, the poet, referring
to the common designation of Rome as caput mundi 'head
of the world,' continues: &ldquo;*Sed nil capit mundum* 'but it contains
nothing pure.' Elsewhere in the same poem occurs a
striking macaronic pun: *Papa, si rem tangimus, nomen
habet a re; / quicquid habent alii solus cult papare.  Vel si
oerbum Gallicum vis apocopare,! &ldquo;Paies! Paies!&rdquo; dist li mot,
si vis impetrare.* 'The Pope, if we consider the matter,
derives his name from fact;/ For he alone wishes to lap us
(*papare*) whatever others possess.  Or, if you will abbreviate
a French word, &ldquo;Pay! Pay!&rdquo; the saying goes, if you want to
win your case.'

It was early in the history of their order, which was
founded in 1216, that the Dominicans came to be called
*Domini canes* 'the dogs of the Lord.' (It is to be noted that
originally this was meant not in any derogatory sense, as it
is often understood today, but rather in admiration. The
dog, or watchdog, is traditionally a symbol of preaching;
and, in fact, a dog still figures in the iconography of St.
Dominic.)

It might even be maintained that puns play a role in
medieval learning, inasmuch as mere phonetic resemblance
was thought to be the principal element in the etymology of
a word, regardless of other considerations, such as history,
logic, or common sense. For this reason, there was no difficulty
in accepting the proposition that a word could have
more than one etymology, if it lent itself to more than one
pun. Here, for example, are a few of the thousands of clues
to the &ldquo;true meaning&rdquo; of words to be found in the encyclopedic
*Etymologiae* of Isidore of Seville, one of the most
influential books of the Middle Ages. It will be observed
that Isidore's standards for claiming phonetic resemblance
are far from confining. The puns, of course, are in the Latin
only. It is useless to attempt to reflect them in the translation.
*Caelebs dictus quasi caelo beatus* 'Celibate, so called as
if blessed in heaven.' *Dims . . . quasi divina ira in id actus*
'Dire, as if driven to that condition by divine wrath.'
*Dubius, incertus; quasi duarum viarum* 'Dubious, uncertain;
as if of two roads.' Does this tell us something, about
the way Isidore pronounced b and v? *Fatigatus, quasi fatis
agitatus* 'Fatigued, as if driven by the fates.' *Luscus, quod
lucem ex parte sciat* 'One-eyed, because he knows light only
partially.' *Mutus, quia vox eius non est sermo, nisi mugitus*
'Mute, because his voice is not speech but mooing.' Here the
pun, alas, survives the translation. *Niger, quasi nubiger*
'Black, as if cloud-bearing.' *Piger, quasi pedibus aeger*
'Lazy, as if sick in the feet.' As tempting as it is to speculate
otherwise, we must finally acknowledge that Isidore is in
deadly earnest with all this. But despite the lack of
humorous intent, surely these are as much puns as they are
etymologies.

To compensate Mr. Margolin for my appearing to take
issue with some of his splendid article, let me contribute to
his collection a pun which he may not know, or he might
have included it. While not medieval, it is (partly) Latin,
and so relates to my other examples (at least as well as the
words in many puns relate to each other). One of the
detractors of Martin Luther (*Luterus,* in Latin), a man
named D. Eck, remarked that if you took away his r he
became *luteus* 'muddy.' Luther's retort: &ldquo;Yes, and if you
give myr to him, he becomes *Dreck*.&rdquo;

It should be clear that I am a devoted medievalist, and
I rejoice to see the message of the Middle Age spread.

*[Paul Pascal, University of Washington]*


#### EPISTOLA {Harry Loshak}

Victor Margolin [VII,1] quoted Hook's defence of the
pun (&ldquo;A double meaning has a double sense&rdquo;) but did not
mention what is perhaps the best example of such a pun!

*Is life worth living? That depends on the liver.*
Does anyone know its author?

*[Harry Loshak, Cambridge, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {Henry P. Lewis-Comas}

In your review of *The Reader Over Your Shoulder*
[VII, I], I was slightly surprised to find that you consider
even doubtful that *serai* and *serez* are phonetically
distinguishable. I had always thought them to be perfect
homophones, but I sought corroboration for my opinion
from two French friends of unassailable authority on the
specific subject of the French pronunciation of these two
words. I consulted each of them separately (no communication
between them on this point), and they both agreed
with me that these two verb forms are indeed phonetically
indistinguishable. They both added, as a baker's dozen, that
some purists make a shade of phonetic distinction between
the indicative, *serai,* and the conditional, *serais*.

In &ldquo;Colorful Language&rdquo; [VI, 1] Sterling Eisiminger says
that the rather familiar Italian expression *essere al verde*
means not only 'to be insolvent' but 'to be in debt' as well.
On the basis of my 28 years in Italy, plus the corroboration
of two Italian schoolteachers, my maid, and my 26-year-old
daughter, whose first language is Italian, I can safely affirm
that *essere al verde* means only to be 'broke' and not 'in the
red.' He also gives *vert' histoire* [sic: should be *verte*] as
meaning in French 'off-color tale' and says that *red cabbage*
is *black* in Italian. With the backing of the authorities mentioned
above, I fully disagree. Then, as a born Spanish
speaker, substantiated by dictionaries, I must add that Mr.
Eisiminger's collateral familiar meanings of *naranjada* and
*naranjo* should be rendered in English as 'a gross saying'
and 'a gross person,' respectively, instead of 'rude.' At any
rate, neither of these expressions is ever, ever used, any
more than the dodo uses its wings.

*[Henry P. Lewis-Comas, Rome]*

***

*Editor's Note*

No, we are not turning VERBATIM into a puzzle magazine
*Word Ways* and *Games* fulfill that function very well
already. But we could not resist setting forth a few of our
efforts that resulted from the preholiday silly season that
pervades these offices. Please let me know if you would like
to continue to see &ldquo;Paring Pairs&rdquo; in VERBATIM and, of
course, we should like to know if you like the &ldquo;Anglo-American
Crossword.&rdquo; If readers do not protest too loudly,
we shall continue both in future issues.

## Paring Pairs No. 1

(a). Growing pile of rubbish. (34,3) Compost Heap.  
(b). Sound metallically. (30,40) Copper Bottomed.  
(c). Two connected with pipe. (7,14) Clay; Drain.  
(d). But not press cutting? (23,4) Paper Clip.  
(e). Two cities. (8,41) Intercourse; Paris.  
(f). A book. (27,6) Animal Farm.  
(g). Venus for Communists? (37,5) Morning Star.  
(h). Two suggesting baked. (10,17) Half; Beans.  
(i). For a tiny professor? (9,16) High Chair.  
(j). 16 oz. of silver. (22,42) Pound Sterling.  
(k). Two synonyms. (26,31) Proper; Seemly.  
(l). Two that are black. (13,45) Ebony; Anthracite.  
(m). Having the opposite effect. (33,46) CounterProductive  
(n). Two suggesting mine. (28,36) Limpet; Sweeper.  
(o). Where to teach the wealthy. (38,29) Private School.  
(p). Two with bone. (12,20) Funny; China.  
(q). A proverbial weapon? (11,2) Maxim Gun.  
(r). Two sauces. (32,44) Tabasco; Worcestershire.  
(s). Two connected with blue. (24,35) Cobalt; Bottle.  
(t). Wimbledon assizes? (39,43) Tennis Court.  
(u). For Trojan gymnasts? (15,1) Wooden Horse.  
(v). Grammatical error? (18,21) Split Infinitive.  
(w). Two going with breaker. (19,47) Ice; Tie.  
(x). A novel. (48,25) Little Women.  

The winners of Paring Pairs No. 1 (Answer: 49. Classical.)
are Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York, Donald Marritz, Biglerville,
Pennsylvania, and Stephen Waters, Rome, New
York, U.S. (received on the same day in Essex) and Jared
Weinberger, Bologna, Italy and Thomas M. Lillis, County
Clare, Ireland (received first in Aylesbury).

## Paring Pairs No. 2

Paring Pairs No. 1 was too easy, judging from the
number of right answers received (though only five readers
qualified as, winners by sending in their correct answers
first). Therefore, we have laced this version with Spoonerisms,
homophones, homographs, puns, and other nasties to
make it harder or, as they say in puzzledom, &ldquo;more challenging.&rdquo;
In consequence, we are raising the stakes: the
winners will receive either a copy of the Collector's Edition
of Thomas Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail value $30)
or a copy of *English English,* by Norman W. Schur (retail
value $24.95). Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle
East, or North Africa should send their answers (on a post
card, please) to VERBATIM, 2 Market Square, Aylesbury,
Bucks., England. All others should send them to VERBATIM,
Box 668, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems on
which we depend for the delivery of VERBATIM and to make
it fairer for those who live far from either one of our offices,
we shall arrange to collect all correct answers for 21 days,
starting with the day we receive the first correct answer,
and to draw one name in Aylesbury and one name in Essex,
with a prize awarded from each office. Please indicate on
your answer card which book you would like to receive.

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in numbered items which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues. In some cases, a
numbered word may be used more than once, but after all
matchings have been completed, one numbered word will
remain, and that is the correct answer. Our answer is the
only correct one. The solution will be published in the next
VERBATIM along with the names of the winners*.

(a). Change the locals.  
(b). Person in charge of those occupying lavatories.  
(c). Three-card monte.  
(d). Hat.  
(e). Trouble.  
(f). Not Oxbridge, origami.  
(g). Tired horseman.  
(h). Peter x 2. Missouri?  
(i). Trap.  
(j). High-grade meat. bear.   
(k). Low-grade meat.  
(l). Trajan.  
(m). Wardrobe mister.  
(n). Time drags behind him.  
(o). Lord Tom Thumb's wife?  
(p). Duke always took it.  
(q). Out-of-town comedian.  
(r). Counterfeiter.  
(s). Lollipop.  
(t). Paris hotel.  
(u). Financial gains from origami.  
(v). Oxbridge teams in Missouri?  
(w). A washout next to real bear.  
(x). Slow writing.  
(y). To easily solve.  
(z). More than eight containers for wood defects.

## Answers

(1). Brick.  
(2). Fall.  
(3). Tower.  
(4). Natives.  
(5). Card.  
(6). Hanger.  
(7). Prophets.  
(8). Commander.  
(9). Blues.  
(10). Rig.  
(11). Haggard.  
(12). Cut.  
(13). Water.  
(14). Fiend.  
(15). Pooh.  
(16). Pots.  
(17). Visiting.  
(18). Gear.  
(19). Eater.  
(20). Ship.  
(21). Queen.  
(22). Finger.  
(23). Steer.  
(24). Dragon.  
(25). Sank.  
(26). Infinitive.  
(27). Closet.  
(28). Alter.  
(29). Lady.  
(30). Paper.  
(31). Sham.  
(32). Thimble.  
(33). Arch.  
(34). Eh?  
(35). Lieutenant.  
(36). Rider.  
(37). Upper.  
(38). Pumpkin.  
(39). Watch.  
(40). Red.  
(41). Dead.  
(42). George.  
(43). Paper.  
(44). Head.  
(45). Hot.  
(46). Real.  
(47). Split.  
(48). Pen.  
(49). Train.  
(50). St. Louis.  
(51). Good.  
(52). Nine.  
(53). Bum.

## Iterative Redundancies

Inspired by the contributions of Benjamin Keller and
Jay Ames [VII, I], we offer the following quiz.

Each of the numbered items is a clue to a one- or two-word 
answer that consists of parts that are spelled identically.
Example: father: *papa*.

Answers whose parts are spelled differently don't count
(e.g., *Lallah, cuckoo, lily,* etc.). Watch out for tricks; some
are used more than once. If you want to see more of these,
see the Autumn 1980 issue. Answers are listed later on in
this issue.>

(1). La Boh&egrave;me heroine. Flintstones).  
(2). Farewell.  
(3). Girl's nickname.  
(4). Quickly! tribesman.  
(5). &ldquo;The Governor and —&rdquo;(U.S. TV series), arising from ignorance.  
(6). Mustard pickle.  
(7). Dog.  
(8). Nurse in Peter Pan.  
(9). Barbara — (nickname of TV interviewer).  
(10). Kind of avis.  
(11). Ms. Osterwald.  
(12). Overly much. utterance.  
(13). Train from Chattanooga.  
(14). Antiaircraft cannon (2).  
(15). Society Island.  
(16). Ancient Egyptian god of the ocean.  
(17). Racehorse, monkey.  
(18). M. Le Moko.  
(19). Kind of -rum.  
(20). Starlet activity.  
(21). Sunken fence, idol.  
(22). Peter Joyce.  
(23). Wicked stepmother's confidant.  
(24). Yale yell.  
(25). 1940s' expression of approval or excitement.  
(26). Small African antelope.  
(27). Barney's son (in TV's.)    
(28). Prison.  
(29). North African  
(30). Unanticipated problem  
(31). Belittle.  
(32). G &amp; S characters (2).  
(33). Puccini character.  
(34). Rin's surname.  
(35). Nut.  
(36). Ammunition.  
(37). Santa's joyful  
(38). Toast.  
(39). Lava.  
(40). Cheerleader's cue.  
(41). Pitcher Newsome.  
(42). Extraordinary example.  
(43). South American  
(44). Art movement.  
(45). Feather palm.  
(46). M. Chevalier's song  
(47). Hawaiian bird.  
(48). Kind of -versal.  
(49). African charm.  
(50). Hawaiian goose.  
(51). Politician's perquisite.  
(52). Diminutive comic-strip character.  
(53). Hawaiian dance.  
(54). Resembles pareu.  

## Double Reverse Spoonerisms

Each clue suggests a phrase, which, when Spoonerized,
yields another phrase; the meanings of both phrases are
couched, albeit subtly, in the definition. Answers are on
page 22.

(a). I'd give my shirt for some fingernail soup.  
(b). Was Raquel Welch's publicity program inspiration for Dickensian novel?  
(c). Pinch-visaged before the hearth.  
(d). Melodramatic start reverses to utter failure.  
(e). Suppliant after the swag he smuggled.  
(f). Spirituous British sandwich lands an innocent in jail.  
(g). Odd university official alternates with expensive homosexual .  
(h). When lepidopteran passes, spread takes wing.  
(i). Shame on letting the yeast die.  
(j). Look at the lager and play without music.  
(k). Describing Mayor La Guardia's abrupt departure from the phone company.  
(l). It is equitable to divide up the counterfeit booty.  
(m). Apiary banner resides in disreputable hotel.  
(n). Discalced, brown gamin with Chinese wood.  
(o). Ruins boxes after entering free.  
(p). Fog for the barbecue is profitable.  
(q). Delighted grumbling dog has gone west.  
(r). Sleep while staying on the horse.  
(s). If she had smiled, the outgoing administration wouldn't be outgoing.  
(t). Do everything to rock the seabird to sleep.  
(u). Incongruous cleaning tool used by a sissy.  
(v). Work hard there to produce liquor from germinated grain.  
(w). This snooty fellow cons everyone.  
(x). Many women think they live here when their husbands lose their vigor.  
(y). To be surprised while the nail is in the oven.  
(z). Many who undergo this are happy to find a connection abroad.  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;. . . There is no trace of any commission for this work,
although Handel might have written it as an act of praise
for his recovery from paralysis the following year.&rdquo; [From an
advertisement in *The Musical Heritage Review,* IV: 14 (10
November 1980), for &ldquo;Israel in Egypt.&rdquo; Submitted by Emily
Z. Tabuteau, East Lansing Michigan who considers the
act most prescient.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;7 oz. of choice sirloin broiled to your likeness served
with golden fried onion rings.&rdquo; [from the November 19-26,
1980 Weekly Specials on the menu of the St. Louis County
Country Club. Submitted by Maryan Eger Kirkwood</name>
<place>Missouri, who comments: *The golden fried onion rings impart
just the right halo effect!*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Police said the bodies were found at 12:30 a.m. in
Snider's bedroom in a two-story house under a freeway in
West Los Angeles that he shared with two other people.&rdquo;
[From an AP dispatch in The San Diego Union, August 16,
1980. Submitted by Thomas S. Terrill, Carlsbad, California.
*We know those Californians are rich, but this is too
much*!]


#### EPISTOLA {Mitio Inokuti}

In the list of words for *cock-a-doodle-doo* in Eric
Winter's article &ldquo;Odd Couples&rdquo; [VII,I], there is at least one
error. The word in Japanese is *kokekokko* (in the standard
transliteration). One pronounces it roughly as &ldquo;kowkaykowkko.&rdquo;

The &ldquo;nyaw&rdquo; is a good phonetic representation, but is
expressed as *niyao* in the standard transliteration.

*[Mitio Inokuti, La Grange, Illinois]*


#### EPISTOLA {John M. Campbell}

Through fifty years, I have read many complaints
about our normal spellings of English words and many
schemes and systems of proposed reforms, but never seen a
defense or advocacy of the established usage. Most
&ldquo;reforms&rdquo; would revise spelling to conform to pronunciation,
neglecting or discounting the very different pronunciations
of most common words throughout the English-speaking
world. Virginia Howard's &ldquo;Pooh-Poohey [VII,1] may
shock some quixotic iconoclasts into sense.

In a world where pronunciation varies subtly or drastically
from region to region, century to century, the advantages
of a completely arbitrary and conventional orthography
for distant communication and permanent record
are obvious. Today's post brought me letters from Edinburgh
and Trinidad; I am grateful not to have to puzzle out
braid Scots or Calypso lilt. If we allow convention a virtue,
then any reasonable convention will do; and our dictionary
spellings have the advantage of being already established in
the habits of our populations. *Schedule* is a more useful
word, however pronounced, than &ldquo;skedule&rdquo; or &ldquo;shedule&rdquo; or
both co&euml;xistent would be. &ldquo;Tho,&rdquo; &ldquo;thru,&rdquo; and &ldquo;enuf&rdquo; would
likely offend few readers a century after reform, but they
would miss the self-evident distinction between, e.g.,
*through* and *threw*. Though such pairs are usually distinguishable
by context, reform would cost us this touch of
redundancy by which so much of our intelligibility is facilitated.
(&ldquo;The trumpeter ternd cold and blu&rdquo; and &ldquo;He thru
the dery made a sale&rdquo; are pretty far-fetched, but &ldquo;My
students reed a lot, on the hole&rdquo; is not.)

Perhaps no more need be said on this subject, though I
once lectured on it for an hour, but, if one of your experts
writes an article, he will find a willing reader in

*[John M. Campbell, Paris]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Was cut despite permission to enter the Corps Diplomatique. (7)  
5\. The grand mal? Not in the least.  
9\. Outrages of blackouts (')are eliminated. (7)  
10\. Anthony, the commercial jingle specialist? (7)  
11\. Characteristic of our tardy oil and energy program. (8)  
12\. Really free is the way he likes it. (4)  
15\. Property seized to fulfill pledges causes badly strained virtues. (10, 5)  
16\. Pimps and ponces at the airport, or working stiffs? (7, 8)  
20\. Heavenly dishes do make a mess of us. (4)  
21\. Mean fist leading a strong arm in a football knockdown. (5, 3)  
24\. A great year among the top talent. (3, 4)  
25\. Red who was run to heaven by his own comrades. (7)  
26\. Snack fit for a king, so I hear. (7)  
27\. Dead Red, still feared. (7)  

**Down**

1\. &ldquo;Nobody goes there anymore. It's too  —&rdquo;—Yogi Berra. (7)  
2\. Sings the praises of (7) the old phone rates.  
3\. One whose diet would be eat vinegar to others.(10)  
4\. Tore one's hair out when deeply troubled. (10)  
5\. Type of water used to split the atom. (4)  
6\. Sailors in blue. (4)  
7\. Booked and bound for Casablanca, perhaps.(7)  
8\. Scene stealer in Hamlet. (7)  
13\. Made less great or utterly destroyed. (10)  
14\. Cupid fooled with a little governor, (1, 3, 2, 4)  
16\. Wail for a dead whale. (7)  
17\. Genial joshing from a decent chap. (4, 3)  
18\. Terribly pleased to have passed. (7)  
19\. Some day like this is fit only for a dog. (7)  
22\. List of all that's left. (4)  
23\. The French of the Big  Apple disavow it. (4)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. VI-brat-E  
5\. Dew-Fall  
9\. Perpetual motion  
10\. DISPOR-ti-VE  
11\. Berg  
13\. SH-err-Y  
14\. Pre-amble  
17\. Re-sonant  
18\. Zircon  
20\. Co-co  
22\. Jack-knifed  
25\. Ulterior motives  
26\. Ex-press  
27\. She-a-Red  

**Down**

1\. V-a-P-id  
2\. Birdseeds  
3\. AXE-T-o-g-R-ind  
4\. Equate  
5\. DELIVERY (very devil minus V)  
6\. Wool  
7\. A-GI-le  
8\. Long green  
12\. MAR-I-one-TTE  
13\. Stric-T-ure  
15\. Buck fever  
16\. In-famous  
19\. Ski-MP-s  
21\. Cutup  
23\. Dosed  
24\. Free

## Double Reverse Spoonerisms: Answers

(a). Clawed Broth.  
(b). *A Sale of Two Titties*.  
(c). Plier-face.  
(d). Thud and Blunder.  
(e). Lootbeggar.  
(f). Rum Bap.  
(g). Queer Dean.  
(h). Flutter by.  
(i). Fie! the Barm.  
(j). Eye Beer.  
(k). Like a Hat out of Bell.  
(l). Share Fake.  
(m). Bee Flag.  
(n). Barefoot Boy with Teak of Chan.  
(o). Crate Gasher.  
(p). Mist for the Grill.  
(q). Happy Grunting Hound.  
(r). Sit the Hack.  
(s). Dame Luck.  
(t). Leave No Tern Unstoned.  
(u). Silk Mop.  
(v). Malt Signs.  
(w). Joe Snob.  
(x). Male State.  
(y). Bakin' a Tack.  
(z). Foreign Tether.  

## Iterative Redundancies-Answers

(1). *Mimi.*  
(2). *Bye-bye.*  
(3). *Fifi.*  
(4). *Chop-chop.*  
(5). *J.J.*  
(6, 7). *Chow-chow.*  
(8). *Nana.*  
(9). *Wawa.*  
(10). *Rara.*  
(11). *Bibi.*  
(12). *Too, too.*  
(13). *Choo-choo.*  
(14). *Pom-pom, Ack-ack.*  
(15). *Bora Bora.*  
(16). *Num.*  
(17). *Ceegee.*  
(18). *Pepe.*  
(19). *Summa summa-.*  
(20). *Twinkle, twinkle>.*  
(21). *Ha-ha.*  
(22). *Haw-Haw.*  
(23). *Mirror, mirror.*  
(24). *Boolah Boolah.*  
(25). *Hubbal Hubba!*  
(26). *Dik-dik.*  
(27). *Bambam.*  
(28). *Sing Sing.*  
(29). *Berber.*  
(30). *Unk unk.*  
(31). *Pooh-pooh.*  
(32). *Yum-Yum,Koko.*  
(33). *Cio-Cio.*  
(34). *Tin Tin.*  
(35). *Coco.*  
(36). *BB.*  
(37). *Ho! Ho!*  
(38). *Cin! Cin!*  
(39). *Ao.*  
(40). *Hip, hip.*  
(41). *Bobo.*  
(42). *Lulu.*  
(43). *Titi.*  
(44). *Dada.*  
(45). *Grugru.*  
(46). *Gigi.*  
(47). *O-o.*  
(48). *Quaqua-.*  
(49). *Grigri, greegree.*  
(50). *Nene.*  
(51, 52). *Lulu.*  
(53). *Hula-hula.*  
(54). *Lava-lava.*  


### EX CATHEDRA

In addition to the usual Matchbox, Betsy Wetsy, and
other games and toys offered for Christmas a few weeks
ago, was a host of new items that have, by now, probably
disappeared from the shelves of shops catering to parents
who cater to children. By now, in fact, many of them may
be lying at the bottom of some closet, broken beyond repair
or rejected either out of boredom or because their batteries
(not included) have died. What interests me about these toys
is their names, for the manufacturers must clearly have
some notion that the name given to a toy or game has some
effect on its sale. Thus, *Matchbox* is descriptive of the size of
the cars; *Betsy Wetsy, Wet-Me-Wet, Wipe Your Tears
Baby, Mattel Baby Cries for You,* and similar objects are
descriptive of the various biological and emotional excreta
that a child may expect when squeezing in the proper place,
pressing the appropriate button, or simply waiting the
prescribed amount of time.

The recent crop of children's amusements includes a
number of toys with names that would dissuade any peaceloving
parents from allowing their children within a whiff
of a toy shop: *Slip Disc* (Milton Bradley), contrary to the inference
of its name, is neither, a shrink-pack of wet banana
peels nor a collection of molded figures of middle-aged men,
doubled over, clutching their backs, and bearing an
agonized expression on their faces; *Run Yourself Ragged*
(Tomy) is probably much tamer than it sounds, for it is described
as an &ldquo;obstacle course for armchair athletes&rdquo;; Illco
offers *Emergency Dashboard,* complete with siren, horn,
simulated CB, and &ldquo;more&rdquo;—it takes little imagination to
speculate on the doting uncle who presented a nephew (I
assume) with such an instrument of torture, but quite some
imagination on the youngster's part to reconstruct the rest of
the vehicle on the living-room carpet.

One of my favorites is Kenner's *Play-Doh Doctor Drill
'n Fill,* consisting of a head with a large, open mouth and a
few plastic implements. Apparently, the teeth (which have
faces printed on them!) are removable: &ldquo;Put the teeth in one
by one!&rdquo; read the instructions. The child (Can you imagine
bringing up a child to be a *dentist!*?) pulls out the teeth and,
I suppose, fills their cavities with Play-Doh. What hours of
chairside fun await the tyke supplied with &ldquo;three 6-oz. cans
of modeling compound&rdquo;!

For those children with a more destructive (or, at least,
nonreconstructive) bent, there awaits Mattel's *Hot Wheek
Wipeout:* &ldquo;Watch for a wipeout, keep 'em on the track!&rdquo;
reads the copy on the box. Shouldn't these be sold with an
*Emergency Room Doctor Kit,* complete with defibrillator
(battery not included)? Then, there's Illco's *Musical Cash*
Register, sure to disappoint the mercenary child because
after it has been wound up, a drawer pops open on the press
of a button, and *music plays*. What does it play? &ldquo;Pennies
from Heaven&rdquo;? &ldquo;I Found a Million-Dollar Baby in a Five
and Ten Cent Store&rdquo;? Gabriel offers some rather morbid
contributions led by *Sudden Death* (suitable for budding
body snatchers) and *Colossal Fossil Fight,* which is distinguished
not only by rhyme and alliteration but by
descriptive copy sure to attract all nine-year-old paleontologists,
to wit, &ldquo;Titanic dinosaurs battle for supremacy in the
Valley of the Bones.&rdquo;

Apparently, animals are big these days—in more ways
than one. A ready competitor to *Colossal Fossils* is Hasbro's
*Hungry Hungry Hippos,* more alliterative than literal, for
hippos, as far as I know, are herbivores offering a greater
threat to the house philodendron than to the yobbo who
dares open his box. So much for the macroscopic. At the
microscopic end of the spectrum is Ideal's *My Dog Has
Fleas,* which, as far as I could see, had more to do with
dogs and fleas than with musical staves.

Colorforms came up with the (sensational) *Hook, Line,
and Stinker* &ldquo;Scratch &amp; Sniff Fishing Game.&rdquo; Apparently
the players discover a catch by identifying it by smell, a
rather sad commentary on the freshness of fish in the
markets of America. Turning to those who cater to the more
destructive instincts among the younger set, Kenner makes
(and, presumably, sells) a *Starwars 3-position Laser Rifle,*
though it was not immediately apparent what the three
positions were. By far the most aggressive toy, made
by—Wait for it!—Fun Stuf, is named simply *Hulk,* an
innocuous-sounding word till you discover that it comes
complete &ldquo;with rage cage and split-away shirt.&rdquo; In 1980,
Fun Stuf also promoted its &ldquo;New! Smash-out handcuffs.&rdquo;

So much for the animate and those items suggesting
that their victims can quickly become inanimate. My
favorite, even though I am not a train buff, is something
called a &ldquo;Life-Like Railroad Car.&rdquo; A *life-like* railroad car?

If I gain any more weight, I shall have my own splitaway
shirt, and, if the American judiciary goes much softer
on punishing criminals, felons might as well be provided
with smash-out handcuffs. My gift problems were solved by
sending all my female friends Christmas cards with Scratch
&amp; Sniff perfume panels and my male friends cards with
Scratch &amp; Sniff scotch panels. The latter report a safe (if
slightly insane) New Year's Eve; the former nothing worse
than a broken fingernail or two.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;More good news is that the Brooks company may issue
a shoe designed for the higli-arched foot, which can cause
the runner major medical problems.&rdquo; [From &ldquo;Medical Advice,&rdquo;
by Dr. Geo. Sheehan, in *Runner's World*, November
1980, p. 100. Submitted by N. M. McGee, Daly City,
California.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

COVINA. As part of an on going program to upgrade
the present system, *Covina City Water Department* is
replacing an 8 &ldquo;water main with a new 12&rdquo; one on
Rowland Avenue west of Grand Avenue near Barranca
Avenue to increase and improve fire flow to the area.
[From Pipeline, November-December, 1980, p. 4. Submitted
by David C. Michen, Pomona, California.  *Residents of
the area take notice and increase your fire insurance at
once!*]

***

Editor's Note

We apologize for being so late with the Winter issue, but
we hope that our readers will agree that it was worth
waiting for - our first 24-page issue!

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v7n3_Winter_1980_81)