--- 
title: "VOL VII, No 4 [Spring 1981]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## English as she is spoke: The new guide of the conversation in Portuguese and English in two parts, by Pedro Caroline (Jose da Fonseca)
*Michael Gorman, University of Illinois*

We expect then, who the little book (for the
care what we wrote him, and for her typographical
correction) that may be worth the expectation of
the studious persons, and especially of the Youth, at which
we dedicate him particularly.&rdquo;With these words, Jose da
Fonseca closed his introduction to the most famous and enduring
of fractured English phrase-books. It was first published
in Paris in 1855 and has been republished many times
under its original title and, more commonly, under the title
*English as she is spoke*. The first American edition of the
book (&ldquo;reprinted verbatim and literatim&rdquo; in Boston in 1883)
contained an introduction by Mark Twain, who wrote that
&ldquo;this celebrated little phrase-book will never die while the
English language lasts ... it is perfect ... its immortality
is secure.&rdquo; Fonseca's sublime ridiculousness is not much read
now, yet I am as sure as was Twain that its season will
come again and that other generations will rejoice in its
unique humor.

There is a great difference between the humor that
arises from the simple misuse of language and that which
arises from the kind of naive, serious-minded, and, ultimately,
inspired assault on its richness typified by Fonseca's
phrase-book. I once stayed in a Grenoble hotel room which
was decorated with the alarming instruction &ldquo;In case FIRE,
avert the boots.&rdquo; I soon realized that it was not my footwear
that had to be warded off, but that the message stemmed
from a combination of the belief that *avertir* translated as
'avert' and the use of a French-English dictionary dating
back to the time of the lowly hotel servant known as &ldquo;the
boots.&rdquo; I recalled then my first acquaintance with *English
as she is spoke* and, not for the first time, relished the incredible
variety of our language and the unconsciously
hilarious results caused by its use by less than fluent speakers
and writers.

There are classic phrases from other European phrasebooks.
My favorites are the familiar &ldquo;Stop, the postilion has
been struck by lightning!&rdquo; and the less familiar, but richer
in social nuance, &ldquo;Unhand me Sir, for my husband, who is
an Australian, awaits without.&rdquo; Even these gems are single
lines from otherwise ordinary works. In the case of
Fonseca's book, every page has its memorable lines. He
seems to have been incapable of phrasing even the most simple
idea without some happy misconjunction of words. The
peculiar felicity of his lists, phrases, and conversations came
from his rooted belief that he was a master of the English
language and had a mission to spread the advantages of that
mastery to others.

The book has two main parts. The first consists of lists
of words and phrases in Portuguese and English accompanied
by their English pronunciations. These lists are
found under such headings as &ldquo;Of the man,&rdquo; &ldquo;Some wines,&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Drinkings.&rdquo; The second consists of &ldquo;Familiar dialogues&rdquo;
in English and Portuguese under such headings as
&ldquo;For embarking one's self,&rdquo; &ldquo;With the gardener,&rdquo; and
&ldquo;With a eating-house keeper.&rdquo; The book is rounded out by
various small appendices, of which my very favorite (and
the most sublimely Fonsecaian) is the section headed
'Idiotisms and proverbs.&rdquo; Any one of these idiotisms is
perfect in itself, but they can be divided into the hilariously
loony and the cryptic. Examples of the first are

>The walls have hearsay  
According to thy purse rule thy mouth  
Big head, little sens  
He is beggar as a church rat

The wisdom of these last phrases is not obscured by the
peculiarity of their expression. On the other hand, it takes a
very wise head to tease the meaning out of:

>Nothing some money, nothing of Swiss  
He steep as a marmot  
Take the moon with the teeth  
Cat scalded fear the cold water  
Which like Bertram, love hir dog  
He turns as a weath turcocl

However, before one can move on to a mastery of English
idiotisms, it is necessary to learn more basic words and
phrases. For example, consider the &ldquo;Properties of the body,&rdquo;
among which one finds:

>Drowsiness, Yawn, Contortion, Lustiness, Sneesing,  
Belch, Watching

Armed with these basic concepts, one can then proceed to
the &ldquo;Defects of the body,&rdquo; such as;

>A blind, A hump, A left handed, A squint-eyed,  
The scurf

Knowing the body, its properties and defects, one can begin
to think about more concrete matters, such as food and
drink. For this one needs &ldquo;For the table&rdquo;:

>Some plates, The bottle, Some knifes, Some groceries,  
Some crumb

and &ldquo;Eatings,&rdquo; such as:

>Some boiled meat, Some fritters, A stewed fruit, Some  
jelly broth, Some wigs, A chitterling sausages, Some  
dainty dishes, A litl mine, Hog fat

With such a repast one would have such &ldquo;Drinkings&rdquo;
as:

>Some brandy, Some orgeat, Champaign wine, Some  
paltry wine

I should pause here to note that Fonseca had a number
of singular theories about English. These theories were more
or less what one would expect of a man who thought that
*Chinaman* was a trade; they included the ideas that *a* and
an were masculine and feminine articles, respectively, and
that *some* was a plural article, as in &ldquo;Some garlics.&rdquo; He also
appears to have believed *it* to be the masculine third person
singular pronoun.

To return to his lists, we find the &ldquo;Quadruped's beasts&rdquo;
such as:

>Shi ass, Dragon, Young rabbit, A mule    
and &ldquo;Fishes and shell fishes,&rdquo; such as:
>
>Bleak, Calamary, Muscles, Hedge-hog, A sorte of fish,  
Torpedo

If one were fortunate enough to catch any of these quadruped's
beasts or fishes, one would no doubt cook them with
&ldquo;Seasonings&rdquo;:

>Some wing, Some pinions, Some hog'slard  
or &ldquo;Pot-herbs,&rdquo; such as:  
>
>Some succory, Some cabbages, Some corianders
>
>When one's appetite and thirst are satisfied, there are
such games to play as:
>
>Gleek, The billiard table, Carousal, Pile, Even or non
even.

One of the most useful features of Fonseca's phrasebook
is the phonetic transcription of English pronunciation
given next to the English words and phrases. It is my private
conviction that these pronunciations formed the basis
for the unique accent used by the late Peter Sellers in his
characterization of Inspector Clouseau in the Pink Panther
series of films. Take, for example, Fonseca's pronunciation
for one of his most creative Englishisms-the eatable *Some
wigs*. The phonetic equivalent is &ldquo;Seume uigues.&rdquo; In those
letters one can read the very essence of Clouseau, as one can
in the phonetic transcription of *Gun-powder* (Guenepau'-der).

The &ldquo;studious Portuguese and brazilian Youth&rdquo; to
whom Fonseca addressed his great work will, no doubt,
have spent many studious hours learning the words and
phrases in the first part before approaching the second part
with understandable trepidation, for the second part was to
build on their acquaintance with the English conversation.
Understandably, the author introduced them gently. The
first dialogue &ldquo;For to wish the good morning&rdquo; contains such
staples of conversation as:

>—Good morning, sir, how do you do today?  
—Very well, I thank you  
—To much oblige to you  
—He is very well  
—I am very delight of it. Were is it?  
—He is in country  
—Give a seat to the gentilman  
—It is not necessary, it must go to make a visit hard by  
—You are too in haste

Perhaps one wishes to make a morning visit:

>—Is your master at home? Is it up?  
—No sir, he sleep yet  
—I go make that he get up  
—How is it, you are in bed yet?  
—Yesterday at evening, I was to bed so late that I
may not rising me soon that morning  
—Well! what have you done after the supper?  
—We have sung, danced, laugh, and played  
—What game?  
—To the picket  
—I am no astonished if you get up so late  
—Adieu, my deer, I leave you. If can to see you at
six clock to the hotel from ***, we swill dine
together

A strong personality emerges from these dialogues. It is
that of an inquisitive, fussy, but congenial and clubbable
soul, a sort of Portuguese Pepys delighting in gossip and
food and wine and company. For instance, &ldquo;With a hair
dresser&rdquo;:

>—Master hair dresser, you are very lazy. If you not
come sooner, I shall leave you to
—Shave-me  
—Your razors are them well?  
—Comb-me quickly; don't put me so much pomatum.  
—What tell me? all hairs dresser are newsmonger

One can see all his qualities in &ldquo;For to ask some news&rdquo;:

>—Is it true what is told of master M***?  
—I have heard that he hurt mortally  
—I shall be sowow of it, because he is a honestman  
—Which have wounden him?  
—Two knaves who have attacked him  
—Do know it why?  
—The noise run that is by to have given a box on
the ear to a of them
—I believe it not  
—Are you too many amused to the ball last night?  
—Plenty much, and Madame L*** has call for me
your news

and in &ldquo;For to dine&rdquo;:

>—Sit down here by me.  Do you like soup?  
—Gentilman, will you some beans?  
—Peter, uncork a Porto wine bottle  
—Sir, what will you to?  
—A pullet's wing  
—I trouble you to give me a pear  
—This seems me mellow  
—Taste us rather that liquor, it is good for the stomach  
—I am too much obliged to you, is done

Fonseca's studious youth were not to be contented with
a mastery of English. Other European languages were of
concern to them:

>—How is the french? Are you too learned now?  
—No too much, I know almost nothing  
—They tell howeuver that you speak very well  
—These which tell it they mistake one's  
—Not apprehend you, the french language is not difficult

No matter how difficult these languages might be to acquire, a man with a command of foreign tongues was a man to be envied:

>—How is that gentilman who you did speak by and by?  
—Is a German  
—I did not think him Englishman  
—He is of the Saxony side
speak the french very well
—Tough he is German, he speak so much well italyan, Spanish and english, that among the Italyans they think him Italyan, he speak the french as the Frenches himselves. The Spanishesmen believe him Spanishing, and the Englises, Englisman.  
—It is difficult to enjoy well so much several languages

Even the linguistic paragon discussed in the previous
dialogue could well be at a loss for words when presented
with an unsatisfactory horse by a rascally servant. Not so
the Fonseca of &ldquo;For to ride a horse&rdquo;:

>Here is a horse who have a bad looks. Give me
another; I will not that. He not sall know to march,
he is pursy, he is foundered. Don't you are ashamed
to give me a jade as like? he is undshoed, he is with
nails up, it want lead to the farrier. He go limp, he
is disable, he is blind. That saddle shall hurt me.
The stirrups are too long, very shorts. Stretch out
the stirrups, shorten the stirrups. The saddles girths
are roted, what bat bridle? Give me my whip.
Fasten the cloak-bag and my cloak.

Having disposed of the thoroughly chastened servant
and the blind horse, one could journey forth into the country
to do &ldquo;The fishing&rdquo;:

>—That pond it seems me many multiplied of fishes.
Let us amuse rather to the fishing
—Here, there is a wand and some hooks  
—Silence! there is a superb perch! Give me quick the
rod. Ah! there is, it is a lamprey  
—You mistake you, it is a frog! dip again it in the
water  
—Perhaps I will do better to fish with the leap  
—Try it! I desire that you may be more happy and
more skilful who acertain fisher, what have fished all
day without to can take nothing.

If the disappointments of the fishing are too much to
take or if one were unfortunate enough to fall in the water
while dipping a frog, it could become necessary &ldquo;For to
swim&rdquo;:

>—Sir, do you row well?  
—He swim as a fish  
—I swim on the cork. It is dangerous to row with
bladders, becauses its put to break  
—I row upon the belly on the back and between two
waters: I know also to plunge  
—I am not so dexterous that you  
—Nothing is more easy than to swim; it do not what
don't to be afraid of  
—Tel undress us  
—The weather it is cloudy it lighten, I think we go
to have storm  
—Go out of the water quickly

But life cannot be entirely devoted to pleasure. The sordid
realities of life can impel even this devotee of food and
fun to have dealings &ldquo;With a banker&rdquo;:

>—I have the honour to present you a ex-change letter
draw on you and endorsed to my order  
—I can't to accept it seeng that I have not nor the
advice neither funds of the drawer  
—It is not yet happened it is at usance  
—I know again the signature and the flourish of my
correspondent; I will accept him to the day of the
falling comprehend there the days of grace, if at
there to that occasion I shall received theirs orders

No doubt baffled by this reply, the client resorts to a simpler
monetary request:

>—Would you have so good as to give me some
England money by they louis?  
—With too much pleasure

There are many other examples of how to manage the
commerce and pleasures of the world and, if, by any remote
chance, these should fail the aspiring English speaker, he or
she can reflect on higher matters expressed so well in
familiar idiotisms. For example, who could fail to find
solace and wisdom in the saying &ldquo;After the paunch comes
the dance&rdquo;?

Fonseca's book ends, with perfect appropriateness,
with an absolutely useless index. However, it would do him
an injustice to close on such a negative note. Much more
suitable as an epitome of his friendly philosophy and love of
language and learning is this passage from &ldquo;With a bookseller&rdquo;:

>—But why, you and another book seller, you does
not to imprint some good works?  
—Ther is a reason for that, it is that you cannot
sell its. The actual liking of the public is depraved
they does not read who for to amuse one's self ant
but to instruct one's  
—But the letter's men who cultivate the arts and
sciences they can't to pass without the books  
—A little learneds are happies enough for to may to
satisfy their fancies on the literature

Amen to that, speaking as one happy learned whose
fancies have been satisfied often by this marvelous book.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The defendant, Mrs. —, sat straight and stiff in her
chair awaiting the verdict of the jury. When it came, her
face belied no emotion.&rdquo; [from a news broadcast on Radio
Station WSYR, Syracuse, New York, at 3:30 p.m. on
December 8, 1980. Submitted by John R. Vogt, of that
city.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;After the death of her father as a young child, her
mother moved the family to Durban, South Africa, to be
near relatives.&rdquo; [from a biographical note about Juliet
Prowse in *TV Week, Chicago Tribune*, June 15, 1980. Submitted
by I. Taubenfligel, Chicago.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Police report that a robber jumped up on the counter
of a bar in East Los Angeles the other day and shouted,
This is a holdup,' in both English and Spanish.&rdquo; [From *The
Los Angeles Times*, April 28, 1981. Submitted by Egdon T.
Margo, Reseda, California. *And there are some who would
question the benefits of the teaching of foreign languages in
America!*]

## Antipodean English: *New Australian*
*G. W. Turner*

Among the very early settlers in South Australia were
groups of Old Lutheran refugees from Eastern Germany.
Notable among these were the settlers in the wine-growing
Barossa Valley, where for a long time the German language
was current in a form gradually becoming distinctive
enough to warrant the name *Barossadeutsch*. Time and two
wars, with the accompanying hostility to German settlers,
have left little but a few relics to give local color to tourists
(&ldquo;Wir machen die alte German Mettwurst die best in der
Welt&rdquo; proclaimed a notice seen outside a shop in Truro, just
north of the Barossa Valley, in 1975).

A number of German words have become current in
general South Australian English (*mettwurst, leberwurst* or
*liverwurst*, and the ubiquitous *fritz*, for example, all describing
types of sausage), but spelling, especially in words
containing -ie-, is often so uncertain that a correspondent in
the local newspaper felt obliged to point out that a Wiener
Schnitzel has nothing to do with wine and a Liedertafel
need not be sorrowful. The writer went on to express relief
that an annual gymkhana in Hahndorf, near Adelaide, called
the Schuetzenfest, had not, as it might have been, been
called a Schiessenfest!

The reference to Truro reminds us that not all immigrants,
even in the Barossa region, were German. Cornishmen
were prominent, especially in South Australian mining
districts. Early migration was, however, predominantly
British, even though there were enough exceptions to provide
material for a book *Non-Britishers in Australia* (Melbourne,
1927), by a Scandinavian, J. Lyng.

It is since World War II that migration has become a
flood, and the earlier predominance of North European
migrants has been less evident. Italians and Greeks are
prominent among these new Australians. Only two cities in
the world, Athens and Salonika, have more speakers of
Greek than Melbourne, and none, not even Valletta, has
more speakers of Maltese. Australia's linguistic resources
have rapidly become greatly enriched, though the monolingual
habit remains unshaken in most English-speaking
Australians.

These new languages, particularly Italian, have not
failed to influence Australian English, especially in food
terms. Though the words cannot be said to have entered
English, Australians are at least now familiar with signs on
shops reading *pasticceria* or *macelleria*. More firmly
established as English words are *lasagna* (always in my experience
used in the singular in Australia) and *gelato* or
*gelati*, and even, though less frequently, *gnocchi* or
*tortellino*. Now the Australian may buy *bratwurst, cevapcini,
halva*, or *moussaka* in the take-away shop on the way
home.

Linguists (notably Michael Clyne of Monash University,
especially for German) have not failed to exploit the infinite
variety of sociolinguistic material now available. Not
only is English enriched by new words, but the transplanted
languages themselves also undergo changes, so that such
new variants as &ldquo;Australitalian&rdquo; enter the linguist's social
laboratory. These new varieties might themselves produce
subvarieties. Thus German speakers might call a eucalyptus
*gum-tree, gum, Gumbaum* or *Gummibaum*, the differences
being determined mainly by the locality of the speaker. Add
to all this the kind of German a Latvian might use to communicate
with a Hungarian and the Kinds of English used
when one or both participants in a conversation have little
experience in English, and the range of data available to the
linguist becomes clear.

So we find the Italian writing home &ldquo;&egrave; longo tempo
che non ti scrivo&rdquo; where standard Italian would require &ldquo;&egrave;
da molto tempo,&rdquo; or a German speaker might say &ldquo;Ich kann
es nicht remembern.&rdquo; In Australitalian, a boy or girl might
be called *b&ograve;i* or *gh&egrave;lla* rather than *ragazzo* or *ragazza*. Such
borrowed words might be naturalized enough to be inflected
as native Italian words; the Italian *b&ograve;i* might say
*faitavo* &lsquo;I was fighting.&rsquo;

There is a price for multilingualism. Many people,
especially Southern European women or newcomers, such
as Vietnamese, are cut off from society by a lack of English.
Australia must now, at a time of educational cutbacks, find
the resources to develop courses in English as a Second
Language, so that our linguistic enrichment is not gained at
the price of loneliness and despair for the linguistically
isolated.

## S? Yes!
*Barbara R. DuBois, Los Alamos, New Mexico*

My husband doesn't like to be consulted as a plastic
man, though he is an expert. Mild mannered he is, patient
he is, good with glue he is, but not malleable. One colleague
who unintentionally offends him calls himself a
member of an electronic group, which makes us think of
loud guitars rather than transistors. A memo arrived at my
office from an explosive expert, who sounds too irascible for
me to deal with, but perhaps my serene spouse will be able
to handle him.

An explosive expert doesn't frighten me as much,
however, as an &ldquo;Explosive Truck Route.&rdquo; Ever since seeing
that sign, I have taken the alternate road. Friends that I've
warned assure me that it isn't the whole route that is
hazardous; a later sign makes it clear: &ldquo;Explosive Truck Inspection
Yard.&rdquo; Only the trucks may explode. Or only the
yard? Well, at least not the whole highway.

Town is safer, but still confusing: the drugstore boasts
a new cosmetic salesperson. Is she more beautiful than her
predecessor? Or is he more handsome? A shop advertises instruction
in stripping for antique lovers. I guess senior citizens
can take lessons in anything these days. A want ad calls
for an antique judge; it takes one to know one?

At school we have an athletic director; good, I hate to
see flabby coaches setting a bad example for the youngsters.
Fortunately, the teaching of Latin and Greek is fading, and
I won't have to hear students refer to the classic professor
much longer-as it he were a Thunderbird. But our son just
broke the news that he is studying to become an invertebrate
expert. Why can't he be like his father?


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A Gross Durham Budget Of $3,887,323 Readied&rdquo;
[Headline in The Middletown (Conn.) Press, May 1, 1981,
p. 17. Submitted by John D. Thomas, Middletown, Connecticut.
*No editorializing, please!*]

## Fringe Benefits
*W. Dark Hendley, University of Missouri, K.C.*

Everyone knows that teachers teach and professors
profess for something other than the money involved.
Readers of VERBATIM would not be surprised to learn that
some members of our brotherhood have discovered a fringe
benefit of the profession—one not included in the usual
benefit packages put together by academic institutions. This
fringe benefit, believe it or not, is theme grading. Allow me
to explain.

Theme grading in and of itself is, of course, often considered
one of the drawbacks of teaching. The work is slow,
tedious, and often repetitious. While grading, however, the
earnest searcher after solecisms, malapropisms, barbarisms,
and the like often discovers that hobby and job coincide,
and the result is a fringe benefit not even dreamed of in the
personnel office.

I have been collecting such fringe benefits for several
years, and this seems a good time to share some of my collection
with readers who are equally entertained by grammatical
and linguistic absurdities. First, however, a few
words of explanation are appropriate. All of my examples
are taken from papers written outside of class; thus, they
presumably contain well-thought-out ideas and are carefully
worded to achieve the maximum effect. All represent the
lucubrations of upperclassmen, advanced students of literature.
Like gemstones found in a slagheap, they come rough
and unpolished, in all their native glory.

The reach for the sublime is one of the greatest pitfalls
for the tyro writer. Reaching for new heights can yield
greater depths, as in this example; &ldquo;For hundreds of years,
the world dreamed of landing on the moon, and Jules Verne
wrote many a story about the possibility. The idea so intrigued
man that in 1969, man walked onto the moon for
the first time. Death rays in literature become lasers in real
life, which are useful at this time.&rdquo; Ordinarily, one might
wish that the death ray would have put a merciful end to
that final sentence. However, from the perspective of the
weary paper grader, that sentence is a fringe benefit, giving
new energy to carry on. Another route to the sublime
chosen by the novice is through mastery of polysyllabic diction:
&ldquo;Coleridge in his reverie captures briefly unrestricted
and spontaneous imagery, and it seems to proliferate flowingly
as he progresses.&rdquo;

The opposing tendency is the desire for pithiness, the
search for the epigrammatic statement or bon mot. The student
finds this especially tempting after reading eighteenth-century 
poetry. &ldquo;If a man does not bear false fronts, neither
should a woman,&rdquo; writes one student. Another student sums
up the situation of one of Wordsworth's characters quite
succinctly: &ldquo;Luke decaded morally while away.&rdquo;

Some students accept the challenge to think of their
papers as an argument, and they attempt to prove their
points through logic and sound reason: &ldquo;The Wife of Bath is
a liberated woman,&rdquo; writes one observer of the social scene
in literature. &ldquo;She rides her horse straddle—another point in
her liberateness.&rdquo; With the knowledge that the best poetry
usually employs imagery to relate the reader to the sensory
experience of the poem, the beginning prose stylist seeks the
pictorial and the concrete: &ldquo;The hero . . . must also be able
to suffer and feel pain throughout the plots and crevices of
the story he is involved in.&rdquo; Another would-be critic attempts
to explain Hamlet's complex feelings toward his
mother: &ldquo;We see that Hamlet loves his mother dearly but is
very disappointed in her because she jumps into incestuous
sheets so soon after her husband's death.&rdquo;

The most common poetic device applied to expository
writing is the use of figurative language. &ldquo;During the middle
parts of the seventeenth century the Parliament of England
stood out like a sore thumb on the hand of
journalism,&rdquo; expounds one student. Another student employs
similar pathological imagery. &ldquo;It was a sore spot on
the body of the government, and speculation exists that this
branch may eventually evolve away as useless.&rdquo;

Sometimes it is hard to know what effect the writer is
hoping to achieve. I assume that the following sentence is
aimed at metaphorical expression, and yet the result leaves
me somewhat puzzled: &ldquo;Politics was just beginning to blossom
in England and the whole land was on the rhetorical
bandwagon.&rdquo; And occasionally the writer achieves an effect
not intended. For example, in writing about Good Queen
Bess, one student concludes: &ldquo;Elizabeth, though victorious
in war, was growing old and weakened by internal unrest.&rdquo;
Actually, this idea might be more nearly true than its
author ever dreamed.

Poets choose words in part for their sounds, a technique
that students often attempt in their own writing. A young
Swinburnian writes: &ldquo;The final section of the poem ends
with a proliferation of alliteration,&rdquo; and another contributes,
&ldquo;This weed of self greed is outgrowing his compassionate
senses.&rdquo;

The mechanics of sentence construction is the downfall
of many an earnest writer. It is difficult to pay attention to
such minutiae as dangling modifiers when you are writing
about august subjects: &ldquo;Lambasted by some critics as the
most tainting aspect of his literary repertoire, it is my opinion
that these poems are his most violent outburst of his
characteristic loathing of hypocrisy and foolishness.&rdquo;
Another writer seeks to avoid a clich&eacute; by use of the word
&ldquo;proverbial,&rdquo; an approach often used; but he, too, ends up
dangling precariously: &ldquo;Like the proverbial glass house, in
those days no one wanted to be the first to start the name
calling.&rdquo;

The inadvertent misuse of a word has been a staple of
comedy ever since Mrs. Malaprop popularized the technique.
&ldquo;It was the strength of their love that made Luke's
leaving bareable,&rdquo; writes one student of the same Luke who
decaded away above. &ldquo;I doubt anyone would vie he wrote
these poems strictly in jest,&rdquo; writes another. My files also
yield &ldquo;it was her destination that made her so affectionate&rdquo;
and &ldquo;next he uses the same approach with the woman
which concretes his sexual suggestions.&rdquo;

The redemptive fringe benefit of a dull paper need not
be anything as large as a word: a single letter mistakenly
added or changed may be enough to translate the grader's
boredom to sheer joy. For example, the correct (and very
undomestic) Jane Austen is summed up in these words:
&ldquo;Austen also deals with the concept of breading and ill-breading
in her work,&rdquo; a startling idea which conjures up
an image of the great satirist directing her attention to the
proper way to prepare a veal cutlet. A misplaced letter may
be a Freudian slip or the result of hasty typing, but for the
weary reader it really doesn't matter, for the result is the
same. Perhaps, for example, this student is making an editorial
comment even greater than he planned when he
states, &ldquo;Defoe wrote simply and sometimes crudly.&rdquo; And
Freud would surely have enjoyed this sentence: &ldquo;The first
scene I would like to analize occurs in *Heart of Darkness*.&rdquo;
Fielding, we learn, &ldquo;drove home the correspondence between
his work and the classics . . . through parodies of
Homeric smiles.&rdquo; Given that Fielding once suggested that
satire was a mirror which the reader held up to his face in
the privacy of his own closet, it is wonderful to think of
Fielding himself leering into his own looking glass as he attempted
to achieve the perfect Homeric grin.

One writer is quite frank in highlighting punctuation
as a source of his difficulties: &ldquo;The work definately needs
close reading to be understood. It would be possible to read
quickly through the passage, I suppose, but definately difficult.
The first line alone contains two semi colons and an
exclamation point.&rdquo;

Once solecisms are seen as one of the important fringe
benefits of this business, there is an unavoidable tendency to
begin recording the most significant examples. It is my own
informal observation that many English professors have
their own private collections stashed away in a desk drawer
where they are always accessible. Herewith a few of my
favorites:

>As with any controversy, one person's meat is another
one's poison.
>
>The impeccable strength of both characters is unquestionable
as well.
>
>Her concerns for God are somewhat warped for her
own beneficial meaning.
>
>Shakespeare develops a parallel of images.
>
>The Wife of Bath (Bath is dead) ...
>
>He deftly shakes up the reader when Gulliver journeys
to the land of the Brobdingnagians and looks up
the great chain of being.
>
>Lear perceives his mistake in obstracizing Cordelia
and showering Goneril and Regan with filial devotion
and favor.
>
>The second image that Othello visualizes himself in is
in the role of being slightly above human. He pictures
himself in a prerogative manner.
>
>He thunders, that before he crys and give in to his
despicable disdainful daughters, and give them the
satisfaction of knowing that they have broken the
pride of a king and brought him to his knoble knees
and made him plead, and wail, and beseech them
that his mind would shatter into a countless number
of subconsciousness: and I will go mad; and in fact,
King Lear does go mad.
>
>Finally, the plot everges.

And so, perhaps, does the reason teachers teach. As the
eager student struggles to express himself, the theme grader
discovers a hidden prize—the fringe benefits not written into
any contract.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;4-Hour Service: In by 8 Out by 2. [From the window
of a dry-cleaner's in San Francisco. *Tempus fugit*.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Original Joe's #2.&rdquo; [Name of a well-known restaurant
in San Francisco. This and the preceding submitted by Dr.
William K. Redican, San Francisco.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;However, several witnesses testified that Hudson was
alone in his office that night at various times with one or
more of the three women.&rdquo; [From *The* (Charleston, S.C.)
*News and Courier*, February 26, 1981. Submitted by McColl
Pringle, Charleston. *It seems increasingly difficult to
find any privacy at all these days*.]

## Pleonasties
*Harold J. Ellner, M.D., Richland, Washington*

&ldquo;It was minus twenty degrees below zero,&rdquo; tautologically
reported the ham operator from Minnesota. Shall we
accept this as merely a pleonasm (unnecessary repetition) or
nitpickingly consider it a double negative and record the
temperature at plus 20?

Pleonasms pervade every aspect of communication. At
times they are intentionally used for emphasis, at times for
verbosity, and on other occasions are just honest mistakes.
In that the author is a urologist and a sports fan, note of
many of these pleonasm has been made in these areas. They
are, however, everywhere.

It is time to institute the Pleonastic Putdown (&ldquo;Pleonasty&rdquo;)
to rebel, as would Edwin Newman and John Simon,
against verbosity. It will not earn the putter-down (pleonasticist)
much cordiality, but it may help defend the
language.

W. C. Fields, who objected to almost everyone, was
reputed to have set the style when he refused to work for a
studio he thought to be Jewish-run. &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he was told, &ldquo;the
president is Roman Catholic.&rdquo; &ldquo;That's the worst kind,&rdquo; rejoined
Fields. Prejudicial, yes, but a decisive pleonasty.

Washington's new Governor, John Spellman, not above
an occasional pleonasm, issued certificates of gratitude to
his supporters, &ldquo;. . .in appreciation and recognition of your
significant contribution to my successful election. ...&rdquo; One
wonders what constitutes an unsuccessful election. Shakespeare's
Falstaff, in *Henry IV*, referred to &ldquo;an &lsquo;Ebrew Jew,&rdquo;
undoubtedly for emphasis.

Here, then, are some pleonasms heard, recorded, and
furnished with a suggested pleonasty for each:

>*Medical*
>
>This room costs $200 to the patient. *To whom
else?*
>
>A positive culture was obtained for Strep. *If Strep
was there, it was positive*.
>
>Scrotal masses in the male Yes, *they predominate
in the male*.
>
>These tests, when performed, gave normal results.
*More so than if they were not performed*.
>
>The urodynamics of urology  *That's the nicest kind
in the whole specialty*.
>
>Then, appropriate treatment was instituted. *Better
than inappropriate any time*.
>
>Many white cells, too numerous to count *Glad you
said it was many; it helped*.
>
>A diagnostic x-ray film *Are any otherwise?*
>
>The patient had a complicated clinical course. *It
would have been worse if nonclinical*.
>
>Clinically, the pain diminished. *That's the best way
for it to happen*.
>
>He'd undergone a previous prostatectomy. *Most are*.
>
>It has been shown in the past by Paulsen et al. ...  
>*A large number of his findings were in the past ...*
>
>Ureteral reduplication Don't you mean duplication?
>
>An admixture *Mixture?*
>
>Foreshortening *Shortening?*
>
>A prior surgeon did it. *Certainly not a future
one . . .*
>
>He claimed marked subjective improvement. *If he
claimed it, it had to be subjective.*
>
>Under appropriate anesthesia  *We have no inappropriate
anesthesiologist*.
>
>This is the first drug of choice.  *How does this
differ from the drug of choice?*
>
>There was still persistent disease. *Still disease?
Persistent disease? Take your choice*.
>
>He gained 14 pounds in weight.  *Certainly not in
height or in British currency*.
>
>It was a totally complete excision.  *That's how I
want my total (or complete) one.*
>
>Skin *rash Bad place for one*.
>
>Dr. James Kildare, M. D. *Which shall we drop, the*
Dr. *or the* M. D.?
>
>The male prostate gland *Needless to say . . .*
>
>Absolutely no blood loss at all  *That clears a lingering
doubt.*
>
>Past history *Ah, yes, much history is found there.*
>
>Yellow jaundice *Of all hues, the most ominous*.
>
>His motor movements weren't good. *But wait until
you see his sensory ones*.
>
>Liver cirrhosis  *The worst kind!*
>
>Some few specimens  *Which shall we drop, some or*
few?
>
>Abdominal ascites. *In that ascites means free fluid
in the abdomen, abdominal is superfluous.*
>
>Mentally insane *Far worse than physically . . .*

>*Sports*
>
>He made 20 in a row without a miss. *Twenty in a
row would be hard to swing with one or two misses.*
>
>(Cosell): Why do you persist in keeping on playing?  
*Well, Howard, I persist in playing because I want to
keep on playing.*
>
>In good field position  *Are there any non-field positions
in this game?*
>
>Face mask  *I'm glad you explained that; I was
thinking &ldquo;elbow mask.&rdquo;*
>
>He'll try a 44-yard field-goal attempt. *What's
wrong with the reverse? Can he attempt a try?*
>
>This is their first offensive possession [also, first
offensive play from scrimmage.] The *defensive team
does not possess. Nor does it run any plays from
scrimmage.*
>
>They got a whole full minute time out.  *There are
full minutes and full minutes. Give me a whole full
minute any time.*
>
>Five seconds on the clock  *Anywhere else?*
>
>Deflected away  *Where else can it be deflected?*
>
>He was awarded the game ball.  *As distinguished
from the ungame ball?*

>*General*
>
>To recoil back  *It's the forward recoiling that's
dangerous.*
>
>The ethnic background of the people  *Could it be of
anyone else?*
>
>Past experience has shown . . . *That's the most
enriching kind.*
>
>Just merely *Reminiscent of &ldquo;Just Merely a Song at
Twilight.*
>
>The end result  *How final can you get?*
>
>The sight was pleasing to the eye.  *And to none of
the other senses.*
>
>Mental anguish  *That's anguish in the extreme.*
>
>Last and final curtain call *Superseding the first and
final?*
>
>Affix the necessary postage.  *The Post Office will not
deliver letters faster with the unnecessary postage*.
>
>The basic fundamentals *That's really fundamental.*
>
>A justice court *Some dispense other services.*
>
>He's a human person. *Clad to know!*
>
>Positive affirmative action *The negative type never
worked.*
>
>(Kissinger): A hypothetical situation that doesn't
exist . . . *Give me one that exists every time.*
>
>An unexpected surprise *And how do you like your
surprises?*
>
>A quick minute *Is that a sub-60 second one?*
>
>To successfully pass an exam *Only our best students
pass them that way.*
>
>He kicked his feet.  *In contrast to other appendages?*
>
>A crooked racketeer *Give me the honest kind.*
>
>A visual sight *Like an auditory hearing?*
Add on *As opposed to subtract off?*
>
>From whence *Whence is enough!*
>
>You may purchase the property from the seller.  
>*He'd be the logical choice.*
>
>A perverted sex-offender *The nonperverted type is
not quite as dangerous.*
>
>I took it with my own hands. [Saw it with my own
eyes. Knew it in my own mind.] *And nobody else's!*
>
>Punctured a hole in *The work, obviously, of a
crude puncturer.*
>
>Orbited around *Drop around any time.*
>
>A new innovation *Enough of those old ones!*
>
>A new recruit *Veteran recruits are in short supply.*
>
>Foot pedal *Is that like a hand handle?*
>
>A short three-letter word *The long kind will never
do.*
>
>Cancel it out *Anyway, don't include it in.*
>
>A photographic picture *Does this differ from a
photograph?*
>
>G.I. Issue *Is it Government Issue issue you mean?*
>
>Therapy treatments *What's wrong with plain old
therapy? Or treatments?*
>
>First introduction *Does this differ from an introduction?*
>
>*Just Plain Bad English*
>
>The average age was 29 years old.
>
>Removed out
>
>Thank you for joining with us
>
>Killed him dead
>
>Blood loss was two units of blood.

There is little question that an undercurrent of sarcasm
exists (a current that &ldquo;runs&rdquo; is a pleonasm) in pleonasties.
They should be uttered smilingly and jocularly in the
&ldquo;spoonful of sugar&rdquo; spirit. Although imperfect, pleonasties
constitute a mechanism of reaction unavailable to recipients
of the meaningless &ldquo;Have a nice day&rdquo; or of discourses heavily
laced with &ldquo;y'know&rdquo; and &ldquo;hopefully.&ldquo;

## Found in VERBATIM
*Boris Randolph, Los Angeles, California*

The one hundred and one English words defined below
can all be made up from the letters contained in the word
VERBATIM. You may use the letters only as often as they occur
in VERBATIM itself, namely, once in a word. After you
find the one hundred and one, you may wish to see how
many others you can find on your own. There are quite a
few.

1.  Lincoln's &ldquo;Honest&rdquo; nickname                    _ _ _
2.  Fish lure                                                _ _ _ _
3.  Hearing tool                                               _ _ _
4.  Gershwin the lyricist                                      _ _ _
5.  Coffin-holder                                            _ _ _ _
6.  Actress Murray's first name                                _ _ _
7.  Male sheep                                                 _ _ _
8.  Actress Le Gallienne's first name                          _ _ _
9.  Body bone                                                  _ _ _
10.  Column of light                                         _ _ _ _
11.  Encourage                                               _ _ _ _
12.  Circumference                                         _ _ _ _ _
13.  Marie Wilson's famous role                              _ _ _ _
14.  Naked                                                   _ _ _ _
15.  Vitality                                                  _ _ _
16.  Purpose                                                   _ _ _
17.  Streetcar                                               _ _ _ _
18.  Husband or wife                                         _ _ _ _
19.  Small movie part                                          _ _ _
20.  Edge                                                      _ _ _
21.  Take in as food                                           _ _ _
22.  Ceremony                                                _ _ _ _
23.  Compete                                                   _ _ _
24.  Atmosphere                                                _ _ _
25.  French master                                       _ _ _ _ _ _
26.  Beverage                                                  _ _ _
27.  Drinking place                                            _ _ _
28.  Small contribution                                      _ _ _ _
29.  Paper measure                                           _ _ _ _
30.  Bad boy                                                 _ _ _ _
31.  Deep mud                                                _ _ _ _
32.  Wheel covering                                          _ _ _ _
33.  Precious resin                                        _ _ _ _ _
34.  Mother                                                _ _ _ _ _
35.  Degree of speed                                         _ _ _ _
36.  Baseball tool                                             _ _ _
37.  Dinner check                                              _ _ _
38.  Anger                                                     _ _ _
39.  Kind of word                                            _ _ _ _
40.  French boy friend                                         _ _ _
41.  Let out                                                 _ _ _ _
42.  Female horse                                            _ _ _ _
43.  Took in as food                                           _ _ _
44.  Bolt or pin                                           _ _ _ _ _
45.  Very courageous                                       _ _ _ _ _
46.  Italian river                                         _ _ _ _ _
47.  Heavy spar                                          _ _ _ _ _ _
48.  Beef, pork or such                                      _ _ _ _
49.  Move rapidly                                      _ _ _ _ _ _ _
50.  Talk like a madman                                      _ _ _ _
51.  Thing                                                   _ _ _ _
52.  Another edge                                            _ _ _ _
53.  Rodent                                                    _ _ _
54.  100 square meters                                         _ _ _
55.  Italian street                                            _ _ _
56.  Turkish inn                                         _ _ _ _ _ _
57.  Turkish title                                           _ _ _ _
58.  Game playing group                                      _ _ _ _
59.  Antoinette's first name                               _ _ _ _ _
60.  Reduce                                                  _ _ _ _
61.  Hail!                                                     _ _ _
62.  Animal domesticator                                   _ _ _ _ _
63.  Deserve                                               _ _ _ _ _
64.  French girl friend                                      _ _ _ _
65.  Polar animals                                           _ _ _ _
66.  Spoil                                                   _ _ _ _
67.  Breast-holder                                             _ _ _
68.  Scotch cap                                                _ _ _
69.  A variant of 13 above                                   _ _ _ _
70.  Market                                                _ _ _ _ _
71.  Hoarfrost                                               _ _ _ _
72.  Cravat                                                    _ _ _
73.  Body limb                                                 _ _ _
74.  What a clock measures                                   _ _ _ _
75.  Famous Irish queen                                        _ _ _
76.  Soft French cheese                                      _ _ _ _
77.  Black sticky stuff                                        _ _ _
78.  Fresh-water fish                                      _ _ _ _ _
79.  Eye drop                                                _ _ _ _
80.  Beautiful work                                            _ _ _
81.  Floor covering                                            _ _ _
82.  Pope's headdress                                      _ _ _ _ _
83.  Musical rhythm                                          _ _ _ _
84.  Send                                                  _ _ _ _ _
85.  Period of time                                            _ _ _
86.  Make neat                                               _ _ _ _
87.  Metrical poetical foot                                  _ _ _ _
88.  Declare as true                                         _ _ _ _
89.  Sink teeth into                                       _ _ _ _ _
90.  Biblical weed                                           _ _ _ _
91.  Entertainer Parks, first name                           _ _ _ _
92.  Ward off                                            _ _ _ _ _ _
93.  Angry                                                 _ _ _ _ _
94.  Comedian Conway's first name                              _ _ _
95.  Indian group                                          _ _ _ _ _
96.  Greek letter                                            _ _ _ _
97.  Large tank                                                _ _ _
98.  Another Greek letter                                      _ _ _
99.  Bandleader Shaw's first name                          _ _ _ _ _
100.  Wager                                                    _ _ _
101.  Encountered                                              _ _ _


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;CORRECTIONS: An article in The Living Section on
Wednesday about decorative cooking incorrectly described a
presentation of Muscovy duck by Michel Fitoussi, a New
York chef. In preparing it, Mr. Fitoussi uses a duck that has
been killed.&rdquo; [From *The New York Times*, April 25, 1981,
p. 25. Submitted by James J. Storrow, Jr., New York City.
*Now they tell me! Here, I'd tried a ruptured duck, left over
from World War II, a* lame duck, *left over from the Carter
administration, a* Wild Duck, *supplied by my butcher,
Henrik Ibsen, a Peking duck, which just kept looking at me,
somewhat reproachfully, as I tried to decorate it, and* a cold
duck, which *persisted in trying to get back into its bottle.*]


### OBITER DICTA
*Kathleen Mollohan, Helena, Montana*

Soon I am going to quit my job in state government
and become a full-time artist. One of the reasons I'm going
to do this is so that my entire daily vocabulary will consist
of words like *weft* and *indigo*. My goal in life is never again
to suggest that a community maximize its resources. What
can I possibly mean? If I mean the city should recycle old
newspapers, why don't I say so?

The watchdogs of the English language are trying to
help us tighten up our thoughts and hence our utterances.
The trouble is, we in government and education (I am in
both, alas!) sincerely think we understand each other. I'll
give you an example. I recently asked several of my colleagues
to send me a list of topics on which they could speak
or give workshops. The responses I got can be divided into
three categories. *Perfectly Clear* contains Pruning Ornamental
Trees, the Fitting and Care of Hearing Aids, and
Furniture Refinishing. Wonderful. The second category,
*Ambiguous*, includes Parent Involvement, Human Potential,
Process Consultation, Results Management Techniques
and, my favorite, Multi-cultural Education at the Community
Level. People are going to sign up for workshops
with these titles. What do they think they are going to get?
Will they be disappointed if *parent involvement* doesn't
mean &lsquo;involvement with each other,&rsquo; but rather &lsquo;helping the
first-grade teacher design bulletin boards&rsquo;? The third category
isn't terribly offensive, just incomplete. I call it *Need
More Information*. The topics in this group are a peculiar
form of professional shorthand, rich in meaning to those
whose salaries come from a common funding source but a
mystery to the rest of us. Some examples are Prevention
Education, Accessibility, Token Economies, and Community
Action. I found out that *prevention* means &lsquo;prevention
of delinquency and/or drug and alcohol abuse.&rsquo; *Accessibility*
is &lsquo;the ease with which physically handicapped
people can get into buildings.&rsquo; *Token economies* are not the
economic systems of the third-world countries: incredible as
it seems, token *economies* refers to &lsquo;the modification of people's
behavior by rewarding desirable actions with tokens
which can later be exchanged for junk food or whatever.&rsquo;
*Community action*, it turns out, has a special meaning to a
host of people. There are community action programs and
CAP agencies, but they aren't called that any more (probably
because community action program agencies sounds
silly). They are now called *human resource development
councils;* they still do community action. If you pin these
folks down, they admit theirs is a &lsquo;social service program for
low income.&rsquo; (I am not a low income now, but I will be
soon.) It was only by the most dogged persistence that I
discovered that one of the things they can do is tell poor
people how they can get their homes weatherized-maximize,
in fact, their community resources.

I would like to make all these people carry a pocket
dictionary and look up the definition of every word they
use. I think I'll start with the Human Potential Specialist in
my office. She helps people understand that women should
get the same job training as men.

## Indian File
*Norman Ward, University of Saskatchewan*

A person who lives in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, in a
country named Canada, whose capital is Ottawa,
can hardly be unaware of the importance of Indian words
as a source of place names in North America. After inquiring
into the originals of those names, one will also know
that their pronunciation may have suffered in translation.
The *saskatoon*, for example, a delicious fruit that looks like
a reddish blueberry, was named by the Cree, and in the
English alphabet its Indian source comes out as *misaskwatomin*.
A Cree not only would be unlikely to say *misaskwatomin*
so that it rhymed with *saskatoon*, but might pronounce
*saskatoon* itself differently from anybody whose
mother tongue is English.

That is perhaps one reason why, apart from hundreds
of place names (what is the longest distance one can travel
on this continent without encountering an Indian place
name?), remarkably few Indian words have entered North
American vernacular. There may be many local or regional
exceptions, such as *saskatoon* itself: if it were not also the
name of a city, it is doubtful whether the word would be
often heard outside the berry's prairie habitat. But more important
than difficult pronunciations may be the simple historical
fact that Europeans arrived in North America
already equipped with the words they needed to describe
what they found. They were familiar with the native
peoples' weaponry and modes of transportation and had
their own terms for a considerable variety of geographical
phenomena. Few of them were interested in native religious
beliefs beyond, perhaps, knowing what should be suppressed.
What they did not have were names for places,
tribes, and languages, and for those they drew on both their
own history and on Indian words, frequently (judging from
the comments of authorities on place names) with no clear
idea of precisely what they meant. They also relied on the
natives for the words for North American artifacts, flora,
and fauna with which they were unfamiliar.

Not all words that sound like adaptations from a native
tongue or for some reason or other have particularly North
American, connotations are necessarily of Indian origin.
Lacrosse is widely regarded as a game played first by Indians,
but its name is French, and so is the name of one
tribe that played it, the Hurons. That ubiquitous denizen of
the Great Plains, the *gopher*, honeycombs the earth, and
the French word for &lsquo;honeycomb&rsquo; is *gaufre. Shaman* comes
from Russian sources, among others, and *palaver* is from the
Portuguese; *junco, mesa, palomino, pueblo*, and *sierra* are
Spanish. We are also indebted to Europeans for several
words which, while probably of a native origin in this
hemisphere, nonetheless seem to have entered North American
English with indirect assistance from abroad: French—
particularly Canadian French—imported *toboggan, rubaboo* 
&lsquo;an unappetizing soup made from pemmican,&rsquo; *babiche*
&lsquo;rawhide thongs,&rsquo; and *togue* a regional name for &lsquo;lake trout.&rsquo;
A longer list of more familiar words, generally with Caribbean
beginnings, has come down from the Spanish: *canoe,
guano, hammock, maize, tobacco, papaya (or papaw), poncho,
puma, quetzal*. (Some of those words, incidentally,
have made their way into French with identical spellings,
while others have done so slightly disguised: *cano&euml;, hamac,
ma&iuml;s, tabac*.)

No claim is made that the list is complete: consider the
ill-tempered *piranha*, or that indispensable source of chicle,
the *sapodilla*, not to mention its fellow tree, the *guaiacum*.
All of the words cited so far are readily categorized as
animal, vegetable, or artifact, offering few hints of abstract
ideas. With occasional exceptions, that generalization holds
true of words that have entered North American English
directly from the native languages. From the far north have
come *igloo, kayak, parka*, and *oomiak*. Canadian English,
naturally enough, contains a few, familiarity with which
varies greatly even among Canadians; *komatik, kudlik,
mukluk, muktuk*, and *ooloo*, all of them man-made, unlike
that curious upheaval of Arctic ice called a *pingo*.

More southerly peoples than the Innuit (*Eskimo* is not
of native origin) have produced or contributed to a substantially
longer list of words in general North American use.
Some of these are so solidly identified with particular areas
that their Indian origin is almost forgotten. Of food, there
are *hominy*  (with its strikingly up-to-date root
*rockahomonie*), *pemmican, persimmon, pone, quahog*, and
*succotash*; a feast including some of those on the West coast
would be a *potlatch*, a festival particularly associated with
the Chinook tribe, which gave its name to an unseasonably
warm winter wind that on short notice sweeps eastwards
down the mountains and across the central plains. Untouched
by a chinook is the *muskeg*, which lies between
agricultural and forest lands and the Arctic.

Some of the wild creatures with Indian names are also
food: the edible mammals include *caribou, moose*, and in
some places *opossum*, the fishes *cisco* and *muskellunge* and
the less familiar *oolichan* &lsquo;smelt&rsquo; and *sauger* &lsquo;pike.&rsquo; Less
generally thought of as food, but doubtless eaten, are chipmunk,
raccoon, *skunk*, and *massasauga* &lsquo;a small venomous
snake of the Great Lakes region.&rsquo; Two types of horse are
identifiably Indian: the *appaloosa*, historically identified
with the Palouse River in Washington, and the *cayuse*. (*Pinto*,
which sounds as if it ought to be Indian, is Spanish.)
Recognizable artifacts that would be employed in and
around all these creatures include *moccasin, tomahawk,
wigwam*, and, for trade or perhaps ornamentation, *wampum.*
All of them, of course, could be discussed at
*powwows.*

Native-language words that are specifically associated
with human beings are even rarer in North American English
than are those related to animals. *Squaw* and *papoose*
are still with us, and still capable to titillating audiences at
TV sitcoms when applied to non-Indians; but the best-known
designation for a male warrior, *brave*, is of English
and French extraction. The greenhorn is seen in a rarely
heard word of Chinook ancestry, *cheechako*, and an Algonquian
term, sometimes used for cayuse, recognizes friendship
in nitchie, also rare. *Tammany* Hall took into English
*sachem* &lsquo;a chief,&rsquo; by using the term for its own political purposes,
and two other Algonquian words, *totem* and *manito*,
which represent, respectively, a clan or family emblem and
the Great Spirit.

*Manito* stands almost alone as a word of native origin
in the contemporary North American vocabulary which
does not deal with a live or concrete object, but it shares
with most of the others a capacity to be spelled and pronounced
in more than one way. For that reason, there is
sometimes room for doubt about the etymology of an Indian
word, for if (as George R. Stewart records in *Names on the
Land) the magnificent Merrimack* can also be rendered as
*Monumac* and *Molumac*, each with a different meaning,
there is no reason for surprise if one dictionary says the
origin of *chipmunk* is uncertain, while another, equally
reputable, says it is Algonquian. Since what was sought for
this article were Indian words in use in English, at first only
concise dictionaries were consulted, and whole new visitas
were opened up by the *Oxford English Dictionary*. That
opus supplemented one thing the others agreed on, the spelling
of *chipmunk*, with *chipmunck, chipmonk, chipmuk*,
and *chipmiuck*. Owing to a fault in the paper in my copy,
the last version is unclear and may even be *chipminck*. It is
obscurely comforting to think that it may not matter.

&ldquo;The unlearned or foolish phantasticall, that smelles
but of learnyng (such felowes as have been learned men
in their daies) will to Latine their tongues, that the simple
cannot but wonder at their talke, and thynke surely
thei speake by some Revelacion. I knowe them that
thynke Rhetorique, to stande wholy upon darke woordes,
and he that can catche an ynke home terme by the taile,
him thei compt to bee a fine Englishe man, and a good
Rhetotician [sic]. And the rather to set out this folie, I
will add here suche a letter, as William Sommer himself,
could not make a better for that purpose....

>&lsquo;Ponderyng, erp&emacr;dyng, and revolutying with my
self your ingent affabilitee, and ingenious capacitee,
for mundane affaires: I cannot but celebrate
and extolle your magnificall dexteritee, above all
other. For how could you have adepted suche illustrate
prerogative, and dominicall superioritee, if
the fecunditee of your ingenie had not been so fertile,
and wo&umacr;derfull pregnaunt. Now therfore
beeyng accersited, to suche splendent renoume,
and dignitee splendidious: I doubt not but you
will adiuuate such poor adnichilate orphanes, as
whilome ware c&omacr;disciples with you, and of
antique familiaritie in Lincolne shire. Among
whom I beeyng a Scholasticall panion, obtestate
your sublimitee to extoll myne infirmitee. There is
a sacerdotall dignitee in my native countrey, contiguate
to me, where I now contemplate: whiche
your worshipfull benignitee, could sone impetrate
for me, if it would like you to extend your
scedules, and collaude me in them to the right
honorable lord Chauncellor, or rather Archigramatian
of Englande. You knowe my literature,
you knowe the pastorall promocion, I obtestate
your clemencie, to inuigilate thus muche for me
accordyng to my confidence, and as you know my
condigne merites, for suche a compendious liuing.
Rut now I reliquishe to fatigate your intelligence
with any more frivolous verbositie, and therfore
he that rules the climates be euermore your beautreux,
your fortresse, and your bulwarke. Amen'
&ldquo;What wise m&amacr; readyng this letter, will not take
him for a very Caulfe, that made it in good earnest, and
thought by his ynkepot termes, to get good personage
. . . . Do we not speake, because we would have
other to understande us, or is not the tongue geu&emacr; [given]
for this ende, that one might know what another
meaneth? And what unlearned man can tell, what half
this letter signifieth? Therfore, either we must make a
difference of Englishe, and saie some is learned Englishe,
and other some is rude Englishe, or the one is courte
talke, the other is co&umacr;trey speache, or els we must of
necessitee, banishe al suche affected Rhetorique, and use
altogether one maner of l&amacr;guage.&rdquo;
>
>— The *Arte of Rhetorique* (1553),
>Thomas Wilson

## Jade for the Jaded
*Mary M. Tius, Kavala, Greece*

As all punsters know, *hag, jade*, and *nag* are words
with more than one meaning. So is *harrow*, and when we
look up one of its meanings, we find a few entries away the
word *haras*, defined as a &lsquo;stud farm or harras,&rsquo; derived from
Old French *haraz*, from Arabic *hara* &lsquo;stud, stable.&rsquo; This is
the same word as Turkish *hara* and probably also Latin
*hara* &lsquo;pen or coop for domestic animals; piggery.&rsquo; Next,
looking up *harry* (from Old English *here* &lsquo;army,&rsquo; akin to
Gothic *harjis* &lsquo;host,&rsquo; Greek *koiranos* &lsquo;commander,&rsquo; and Old
Persian *k&amacr;ra* &lsquo;army&rsquo;), we recall that *horde* comes from
Turkish *ordu* &lsquo;army, host&rsquo;; that Latin *armentum* means
'herd'; that army and order are not unconnected notions.

Ambling off to *jade*, we rein in sharply at Panjabi
*jath&amacr;* an &lsquo;armed band,&rsquo; and then again at *jaud*, Scots for
'jade'-whether the stone or the animal is not stated,
though Scots *yad, yade*, and *yaud* mean &lsquo;mare&rsquo; (from Old
Norse *jalda* &lsquo;mare,&rsquo; of Finno-Ugric origin). Heigh-ho!
Turkish at means &lsquo;horse.&rsquo; Galloping on to *mare*, we are
brought up short at Chinese (Peking) *ma&#92;?&#92;3* &lsquo;horse&rsquo; before arriving
at the mare of *nightmare* (akin to Croatian *mora*,
Old High German and Old Norse *mara* &lsquo;incubus,&rsquo; and reminiscent-at
least to us-of French *m&egrave;re* and Greek
*m&egrave;gaera)*. Turkish *cadi* means &lsquo;vampire, hag, witch&rsquo;; Greek
*tzadogria* means &lsquo;hag, witch&rsquo;; both sound like Hindi *jadoo*
or *jadu* &lsquo;magic.&rsquo; Then there is Turkish *harm*, used only of
horses, which means &lsquo;jaded, vicious, worn-out&rsquo;-a fairly
good description of French *haridelle*. English harridan has
lost its French equine connotation but keeps the &lsquo;strumpethag-jade&rsquo;
sense. Somewhere along the way to becoming an
utter *hag-harpy*, a *harridan-nag* is a *harlot-houri-whore*
the incubus kind of mare.

And what of *jadestone*? While hastening from *yaud*,
we stumbled upon Chinese (Peking) *yu&#92;?&#92;4* &lsquo;jadestone.&rsquo; Turkish
*hara* &lsquo;stud farm&rsquo; also means &lsquo;stone, marble of mottled blue
or brown.&rsquo; Though jade is usually green, it may be whitish,
and a glance at purple or any other color shows how
nomadic and unstable color words are. Jasper, for instance,
can be brown, gray, green, pepper-and-salt, red, or yellow.
So that Turkish *hara* may well refer to &lsquo;jadestone&rsquo;-especially
since the Turkish word for &lsquo;jade, *yeshim*, means &lsquo;jasper&rsquo;
and &lsquo;porphyry&rsquo; as well. *Yeshim* probably derives from *yeshil*
&lsquo;green&rsquo; and *yash* &lsquo;verdant.&rsquo; Another Turkish word, *toy*,
means not just &lsquo;green&rsquo; but also the &lsquo;greater bustard, bittern,
night heron.&rsquo; *Toygan* means &lsquo;falcon, hawk&rsquo;; *toynak* &lsquo;hoof&rsquo;;
*tirnak* &lsquo;claw&rsquo;; *tirmiklamak* &lsquo;to rake, harrow&rsquo;; *tay* &lsquo;colt&rsquo;-
which trots us off to English *hagdon*, *haggard*, *haglet*, *harrier*, and *hawk*.

What we seem to be looking at here is a hostile horde
of herdsmen-horsemen who hunt with hawks when they're
not hacking at and harassing their neighbors. These harsh
harriers are roving reavers, haiduks who appear as suddenly
as nightmares, wreak their havoc and then vanish as if by
magic. Though nothing like as harrowed and hag-ridden as
the pedestrian peoples in their path, both nags and riders,
what with all that raiking and roaming, do become jaded-the
riders especially, since, however hardy a jaunting
marauder may be, jouncing about on jades is harmful to the
health. For the resulting kidney disorders-among them,
renal colic-there is, we are happy to report, a specific: the
wearing of nephrite, either alone or in combination with a
*hagstone* which, because of its unevenness, may, even more
than the yellowish-bluish-grayish-whitish-green jade, resemble
and, therefore, protect against kidney stone.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Tenderfeet and Ladyfingers*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/tenderfeet-and-ladyfingers-2_susan-kelz-sperling/1333779/#edition=2060599)
Susan Kelz Sperling, (Viking, 1981), vii + 150 pp., illustrated.

Mrs. Sperling's earlier effort in this genre, *Poplollies
and Bellibones*: *A Celebration of Lost Words*, was well
received by the word-buff crowd, but I have some apprehension
about this one, which consists of a series of brief,
essay-style explanations and anecdotes about a few hundred
expressions of English like *one foot in the grave*, *Achilles
heel*, *a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush*, *learn by
heart*, and others. If the subject seems to cleave to the
anatomical, the subtitle explains: &ldquo;A visceral approach to
words and their origins.&rdquo;

I can say only that I wish the subject had been
broader, for Mrs. Sperling has included a number of
metaphors whose sense and origin are so obvious as to make
reading about them quite redundant. Those expressions that
do not yield readily to analysis-*break a leg!*, *thumbs
down*, *lick one's chops*, and others-are treated well, but
they are scattered here and there among the obvious. Why
should anyone need an explanation of *the walls have ears* or
*a hair-raising experience*? And some of these have been in
the language for so long that providing a single source in
certain cases can invite only contumely from those who can
readily find earlier citations. An attractive book with neatly
done illustrations by Michael C. Witte, *Tenderfeet* would
make a fine gift.  *[L.U.]*

## Arabic Loanwords
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

A is well known, English is basically a Germanic
language, deriving its principal grammatical and
syntactical characteristics, as well as a large part of its
vocabulary, from its Germanic forerunners. But it has also
borrowed words lavishly from non-Germanic languages, as
is evidenced by the inclusion of such words in standard
English dictionaries. Although a large percentage of these
loanwords derives from Greek, Latin, and the various
Romance languages, many lesser known and, to Americans,
rather exotic languages are also well represented.

One such fertile source has been Arabic. I frankly have
no idea of the total number of Arabic loanwords that have
found their way into English, but it must be very substantial
indeed. In only a short time, I turned up 400 Arabic loan-words
by leafing through the pages of the *Random House
Dictionary of the English Language*, *Webster's Third New
International Dictionary*, and the *Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary*. The words range from ones like *candy*, *guitar*,
and *syrup*, which are so common that they are known to
every English speaker, even the most uneducated, to the
avowedly exotic, *like fiqh*, *khanjar*, *maksoorah*, which are
likely to be known only by orientalists and/or xenologophiliacs.
Between these two ends of the spectrum are the
moderately familiar (e.g., *caliph*, *mosque*, *talisman*), which
should certainly be in the recognition vocabulary of any
educated English speaker, and the slightly unusual (e.g.,
*dhow*, *jennet*, *wadi*), with which at least crossword-puzzle
fans should be familiar.

Arabic loanwords have entered the lexicon, of English
by various paths, including the following:

1) *Directly from Arabic*. This route accounts for 222
(55.5%) of my 400 examples. Included in this number are
37 that reached Modern English through the filter of Middle
English.

2) *From other languages*, *which had earlier borrowed
them from Arabic*. About half of these passed through only
one other language before reaching English; the remainder
passed through as many as five or six. The immediate donor
languages include Spanish (43), French (43), Latin (28),
Hindi (18), Turkish (17), Italian (9), Urdu (5), Persian (4),
Portuguese (4), and seven others that contributed one each
(Hebrew, Provencal, Swahili, Javanese, Hungarian, Catalan,
and Yiddish).

Both categories, it should be noted, include some words
that are not true Arabic loanwords, that is, they passed
through Arabic en route to English, but their origins are
elsewhere. My 400 examples include 34 such words, of
which 12 derive ultimately from Persian, 8 from Greek, 4
from Latin, 3 from Sanskrit, 2 each from Turkish and Coptic,
and one each from Spanish, Aramaic, and Syriac.

3) *As hybrids that incorporate elements both from
Arabic and from another language*. *Zinjanthropus*, for
example, combines the Arabic *zinj* (East Africa) and a
Latinized form of Creek *anthropos* (man), while *musaceous*
is constructed from the Arabic *mawzah* &lsquo;banana,&rsquo; the Latin
scientific particle -*aceae*, and the *English adjectival suffixous*. *Safflower* can
be traced back through the Dutch *saffloer* to the Middle French
*saffleur* to the original *saffiore*,
which combines the Arabic *asf(ar)* &lsquo;yellow&rsquo; and the Italian
*fiore* &lsquo;flower.&rsquo; My 400 examples include five other such
hybrids.

Many Arabic loanwords, especially those connected
with Islam (e.g., *hadith*, *mihrab*, *waqf*), are simply transliterations
of the Arabic originals. But since different individuals
have different ideas about how the Arabic alphabet should be transliterated, in many cases there is no single
&ldquo;correct&rdquo; way to spell an Arabic loanword and, instead,
dictionaries offer several-sometimes as many as five-accepted
variant spellings. To cite a few examples: *ameer*,
*amir*, *emeer*, *emir*; *cadi*, *kadhi*, *kadi*, *qadi*, *qazi*; *chamsinie*,
*khamseen*, *khamsin*; *fakir*, *faqir*, *faquir*; *gasal*, *gazel*,
*ghasel*, *ghazal*, *ghazel*; *hadj*, *haj*, *hajj*; *hegira*, *hejira*, *hijra*,
*hijrah*; *kasida*, *qasida*; *kibia*, *kiblah*, *qibia*, *qiblah*; and
*shaikh*, *shaykh*, *sheik*, *sheikh*, *sheykh*. As an 1846 *Punch*
cartoon caption observed, &ldquo;You pays your money and you
takes your choice.&rdquo;

Many loanwords have been altered beyond recognition.
Few individuals, I hazard, would be likely, upon seeing the
Arabic terms *qar'ah yabisah* and *samt*, to discern therein
the English *calabash* and *zenith*. It is, of course, not surprising
that this is so, for the phonetic demands of a particular
language often do strange things to words taken in from
other languages. Many Arabic loanwords have changed not
only their forms but also their meanings. *Alcohol*, for example,
derives from *al-kuhl* &lsquo;the powdered antimony&rsquo; and
*algebra* from *al-jabr* 'the bone-setting.' *Mummy* derives
from *mumiyah* 'asphalt,' and *salep*, as unlikely as it may
seem, from *khasyu'th tha'lab* 'fox's testicles.' *Rahah* 'palm of
the hand' has somehow evolved into *racket (or racquet)* as
well as into the anatomical term *rasceta*.

A special kind of deformation has occurred in the case
of Arabic loanwords beginning with *at*, which represents
the Arabic word for 'the.' *Alcazar*, for example, derives
from *al-qasr* 'the castle'; so when we say &ldquo;the alcazar,&rdquo; we
are, in a sense, really saying &ldquo;the the castle (or fortress).&rdquo;
This deformation is usually associated in people's minds
with loanwords that have entered English through Spanish.
That belief is justified in many cases but not all. My 400 examples
include 55 with initial *al*, of which only 22 entered
English from Spanish. Of the remainder, 9 entered from
Latin, 8 directly from Arabic, 6 each from French and Middle
English, 2 from Portuguese, and one from Hebrew. It
must be noted in all fairness, however, that 14 of these 32
had first passed through Spanish, where the al was added to
the basic Arabic word. The 55th word, *alconde*, is one of
those hybrids discussed above, being a combination of the
Arabic *al* and the Spanish *conde*.

The incorporation of the Arabic *al* does not occur only
in loanwords having an initial al. *Azimuth*, for example,
derives from *al-sumut* 'the directions,' and *azoth* from
*al-za'uq* 'the quicksilver.' The explanation lies in a peculiarity
of Arabic: in pronunciation, Arabic words beginning
with one of the so-called &ldquo;Sun Letters&rdquo; *(t*, *th*, *d*, *dh*, *r*, *z*, *s*,
*sh*, &#92;?&#92;, &#92;?&#92;, &#92;?&#92;, and *n*) assimilate the *I of* a preceding *al*. Thus,
the aforesaid words are written as shown but are pronounced
*as-sumut* and *az-za'uq*. *Lute*, which derives from
*al-'ud* 'the wood,' is a special case, i.e., only the *I* of *al* was
adjoined. Another special case is *aubergine*, which derives
from *al-badhinjan* 'the eggplant.' The latter has also provided
the English *brinjal*.

There are, in fact, numerous examples of two or more
Arabic loanwords which, in their English versions, differ
considerably from one another but derive from the same
Arabic word. *Zero* and *cipher* both derive from *sifr* 'empty,'
for example; *wazir* has given us not only the transliterated
*wazir* but also *vizier* and *alguacil*; *carob*, *algarroba*, and
*algarrobilla* all derive from *kharruba*; *jubbah*, *jibba*, and
*jupe* from *jubbah*; *henna*, *alkanna*, and *alkanet* from *hinna*;
and *crimson*, *carmine*, *alkermes*, and *kermes* from *qirmiz*.
The list could be extended at length.

As should be clear from the examples already cited in
this article, the Arabic loanwords in English relate to a
wide variety of subjects. Of my 400 examples, roughly 50
do not readily lend themselves to categorization and can
most conveniently be lumped together under the rubric
&ldquo;miscellaneous.&rdquo; As for the remaining 350, the largest group
consists of words which relate to Islam (itself a loanword)
and have meaning only in an Islamic context, for example,
*fatiha* and *muezzin*. A smaller but closely related group
includes words that have meaning in the context of Islamic
history as distinct from Islam as a religion (e.g., *jahiliya*,
kharijite). Another large group consists of words related to
government and administration, many of them being titles
of one sort or another (e.g., *amir*, *nizam*) and names of
governmental or administrative bodies or functions (e.g.,
*majlis*, *tariff*).

As for the rest, the fields covered are indeed numerous
and include the following (for each I will cite two examples,
although in all cases more are available):

>animals (*jerboa*, *mehari*)  
architecture (*alcove*, *minaret*)  
astronomy (*almucantar*, *nadir*)  
beverages (*coffee*,* julep*)  
birds (*albatross*, *bulbul*)  
chemistry (*alkali*, *realgar*)  
clothing (*sash*, *tarboosh*)  
coins (*dinar*, *dirhem*)  
color (*azure*,*saffron*)  
fish (*albacore*, *tuna*)  
flora (*jasmine*, *spinach*)  
folklore (*ghoul*, *roc*)  
general science (*alembic*, *aludel*)  
literature (*almanac*, *ruba'i*)  
maritime (*felucca*, *xebec*)  
medicine (*kef*, *zedoary*)  
meteorology (*haboob*, *shamal*)  
military (*admiral*, *jemadar*)  
music (*rebec*, *timbal*)  
sports (*jereed*, *safari*)  
topography (*bled*, *djebel*)  

In the field of astronomy, the greatest Arabic contribution
has not been general loanwords but rather star names.
VERBATIM readers should refer to the article by E.E.
Rehmus, &ldquo;The Arabic Star-Names&rdquo; [V, 3], which listed
more than 50 such names. Rehmus's list, however, was not
nearly complete. In *The Story of the English Language*
(New York, 1967), Mario Pei states (p. 225) that a precise
count of 183 star names showed 125 to be Arabic and
another 9 to be Arabic-Latin.

The two most unlikely Arabic contributions to the
English lexicon are the expressions *ballyhoo* and so *long*. In
*The Story of Language* (London, 1952), Pei asserts (p. 156)
that *ballyhoo* derives from the Arabic *b-Allah hu* 'by Allah
it is' and that so *long* was adapted by British colonial troops
from the Malay *salang*, which, in turn, was a corruption of
the Arabic salaam 'peace.' However, Pei's eminence in the
field of linguistics notwithstanding, the Arabic origins of
these two expressions have not, in fact, been established.
Pei's attribution is not reflected in any of the dictionaries I
consulted, while in one of their works. *The Dictionary of
Word and Phrase Origins (New York*, 1967, Vol. II, pp.
255-56), William and Mary Morris note that, although
some people ascribe the ultimate source of so *long* to
*salaam*, they themselves consider this etymology to be
&ldquo;wildly far of the mark.&rdquo; I do not pretend to know the truth
of the matter.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*American Tongue in Cheek*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/American-Tongue-Cheek-Populist-Guide-Language/30822474711/bd)
Jim Quinn, (Pantheon Books, 1980), xviii + 219 pp.

&ldquo;If this book doesn't make you angry, it wasn't worth
writing.&rdquo;  [first line of author's Preface]

As any logician can tell you, the corollary of the above
quotation is not necessarily true, that is, if the book does
make you angry, it does not necessarily follow that it was
worth writing. I must confess that I found the book irritating,
chiefly because it makes the assumption that everything
written (or said) by Edwin Newman, Bill Safire, John
Simon, Ted Bernstein, and other outspoken (but seldom out-written)
critics of modern English usage is wrong, but also,
largely, because it is the author who seems to be angry; that
seems to be his reason for believing that the book was worth
writing. Besides, the book is riddled with misinformation,
errors, and misconstruals, either inadvertent or deliberate.
For example:

>First of all, *gift* is often used as a verb. We use the
past participle of that verb, as an adjective,
whenever we say a *gifted writer*, a *gifted painter*.
[p. 16]
>
>According to the *OED*, the word *rhetoric* has been
applied to false or empty phrases since 1562, [p. 23]
*Inoperative* was first used in 1631, and by John
Donne: &ldquo;A dead faith, as all faith that is
inoperative.&rdquo; . . . The *OED* lists the word as current,
adding that in legal language it means &ldquo;without
standing force, invalid,&rdquo; which is where Ziegler probably
came across it-though who knows? Donne may
be one of his favorite poets-and at any rate,
whatever else Ziegler is guilty of, he is not guilty of
bad language when he imitates John Donne, [pp.
26-27]
>
>Newman complains that *guilty culprit* is redundant-
*culprit* all by itself means guilty.
Any historical dictionary would have told him different.
At first, *culprit* was formal legal language
that meant &ldquo;the prisoner waiting before the bar for
trial.&rdquo; It meant that in 1678, when it was first cited
in the *OED*, and it means exactly that today. Strictly
speaking, of course. But gradually . . . the word
began to take on associations of guilt-in uninformed
use. [p. 27]

In the first quotation, Quinn shows his utter ignorance
of the uses of the -*ed* suffix in certain formations with nouns
(*tender-hearted* certainly does not come from the verb &ldquo;to
tender-heart&rdquo;), and would be well advised to look matters
up in dictionaries and grammars before accusing others of
their failure to do so. The second and other examples illustrate
not only Quinn's inability to cope with semantic
change but his complete insensitivity to language: his obsession
to discredit critics like Newman blinds him to the facts
that are before him in the very works he cites as Gospel.
The objection to *inoperative* is not to the word itself (which
is standard in *inoperative cures*, for instance, and non-standard
for *inoperable* in *inoperative* cancer) but to its use
as jargon representative of the kind of duplicity associated
with statements emanating from Ziegler and others who uttered
pronouncements on the Watergate events. As for
*culprit*, which we use today-notwithstanding the 17th-century
meaning of the word-to mean 'the guilty one,'
Quinn dismisses it as &ldquo;uninformed&rdquo; merely because he has
found evidence for an archaic sense that provides him with
ammunition to attack Newman.

And so on, throughout this book, the author selects
from various sources the evidence he desires, regardless of its
validity or age-as long as it is in print somewhere, he
quotes it-to confute comments by the critics whom he
punishes on every page. (As for *regardless*, he has this to
say: &ldquo;A language conservative like myself resists
change-for example, I still use the word *irregardless*. I
grew up using it.&rdquo; [p. 18])

Quinn is a journalist, and his writing is incisive, direct,
fluid, and exciting. It is also ungrammatical and non-standard.
I cannot help feeling that this book is a tour de
force, attempting to capitalize on the successes of the works
published by those he attacks. It can scarcely be deemed
controversial, because there is little or no controversy about
most of the matters on usage discussed by Quinn. If you
react violently to this sort of book (and suffer from hypotension),
you can easily raise your blood pressure by reading
a few pages of this spurious, unscholarly nonsense. It is sad
to note that the author, a professional writer, has such an
iconoclastic attitude toward *style* in language and that his
book confirms, on every page, his inability to comprehend
the merest notion of what it is that the targets of his
vituperative hostility rail at. I certainly hold no brief for the
&ldquo;You-won't-go-to-heaven-if-you-don't-speak-proper-English&rdquo;
school of usage criticism as exemplified by
Newman, Simon, et al.; neither do I subscribe to Quinn's
tenet that you'll go to hell if you conform to a consensus of
good usage, tempered, of course, by your own style and
taste.  

[L.U.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Brave New Words*](https://www.biblio.com/book/brave-new-words-bill-sherk/d/885292086)
Bill Sherk, (Double-day, 1979), xiv + 174 pp. 

For as long as I have worked as a lexicographer-more
that one quarter of a century-people have written to me
urging that the next edition of whatever dictionary I was
working on include a &ldquo;new word&rdquo; that they had coined for
(or on) a particular occasion. Since I started publishing
VERBATIM, these and other word-coiners have been sending
their creations to me, pressing for recognition. (I cannot
properly call them *neologists*, for that name should be reserved
for those who study *neologisms*, which are new
words that have been accepted into the language, not ones
still in the proposal stage.)

Professional lexicographers, always on the lookout for
new words and meanings, have generally established as a
standard for recording neologisms in their dictionaries the
repeated appearance of the word or meaning in media of
sufficiently large exposure to indicate acceptance by English
speakers. Those who attempt to persuade lexicographers to
list novel concoctions are unaware of our function, which is
to describe the lexicon of a language, and that means its
word stock; the lexicon of English does not include the fancies
of people who have discovered the technique of putting
morphological elements together.

Some of the coinages in this book are jocular; though I
enjoy a (good) joke as much as the next fellow, I fail to see
anything funny about words like *volnic* ('an imaginary part
of a carburetor') and *gafahvitz* ('the tool used to adjust a
volnic'). Some coinages are simply awful because they are
hybrids, that is, made up of Germanic and Greek or Latin
parts: *baldephobia* ('fear of going bald') is an example. If
such a word is needed, it ought to be *alopeciaphobia* or
*calvophobia*, both hybrids but at least with parts of the
same vintage; but the real question is whether the word has
any use in the language (except for the vain fellow who
coined it). Other coinages can be attributed to those who
are unaware that a word with the needed meaning already
exists. Why coin *spork* when *runcible spoon*, from *runcible*,
itself coined by Edward Lear, already exists? The *foon*
referred to under *spork* in this book is a utensil with a fork
at one end and a spoon at the other, reminiscent of the odd
gadgets once popular with the manufacturers of novelties
for the premium market. I recall a comb with a shoehorn as
a handle; made of plastic, it was a giveaway at the Times
Square Hotel in New York in the 1940s. Such combinations
can make the imagination take flights of fancy: how about a
toothbrush with a blackhead squeezer at the other end? or a
combination of eyecup and eyelash curler? or a nail file
with a toothpick?

This book is full of similar strange combinations-of
words, that is, not gadgets. The language is difficult enough
to deal with as it is, and I lose my sense of humor with
items like *lexiconia*, *fuzztache*, *willectomy*, and the rest.
Those who are willing to spork out $12.95 (about 13&cent; each)
for this sort of nonsense are welcome to it. Two more
points: I am not averse to coining words myself and am
responsible for *thimblewit*. Second, Sherk lists *Norsex* as the
logical companion (in the north of England) to *Wessex*, (in
the West), *Sussex*, (in the south), *Essex*, (in the east), and
*Middlesex*, (in the middle): as for what the English up north
did for their sex, I'm surprised he hasn't heard of *Norfolk*.
The latest news, good or bad, depending on your viewpoint,
is that a second version is on the way.

*[L.U.]*

## Philip Howard on English English: *Pronunciation*

Not merely *de gustibus: De pronuntiationibus non
disputandum*. But, by Hermes, God of mispronunciation, in
Britain we enjoy arguing about pronunciation more than
about politics. Perhaps this is not surprising in a country
where one's pronunciation is a badge of class and where we
still doubtfully believe in a correct form of pronouncing the
Queens English, called Standard or Received or Southern
English, defined as the dialect of the educated all over
England. It has also been defined polemically as 'not the accent
of a class, but the accent of the class-conscious, the
dialect of an effete social clique, half aware of its own
etiolation, capitalizing linguistic affectations to convert
them to caste-marks.'

The notion of a correct way of pronouncing British
English has been undermined over the past twenty years by
the vogue for regional and 'uneducated' British accents on
radio and television, though, interestingly, not on the Overseas
Service of the BBC. It is still thought proper that
foreigners should hear mainly Standard English.

Whenever some news reader or other influential personality
'mispronounces' a word, conservative folk feel the
standards of civilization threatened and do the only thing a
chap or chapess can do in the circumstances: write a fulminatory
letter to *The Times*.

Take a recent, controversial example. The Standard
English pronunciation of *controversy* puts the primary stress
on the first syllable and a secondary stress on the third
syllable. It has suddenly become fashionable among the
media or uneducated classes to put the stress on the second
syllable. My sources indicate that this shift has not happened
in the States.

The new pronunciation upsets British purists catastrophically.
They write complaining that it is ugly, uneducated,
and wrong. Ugliness in pronunciation is not a quality
that can be judged objectively. Uneducated? It is true that
until recently dictionaries, grammars, and teachers of English
told us that it was correct to stress the first and third
syllables of *controversy*. But they merely record the way
that most of the &ldquo;best&rdquo; speakers pronounce the word. The
new *Collins English Dictionary* recognizes the new pronunciation
of *controversy* as an alternative in British English.

But is it wrong? I am not sure that it is helpful to talk
about correct and incorrect pronunciations. Of course one
can invent examples of pronunciations that are clearly
wrong. If somebody always said it &ldquo;controvarsity,&rdquo; at the
very least we should say that he or she had an amusing eccentricity
in his or her speech when it came to *controversy*.

Recessive accent took the stress to the first syllable of
*controversy* in British English. Progressive accent seems to
be taking it forward again. It happens. *Commendable* was
clearly once stressed on its first syllable:  &lsquo;Tis sweet and
commendable in thy nature. Hamlet.&rsquo; That will only scan if
you stress the first syllable. Today the correct pronunciation
of *commendable* stresses the second syllable. It is possible
that the same shift of stress forward to the second syllable is
happening in *formidable*.

I have correspondents who argue vehemently that the
Standard English pronunciation of *controversy* with the
stress on the first and third syllables must be correct because
it retains the Latin pronunciation of the root word. There
are three things to say to that. First, we do not completely
understand the Latin stress system, but it was different from
English. Second, the *o* in the second syllable in Latin was a
long vowel, not the short o that most of us make it in
English. And third, we are not bound in English to maintain
the pronunciation of words we steal from other languages.
Look what we have done to the Frog *formidable*.

There is no rhyme or reason, but a healthy variety in
much English pronunciation. The BBC announces programmes
about a Don it now calls 'Kee-hohtie,' but it pronounces
*Sancho Panza* as in English. Why this keehohtic
quixotic confusion?

When you come on to British pronunciation of Latin
words, the controversy is complicated because sectarian
prejudice is added to the brew of class snobbery and
linguistic purism. For instance, there are four current pronunciations
of *Caesar* in Britain:

>1. Seezar: the traditional English.  
>2. Kaiser: the modern reformed.  
>3. Sayzar: the European, and medieval English.  
>4. Chayzar: the Italian.

We have recently been having a controversy between
Roman Catholics and others about whether the new pronunciation
of *deity* to rhyme with *laity* is closer to the
original Latin, as if that mattered. Since the Latin *deitas*
has a short *e*, the new pronunciation seems not so much
&ldquo;correct&rdquo; as an Italianate pronunciation. Should we start
pronouncing the English word *genius* 'jaynius'? If the cry is
that we must revert to the Latin pronunciations of our
Roman forefathers, perhaps we can escape from the
disagreeable sounds made by the 'misuse' of the words *ego*
and *libido*. By extension to Greek, we might hear *Eros*,
*Thetis*, and *economic* pronounced with their original
values. The truth is:

1. There is no necessary connexion between the British
pronunciation of a word and its pronunciation in the language
from which it is taken.

2. There is a tendency to pronounce words as they are
written, and to pronounce foreign words with a foreign pronunciation,
often with ludicrous results.

3. The use of pronunciation as a class shibboleth to
separate the sheep from the ruling class survives, but looks
increasingly silly.

## Phreddy Is a Phynque: Two Graphs for One Sound
*Robert A. Fowkes, Yonkers, New York*

The graffito, *PHreddy Is a PHynque*, in childish writing,
was seen on the walls of Chester some time in
1966 by the writer, who was mildly surprised that *fink* had
&ldquo; made the British scene.&rdquo; The facetiousness of the orthography
was a parody of English spelling caprices, smartly
perceived by the probably juvenile inscriber.

A large portion of the intriguing complexity of our orthography
may be traced to transcription practices, many of
them involving digraphs with the strangely useful symbol *h*.
For example, *ph-superficially* regarded as a cumbersome
way of indicating one sound by two symbols, perhaps-owes
its presence in our writing system to a long
historical process. When Romans first wrote in their language
Greek words containing *phi* (&phi;), they chose *ph* to indicate
what was in early times an aspirated *p* (more or less a
*p* followed by *h*). There was a precedent for this in Greek
itself, for an ancient way of writing *phi* was IIH. But *phi*
underwent a change in pronunciation, and around the second
century B.C. it was probably an *f*, although not the
labio-dental *f* of English and, possibly, of Latin, which involves
the lower lip and the upper teeth, but rather a
bilabial *f*, which involves both lips but not the teeth. Maybe
*phew* has this sound &ldquo;marginally&rdquo; in English. At any rate,
the Romans evidently found *ph* a convenient way of marking
a sound that differed from their *f*. Perhaps many
Romans could not distinguish the two sounds, but some of
them studied in Greece and mastered the language. Such
people possibly made a point of preserving the distinction
between *ph* and *f*. In time, the two sounds became identical.
In later centuries, medieval Latin and then the
Romance languages adopted the practice of writing *f* for
what had previously been *ph*. The following brief list in
Italian illustrates the point:

>*farmacia*   —   pharmacy  
*fase*      —    phase  
*frase*      —   phrase  
*fenomeno*    —  phenomenon  
*fonetico*   —   phonetic  
*fotografia*  —  photograph (y)  
*sfera*      —   sphere

French has re-acquired many *phs*.

In Old and Middle English, a similar move was made
to *write f* instead of *ph* in such words. But learned tampering
set in, and people who knew that there had once been a
*ph* in the words restored the old writing. John Gower is said
to have been especially vigorous in *ph*-restoration, but
others-Mandeville, Langland, and many more-show the
same trend. Thus, what had temporarily been *filosofie* and
*fisique*, for example, were rewritten with *ph*.

Not all new *phs* were really restorations. Some were
introduced into words not of Greek origin which had never
had *ph* at all (like our facetious forms *Phreddy* and
*Phynque*). Examples (which have not survived) include:
*phang* (fang), *phan* (fan), *phlip* (flip), *phanatic (fanatic* is
from Latin), even *philome* (film). The process of replacing *f*
by *ph* in words that historically &ldquo;justify&rdquo; it has not been
thorough. Hence we have *fantom  phantom*, *fantasy/phantasy*, *fantastic / phantastic*, *fantast/phantast*, *frenzy I phremy*,
*frenetic / phrenetic*. *Frantic* was possibly aided and abetted
by the unrelated *fanatic*.

Forms with apparently uncontested *ph* include *pharmacy*, *pharynx*, *pheasant*, *phenomenon*, *Philadelphia*,
*physics*, etc. *Philter / philtre* 'potion' is unrelated to *filter*,
which is from Medieval Latin *feltrum* 'felt'-used as a
filter-itself from Germanic.

In modern words of Greek origin, *ph* seems to
predominate, without monopolizing, however. *Sulfur*,
*sulfuric*, and *sulfate* are competing forms for *sulphur*,
*sulphuric*, and *sulphate*. And *f* is apparently winning in
*sulfa drugs*, *sulfanilamide*, etc. Some scientists have told me
that they consider *f* &ldquo;more up to date&rdquo; in such words.

Another source of *ph* is the rich mine of Old Testament
names, mostly of Hebrew origin, but also from Aramaic,
Egyptian, and other languages. Conceivably, even these
made their way into English via Greek and Latin. But theological
scholarship has also looked to the original sources
again. English seems to use no *f* in these Old Testament
names; *Ephraim*, *Joseph*, *Naphtali*, *Tophel*, *Ophrah*,
*Pharez*, *Pharaoh*, *Philistines*, *Potiphar*, *Phinehas*, *Shepham*
(looks like an English town name!), etc. The *ph* in Hebrew
or Aramaic words reflects Semitic phonological conditions;
it is *phe* (sans dagesh) as opposed to *pe* (with dagesh) and
may involve syntactic considerations. Some of the initial *phs*
may be hard to account for. Transmission via Greek *phi*
may have added to the confusion. (In some Bible translations
based on recent research, many *phs* are replaced by p.
The Icelandic Bible, e.g., which has no qualms about
writing *ph*- [actually as *f*-] in Greek names like *Philippians*,
has *Perez*, *P&uacute;ra*, *Palti*, *Pall&uacute;*, *P&uacute;va*, as opposed to English
*Pharez*, *Phurah*, *Phaiti*, *Phallu*, *Phuvah*.)

English, then, has several ways of indicating the sound
of *f*, in addition to *f* itself. One is *ff* *(cuff)*, another, *ph*
*(Philadelphia)*; also *gh* (*laugh*, *tough*); *pf* (in names like
*Pfeiffer* as pronounced in the U.S.) is another. English
*lieutenant (left-)* has an unusual way of marking *[f]*; the
corresponding title in the British Navy is pronounced as it is
in the U.S. If [*f*] is thus denoted cumbersomely in several
ways, *ph* can in turn represent, in addition to [f]: [v] in
*Stephen and nephew*; [p] in *Clapham*; possibly bilabial
voiceless fricative in *phew*; and zero in *phthisic*. It would be
cheating a bit to point to *ph* as *p + h* in *uphill*. (Is anyone
ever tempted to read it as *euphyll*?)

*th*

Parallel to *ph* is *th*. Romans transcribed Greek *&theta;*
(8) as th. Early Greek inscriptions had *th*, representing
aspirated t (once more, parallel to *ph*), although there were
other writings too. The Romans had no such sound but
transcribed *theta* mechanically by *th (Thisbe*, *Thetis*,
*Th&emacr;s&emacr;us*, *the&amacr;trum*, *thema*, *th&omacr;rax*).*Th* was adopted in
English to represent two native sounds: the voiceless *thorn*
(&#92;?&#92;) as in *thorn*) and the voiced *edh* (&#92;?&#92; as in these). Caxton
is said to have introduced th, for, having brought from
the Continent a form of type having no thorn, he used *th*
for both sounds. (In Scotland, however, a form of &#92;?&#92; that
looked like Y was long retained-in manuscripts in England
too. This led to ye for 'the' and to &ldquo;Ye Olde Tea Shoppe&rdquo;
and similar blunders. In Anglo-Saxon times, when there
were separate characters for *th* as in *thorn* and for *th* as in
*then*, the signs were, amazingly enough, used inter-changeably.
In Icelandic, better sense prevailed, and there
were separate signs (usually) carefully distinguishing the
voiced and voiceless sounds.

The adoption of *th* was, despite the confusion, advantageous
in native words. *Ph* was, in a way, superfluous
from the start, since *f* was available. But *th* occurs in some
of our most frequent words: *the*, *this*, *that*, *they*, *them*,
*their*, *than*, *with*, *other*, etc. We shall resist the temptation
to discuss the history of some of these. But something else
happened too. Words like *theatre*, *theory*, *theme*, *throne*,
*thermal* are now pronounced with the voiceless *th*-sound, as
they would have been in Greek, although most of them
entered English through Latin or French, where no *th*
existed. But learned restoration occurred again, and English
speakers finally pronounced a *th* simply because it was
written.

Yet the name *Thomas* seems to have had, the sound of *t*
in all periods of English (cf. *Tom, Tommy*), as have the
related names *Thompson and Thomson*, also (with a different
vowel sound) *Thomite*, *Thomistic*, *Thomism*.
*Thames* [temz] has no reason for a *th*-spelling, being a Celtic
river name (*Tam&emacr;sa*, probably). But there is a *Thames*
river in Connecticut that rhymes with *James* and has the initial
sound of *thorn!*

*Thailand* has the t-sound, as does *Tha&uml;s* when referring
to the novel by Anatole France or the opera by Massenet;
but as the name of the mistress of Alexander the Great and
Ptolemy I (consecutively) it has *th* as in *thorn*.

The *Thaler* of German coinage, with spurious *th* to
begin with, supposedly has *t*- if and when pronounced in
English. The spelling th in German was a fad of long duration
created by printers, who considered the added *h*
&ldquo; elegant.&rdquo; When names of German origin came into
English, interesting but not unexpected things happened.
All the names ending in -*thal* (contemporary spelling *Tal*
'valley')-*Rosenthal*, *Lilienthal*, *Blumenthal*, and the other
flowery dales-acquired a final element *thawl*. And *Roth*
(contemporary German -spelling rot 'red') became *wroth*. In
the name of the *Rothschild* family (*rot* 'red' + *Schild*
'shield, coat-of-arms') an illegitimate Wroth's Child sneaks
in. If the *Rathskeller (or Ratskeller* in more modern form)
seems to have preserved its t-sound intact, it may be because
most frequenters of such places know enough German. But
a friend named *Rath* (ultimately of the same origin as the
first part of *Ratskeller*) was called Professor Wrath exclusively.

*Thug* is a Hindi word, with an alveolar t plus aspiration,
a sound not too unlike that of t in *tug*. But the spelling
*th* has put a thorn in the side of the thug, and he's stuck
with it. *Waltham*, Massachusetts, should have -*ham* as its
final element, and there should be no th-sound; but there is.

The use of *th* to represent the *theta* sound is by no
means an English monopoly. Welsh uses it for the voiceless
sound of *th* (in *thin*). But quite early in Old High German,
when such sounds still existed in German, spellings *th*-, *dh*-
are found for *thorn* and *edh*, sometimes indiscriminately.
Such matters are not necessarily independent repetitions of
similar processes but may be connected with the calling of
the scribe and the interrelated practices of scriptoria.
Scribes probably moved from country to country, mostly
under the aegis of the Church, to begin with. Later, printers
became decisive, and they had international connections.

*ch*

Since *ph* and *th* correspond, in a way, to *phi* and *theta*,
we might expect English orthography to have a digraph to
match *chi*. There is one, although it is out of step, inasmuch
as it does not correspond to sounds in English in quite the
same way as *phi* and *theta* do. It is *ch*. But Greek *chi* has
not the same relationship to English phonetics as it would
were it completely parallel to *ph* and *th*. It is true that Old
English had the sound, but it was written *h*-sometimes g.
Norman scribes then introduced the digraph *gh* (*right*,
*night*, etc.), but the sound vanished in a few centuries, leaving
the spelling.

Latin used *ch* to represent Greek *chi* (* X* ) although the
sound was not present in Latin. (We encounter a problem
in Latin *pulcher*. Old Latin *polcher* 'beautiful,' which is not
a word taken from Greek. Why does it have *ch*?) Latin
words from Greek with *ch* include: *charta*, *chorus*, *chorda*,
*Christus*, etc. The Romance languages usually got rid of the
h, cf. Italian *carta*, *coro*, *corda*, *Cristo*. If Italian *Chimera*
(Latin *Chimaera*, from Greek *Chimaira*) seems to retain *ch*,
the semblance deceives: this is a special Italian use of *ch* to
denote the k-sound before t or e.

In Old French the digraph *ch* was often used to represent
the sound of *ch* in *cheese*, *choke*, etc. With the Norman
Conquest *ch* was therefore introduced into French words
newly acquired in English (like *chafe*, *chain*, *chair*, *chance*,
*charity*, *chase*) but simultaneously into native English words
(like *cheek*, *chew*, *child*, *chin*, *choose*, *churn*). In noninitial
position the sound was often designated by -*tch*- (*witch*,
*batch*, *wretch*, *itch*).

*Ch* has been overworked in English orthography, partly
because it is from so many different sources. In addition
to denoting the sounds mentioned above, it represents [?] in
words of later French origin: *chef*, *chic*, *chassis*, *chiffon*,
*machine*, *chauvinism*, *chauffeur*, etc. It is [k] in words
ultimately from Greek: *chaos*, *chasm*, *character*, *cholera*,
*choral*, *chrism*, *chrysanthemum*, *psyche*, *tachograph*, *hydrochloride*,
*synecdoche*.

Purists will try to pronounce the German ach-sound in
*Bach* or the ich-sound in *Richard Wagner*; *some* will
succeed.

*gh*

We have mentioned that *gh* became the writing for
[X] in Middle English, but that the sound itself was lost.
Ironically enough, when the front fricative [f] was substituted
for the back sound of gh in *laugh*, *tough*, *rough*,
*enough*, etc., the digraph continued (most inappropriately)
to represent a sound far removed from the original. That *gh*
represents an Indic sound in a few words like *ghat* is due to
a convention for transcribing Sanskrit and its descendants
and is quite separate from the other *gh* use.

All digraphs mentioned have had *h* as their second
member. Most have proved useful, one or two less than
useful. Another one is of dubious value in English: *rh*. The
Greek sound system did not &ldquo;tolerate&rdquo; an initial r. Whenever
one threatened to occur, an h- was made to precede it,
indicated by the so-called rough breathing. Hence, *hr*- is the
actual initial. But the Romans transcribed it as *rh*-, possibly
because that combination did occur in Latin-although
never initially-whereas the sequence *hr* was completely
strange: *perhibeo*, *perh&umacr;m&amacr;nus*, etc. At any rate, Latin
adopted Greek words like *hrin&oacute;ker&omacr;s* and *hrythmik&oacute;s* as
*rh&imacr;nocer&omacr;s*, *rhythmicus*. Once the style was adopted, *rh*-
was used where even hr- would have feared to tread, e.g.,
in the Celtic river name *Rhenus* (the h has remained in German
*Rhein* and English *Rhine*); also in *Rh&emacr;mi* (for *R&emacr;mi*)
the name of a Gaulish tribe giving its name (perhaps voluntarily)
to *Reims* (with variant *Rheims*). It happens, coincidentally,
that one Celtic language, Welsh, has turned all
initial rs into *rh*- (in that sequence, not **hr*-). Hence Welsh
words &ldquo;legitimately&rdquo; begin with rh-, and *Rhein* is not an
imitation of German.

The *h* of rh plays an otiose role in a number of words
ultimately from Greek: *rhapsody*, *rheostat*, *rheumatism*,
*rhododendron*, *rhubarb*, *rhythm*. The practice is reminiscent
of the English spelling *wh*-, which, in those brands of
English where the h is pronounced, has the phonetic
sequence *hw*-. There is no sense to the *rh* in *rhyme* (or to
the -y-, either); the spelling seems to result from imitation of
*rhythm*, to which it is not related.

The rh-factor is obviously something different in
*Singman Rhee*, certainly in *Ernest Rhys* and *Rhondda
Valley*. And *rhatany*, a leguminous shrub of South America,
shows tampering with what must have been a Kechua
word. French has a few words with rh-, including *rhum*,
where it does not belong but possibly adds an exotic touch.
French also reveals conflicts in pairs like *rapsodie/Irhapsodic
and rythme/rhythme*.

*sh*

Unlike the digraphs discussed up to now, sh corresponds
to nothing in Greek or Latin. No such sound as [s],
was in their inventories, nor was it known in early French.
Old English used sc for a while. A variety of other spellings
followed, the most durable (12th-14th centuries) being *sch*.
(It is hard to believe that this is unconnected with sch in
German or Dutch.) Sh seems to be a simplification of that
sch. Sh- occurs in a host of native English words (*shoe*,
*shadow*, *shiver*, *shine*, *ship*, etc.) and in many borrowings
(*shampoo*, *shamrock*, *sheik*, *sherry*, *shibboleth*, *Shogun*),
but not many from French, at least not in initial position.
In medial and final position, it is commoner in French borrowings,
but it was usually some other sound in French
itself (*rush*,* push*, *flush*, *abash*, *leash*, *bushel*, *fashion*, *hash*).

A few other digraphs with *h* are traceable to other
origins and are more or less out of the system. *Gh* has been
mentioned above in its character of transcription of an Indic
sound. *Dh* is similar to it, occurring in words like *dharma*.
*Cf*. also *bh* in *Bhagavad G&imacr;ta*, *Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata*, etc.

*Kh* represents a number of origins (*Khan*, *Khartoum*,
*Khanukah*, etc.). In all of these the same exploitation of the
availability of h is noted. H is in a way a diacritic par excellence
that removes the need for diacritics. It has
demonstrated its usefulness in a wide variety of languages-bungling
though the practice often may be. It is really
*ghapsignaphthing* ('fascinating': *gh* as in *tough*, *ti* as in *nation*, *gn* as in
*gnaw*, *phth* as in *phthisic*) to me.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Attitude Adjustment Hour-11:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.&rdquo;
[From an advertisement in *After Dark*, March 1981, for
Past Time Lounge, Winter Haven, Florida. Submitted by
Jerome Rhodes, Delray Beach, Florida, who marks the
novel euphemism for drinking as well as the new sense of
how.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; He said that although the island can be seen in just
about three hours, it boasted of several achievements which
China would like to borrow. He did not specify.&rdquo; [From an
(undated March) piece in the *Advocate News* (Barbados),
submitted by John McClellan, Woodstock, New York.]

## Louisiana's German Cajuns, or, From Kissinger to Quisingre
*M. M. Kreeger, Metairie, Louisiana*

Millions of Americans bear surnames different from
those that they or their forebears brought from the
old country. In most cases, the names have been shortened
or simplified to make them more manageable in an English-speaking
society. The revision that has received the most
widespread notice in recent years was from *Anagnastopoulos*
(I think that's about right) to *Agnew*. The alteration
didn't help the Vice President to stay out of trouble, but it
sure was a boon to headline writers.

My grandfather made a more modest modification in
his name, from *Krieger* to *Kreeger*, because people kept
pronouncing it to rhyme with &ldquo;tiger.&rdquo;

The pattern of mutations on Louisiana's C&ocirc;te des Allemands,
or German Coast, was very unusual, if not unique.
The spellings of the surnames were Gallicized instead of
Anglicized, but most fit easily into English speech. Changes
were applied to a whole community and were imposed by
authority, not chosen by the name-bearers themselves. The
object was not to revise the names but to render their
sounds as closely as possible to the originals in forms that
the French speakers could spell and pronounce.

In the early eighteenth century, when France was
trying to develop its American possessions, it was almost
impossible to induce Frenchmen to settle in Louisiana.
Some second and subsequent sons of aristocratic families
were attracted through large grants of land around New
Orleans, upon which they established plantations with slave
labor. But small farmers, needed to give the colony a substantial
European population, were reluctant to leave
home. If they did move, they preferred the much shorter
move to Canada.

Recruiters had considerable success, however, in the
Roman Catholic regions of the German states, and, shortly
after the founding of New Orleans, in 1718, a number of
German peasant families were settled along a stretch of the
Mississippi River from about 20 to 50 miles above the town.
French clerks had difficulty recording land titles under the
strange names, and priests encountered problems in registering
births, marriages, and other sacraments. They applied
Gallic phonetics as best they could to Teutonic sounds.
Many of the peasants were illiterate, and the Frenchmen
wrote the names as they heard them. The most drastic
changes were occasioned by the application of French
values to the German spelling, when the spelling was
known.

Original pronunciations were preserved rather well by
rendering *Wichner* as *Vicknair*, *Weber as Webre*, *Foltz* as
*False*, *Lesch* as *Leche or Laiche*, and *Kissinger as Quisingre*
(How about that!). But as an initial *h* is silent in French,
*Huber* became *Oubre*, *Heifer* became *Elfer*; and as *au* in
French is like long *o*, *Hauser* was transmuted into *Oser*. The
[ks] sound of x tripped heavily over the Gallic tongue, and
*Troxler* was written *Trosclair*. But an x seemed to help with
the jawbreaker *Scheckschneider*, which was resolved into
*Schexnayder* and a dozen or more variants.

*Zweig* was a really tough one: no Frenchman could
pronounce that, no matter how it might be spelled. There is
a legend that the head of the Zweig family, apparently believing
a Frenchman could handle the name if he understood
its meaning, broke a branch from a tree and held it
up, exclaiming; &ldquo;Zweig! Zweig!&rdquo;

&ldquo;Ah,&rdquo; said the French clerk, &ldquo;La Branche.&rdquo; Whether
the story is true or not, *Zweig* has a sizable progeny yclept
*Lebrawhe* or some form thereof.

Other changes included *Edelmeier to Delmaire*, *Schaf*
to *Chauffe*, *Vogel* to *Fauquel*, *Mayer* to *Mayeux*, Dubs to
*Toups*, *Steileder to Estilet*, *Steiger* to *Estaidre*, *Kleinpeter* to
*Clampetre*, *Kamper* to *Cambre*, *Katzenberger* to
*Casbergue*, *Wagensbach* to *Waguespack*, *Trischi* to *Triche*,
*Traeger* to *Tregre*, *Zehringer* to *Zeringue*, *Himmel* to
*Hymel*, *Roder* to *Auder*, and *Schaefer* to *Chevre*.

The Germans eventually lost their language and their
separate identity. Some 50 years after the German influx,
they intermarried freely with the Acadians, who began arriving
in large numbers after their expulsion from Canada
by their British conquerors. Many thousands of the Germans'
descendants speak Cajun French and speak English
with a Cajun accent.

The memory of the early settlers' origin is preserved,
however, in the distinctive names. The area is still known
unofficially as the &ldquo;German Coast&rdquo;; and the map of Louisiana
officially shows a town, a bayou, and a marshy lake
named *Des Allemands*.

## The Unfairness of Articles
*Martin A. Zeidner, New Orleans, Louisiana*

During the past 16 years, I have lived and worked in
the oil fields of 11 countries, in addition to the U.S. I have
mastered a number of foreign languages to the point where
I am no longer afraid of having to starve to death, and I
can usually understand directions well enough to find my
way to the field and back, eventually.

Quite often I work with native field hands. Point to an
object and assign it a name-*dragline*, *retrieving tool*, *electric
log*, *crown block*-and, particularly if there is no corresponding
word in their own vocabularies (there seldom
is), they usually remember it-sometimes. To add an a or
*the* would be like polishing sandpaper. But when these
hands talk among themselves, articles are absolutely essential.
In fact, most of the foreign languages I am familiar
with demand something that will ascribe a masculine,
feminine, or sometimes neuter nature to the &ldquo;thing.&rdquo; The
French seem to take the easy way out by poking an indiscriminate
*le* or *les*, depending upon plurality, in front of
any intruding non-French noun. Spanish and Portuguese
tend to be ambivalent. Germans have three choices.
Although I have definite feelings about the gender of certain
English words, I am not permitted to express them in my
own language because of the all-encompassing a and *the*.
When my buddies in the field cannibalize these same words
into their own languages, they feel no such constraints. The
ultimate decision on the proper article to use depends entirely
upon the sexual preferences of the cannibal: *une manole*,
le *female thread*, la *bull plug*, and, most dehumanizing of
all, *das stud*.

There is no way I can even the score, because, no matter
the foreign noun I try to incorporate into English, I am
still stuck with a and *the*.

## Rivals the brilliance of genuine diamonds!

I know that a 32-page, 4-color catalogue cannot *possibly*
be produced just for me, but I wonder who else in the
world is so fanatical about reading such rubbish as to make
it worth while to print them in any economical quantity.
&ldquo;You'd be surprised,&rdquo; I can hear my friend, the mail-order
advertising man, saying; and I suppose I would. I read such
nonsense *carefully*, wondering, too, whether there is anyone
who believes the text and then orders the goods. There must
be someone, I keep telling myself, though as I leaf through
the catalogue, I find it increasingly hard to believe.

Here, for instance, is a catalogue that has on its front
cover &ldquo;The Fabulous Fashion Carry-all,&rdquo; featuring &ldquo;20
Special COMPARTMENTS&rdquo; to &ldquo;Get You Organized Fast!&rdquo;
Seems to be just what I need. (You should see the top of my
desk!)-Sorry, I'm not supposed to use exclamation points;
they are reserved for mail-order &ldquo;clinchers.&rdquo; Only $14.97
(each); FREE INITIALS. Among such convenient organizers on
the back of the bag are a Postage Stamp Pocket, Telephone-Address
Index, Credit Card Holders, 2 Checkbook Holders
(one, presumably, for the bank on which one writes those
checks that are returned for insufficient funds), Pen &amp; Pencil
Holders, Change Purse, and See-Thru &ldquo;Portable Desk.&rdquo;
It's that last item that I probably need to get myself
organized fast (!), but I can't somehow see myself carrying a
See-Thru version.

Moving right along, in a well-organized fashion, I am
drawn by the &ldquo;clinchers&rdquo;-those lines of copy ending with
an exclamation point. I have always read such lines as if
they were followed by a *Wow!*, *Colly Gee!*, or *Think of
That!* On page 2 appears the &ldquo;Amazing Slicer Does It
All-with 3 STAINLESS STEEL Blades and SAFETY HOLDER!&rdquo;
(*Wow!*) Then, &ldquo;the Vanderbilt Jewel-Rivals the brilliance
of genuine diamonds!&rdquo; (*Colly!*) It is interesting/useful
to note that the tiny type under the illustration reveals
&ldquo;... carats refer to size not weight.&rdquo; That's a bit odd, as
any dictionary definition of carat will show. &ldquo;NEVER BUY
SOCKS AGAIN!&rdquo; is the headline of an offering of &ldquo;Incredible
Super Nylon Socks.&rdquo; I'm not sure I don't want to buy socks
again: wearing the same socks 10, 15, or 25 years from now
might be quite boring. (Now, &ldquo;Never wash socks again&rdquo;
might be more tempting.) Here are some more Gee-whiz
clinchers from the same catalogue:

>WAIST REDUCER BELT SLIM DOWN Waist and Hip Area  
WITHOUT STRENUOUS EXERCISE! ... PERFECT FOR  
MEN AND WOMEN!
>
>Grind Everything From Meat To Nuts! Suction-Grip  
VACUUM BASE Stays Put!
>
>... Automatic Screwdriver and Push Drill YOU PUSH  
>... IT TURNS AUTOMATICALLY!
>
>Get &ldquo;ZIP UP&rdquo; Protection For all your valuables! (This
is a man's pocket wallet with some plastic credit
card sleeves: it affords little protection from someone
who steals the entire thing.)
>
>Never Clean Toilets Again! (Does this mean you'll
never have to clean them again or that they'll
never be clean again?)
>
>Have everything you'll need with our COMPLETE 20
Piece Kitchen Towel Set! (This may be an over-statement
for some people. Man does not live by
kitchen towel sets alone.)
>
>Deluxe DINING TABLE...Recessed holder for glass
or cup! (From the scale of the picture, this would
seem to be about 8" &times; 16" with four 16" legs. &ldquo;To
store, simply slide legs underneath.&rdquo; That, to some,
may constitute a &ldquo;Deluxe DINING TABLE,&rdquo; but in
the Affluent Society of the 1980s it might seem a
trifle overstated.)
>
>Fill Your Boom with a rainbow of MOVING LIGHTS!
...You'll be reminded of the era of marathon
dances as you enjoy the exciting movement of color
and light!
>
>INSTANT PERSONAL MASSAGE...Anywhere, Anytime!
[Cordless, personal vibrator] slips into purse or
briefcase for on-the-spot relief anywhere!
>
>NEVER IRON AGAIN!
>
>Have A &ldquo;Hardware Store&rdquo; IN YOUR OWN HOME!
(Must I?)
>
>NEVER WAX YOUR CAR AGAIN! (N.B.: This doesn't say
you won't have to wax your car again, only that
you should use this &ldquo;New Miracle Polymer Sealant&rdquo;
instead of wax.)

Lest anyone think that the people who run this outfit
are maladroit nincompoops when it comes to language, note
that the see-through panel in the mailing envelope showed
the following: &ldquo;One of the persons listed below has won
$50,000.00 . . . M. Arvay, Toledo, OH.; L. Urdang, Essex,
CT.; L. Gloyd, Ft. Lee, VA.&rdquo; A careful reading of the
small print reveals that &ldquo;Ms. Marjorie Arvay of Toledo
[was] the 1980 Giant Jackpot winner!&rdquo; And you probably
thought that the first line meant that Arvay, Urdang, or
Gloyd had already been selected to win a prize that was yet
to be claimed. A check with information revealed that there
is, indeed, an Arvay in Toledo (with an unlisted number);
but a similar check could not turn up anyone with the
named L. Gloyd in Ft. Lee, VA. That, of course, may
mean only that L. Gloyd doesn't have a phone; perhaps he
(or she) ordered a &ldquo;COMPLETE 20 Piece Kitchen Towel Setl&rdquo;
and has everything he (or she) will need.  [L.U.]

## Found in Verbatim-Answers

1. ABE 
2. BAIT
3. EAR
4. IRA
5. BIER
6. MAE
7. RAM
8. EVA
9. RIB
10. BEAM
11. ABET
12. AMBIT
13. IRMA
14. BARE
15. VIM
16. AIM
17. TRAM
18. MATE
19. BIT
20. RIM
21. EAT
22. RITE
23. VIE
24. AIR
25. MAITRE
26. TEA
27. BAR
28. MITE
29. REAM
30. BRAT
31. MIRE
32. TIRE
33. AMBER
34. MATER
35. RATE
36. BAT
37. TAB
38. IRE
39. VERB
40. AMI
41. EMIT
42. MARE
43. ATE
44. RIVET
45. BRAVE
46. TIBER
47. BARITE
48. MEAT
49. VIBRATE
50. RAVE
51. ITEM
52. BRIM
53. RAT
54. ARE
55. VIA
56. IMARET
57. EMIR
58. TEAM
59. MARIE
60. BATE
61. AVE
62. TAMER
63. MERIT
64. AMIE
65. BEAR
66. MAR
67. BRA
68. TAM
69. ERMA
70. MART
71. RIME
72. TIE
73. ARM
74. TIME
75. MAB
76. BRIE
77. TAR
78. BREAM
79. TEAR
80. ART
81. MAT
82. MITER
83. BEAT
84. REMIT
85. ERA
86. TRIM
87. IAMB
88. AVER
89. BITE
90. TARE
91. BERT
92. AVERT
93. IRATE
94. TIM
95. TRIBE
96. BETA
97. VAT
98. ETA
99. ARTIE
100. BET
101. MET.

*Some of the others*

AM, AI, AT, BE, BIM, BARI, BARM, BEMA, BRAE, EM, ER, EMBAR,
IT, IVAR, ME, MA, MI, MIB, MEA, MAPI, MITRE, RA, RAE, REB,
RET, REI, REBA, RIVE, RAMIE, TAI, TAV, TAME, TARIM, VET,
VAIR, VITA, VIET.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Dashing cravat for a gay dog. (5,3)
2\. Bad writing not worth reading. (6)
3\. Sounds like money to buy hot goods will lead to ultimate punishment. (7,8)
4\.  I arm the USA? In a way, I once did. (7)
5\.  Loose enough to follow one's bent. (7)
6\.  I only cop welfare in continuation of insured income program. (7,2,6)
7\.  This might be the editors! (5,2,3,5)
8\.  Like the lithe and slender damsels of Ole Miss. (7)
9\.  L.A. turns tough, making the final score. (4,3)
10\. Joining the drag race? (8,7)
11\. They always include the alternative in such a postulate. (6)
12\. Copy the Indians follow, of the laws of the land. (8)

**Down**

1\. Plaintiff in court accrues it all wrongly. (7)
2\. Newspaper writer in bad company. (7)
3\. Musical coach? (5)
4\. Cause of bitterness among the heirs. (3,4)
6\. When the bouillon clears up there's nothing in it. (5,4)
7\. Original point of African tribal conflict. (7)
8\. What must be done to enjoy New Year's eve. (4,3)
10\. Make a boo-boo? It's a mere nothing! (5)
14\. Go warn'em of this disturber of the peace ... (9)
15\. ... and find a place to hold the skunk! (7)
16\. We surround a deer, bent on destruction. (7)
17\. Refrigerant to cool main part of the inferno. (5)
18\. Call the spitfire a harpy. (7)
19\. Being in range of what people say can make one s ears burn ... (7)
20\. ... like intimate passages of immoral customs. (7)
23\. The brew must end, even for the first in, last out. (5)

The answer to Puzzle No. 14 appears on page 21.

## How DARE You?  Part 2

In VERBATIM VI, 2 was printed a list of queries from
the *Dictionary of American Regional English* to which
many readers made useful replies. *DARE* gratefully returns
with another list. Please give us, as appropriate, the time,
place, occasion, or circumstances and the type of person
who used or uses the word or phrase. If you know the origin
or have a reasonable surmise about it, please include that.
Many thanks! Send replies to Prof. F. G. Cassidy, *DARE*,
6125 Helen White Hall, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53706.

*alibi* *verb*, in the sense of 'malinger.' We already have
the senses of excusing oneself speciously and of hedging
or avoiding an issue.

*backed up* constipated. We have examples from Tennessee
and southwestern Arkansas. Where else is it
used?

*blink* a very thin coating of ice on a pond or the like.
We have one record from southeast Missouri.

*cheese cutter* *Dialect Notes* reported this in 1924 from
New Mexico for 'bicycle.' From Wisconsin in 1950
came the same word, but this time meaning 'Protestant.'
These must be independent developments, but
the second metaphor escapes us.

*chill* a very peculiar word: 'a new cane or shoot of
the salmonberry bush.' Reported from Washington
state. Where else is it known?

*Chinese school* a children's outdoor game reported
from Massachusetts, Mississippi, and West Virginia.
Is it played elsewhere? What are the rules in your
neighborhood?

*chinker* from Connecticut we have one record of this
for 'rough, wild, or dangerous horse.' Other evidence
of use, and explanation of source are needed.

*chipper* We have one report each for three different
senses: 'kiss' (Wisconsin), 'small child' (Ohio), and
'doughnut' (Michigan). Do you know any of these?

*cho-cho* A small child, a boy. Two informants from
Oregon say it is a Basque word. Can others testify
to its use, where and when. (Presumably it's from
Spanish *muchacho*.)

*cold-bird* a 'brown bird (otherwise unidentified) whose
singing is thought to predict cold weather.' One
report from South Carolina, 1938. Is the term otherwise
known, and what bird is it?

*cold duck* not the drink, but a dance. Reported by
Blacks from Virginia and West Virginia. How is it
done? Why the name?

*the same old six and seven* a reply to the question,
&ldquo;How are things?&rdquo; Reported from Illinois and Oklahoma
from past use. Where else was or is it used?
What is its origin? (*At sixes and sevens* is standard;
this is different.)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. C-leave-D;  
5\. Mini-mal;  
9\. OUT(r)AGES;  
10\. Ad-verse;  
11\. D-il-AT-o-RY;  
12\. Scot;  
15\. Distressed goods;  
16\. Baggage handlers;  
20\. U-FO-s;  
21\. STIF-F.-arm;  
24\. Big time;  
25\. TROT-sky;  
26\. ROYAL-ty;  
27\. DRE-aded.  

**Down**

1\. Crowded;  
2\. EX-tolls;  
3\. VEG-eta-RIAN;  
4\. DisTRESSED;  
5\. MOAT;  
6\. Navy;  
7\. Morocco;  
8\. LAERTES;  
13\. De-VAST-ated;  
14\. A go-d of lo-v-e-;  
16\. Blubber;  
17\. Good guy;  
18\. ELAPSED;  
19\. S-a-MO-y-E-d;  
22\. Will;  
23\. De-N.Y.  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Hundreds of millions of broccoli heads are devoured
annually by Americans in every calendar month.&rdquo; [From
Horticulture, March 1981, p. 25. Submitted by Jesse Roth</name>
<place>Rockville, Maryland. *Is that the Julian or the Gregorian
calendar month?*]

## Paring Pairs No. 3

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in numbered items which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues*. *In some cases*, *a
numbered word may be used more than once*, *but after all
matchings have been completed*, *one numbered word will
remain*, *and that is the correct answer*. *Our answer is the
only correct one*. *The solution will be published in the next*
VERBATIM *along with the names of the winners*.
Winners will receive either a copy of the Collector's Edition
of Thomas Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail value $30)
or a copy of *English English*, by Norman W. Schur (retail
value $24.95). Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle
East, or North Africa should send their answers (on a post
card, please) to VERBATIM, 2 Market Square, Aylesbury,
Bucks., England. All others should send them to VERBATIM,
Box 668, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems on
which we depend for the delivery of VERBATIM and to make
it fairer for those who live far from either one of our offices,
we shall arrange to collect all correct answers for 21 days,
starting with the day we receive the first correct answer,
and to draw one name in Aylesbury and one name in Essex,
with a prize awarded from each office. Please indicate on
your answer card which book you would like to receive.

(a). More than a discussion on sex.  
(b). Damager of toupees.  
(c). Surf 'n' Ski acrobatically.  
(d). Church singer.  
(e). Bashful helper's visor.  
(f). Treacly church rituals.  
(g). Queue for liquid refreshment.  
(h). Miner's serendipitous strike.  
(i). Basic ursine datum.  
(j). Complaint merchant.  
(k). Inclined tree source.  
(1). Ironing work force.  
(m). In favor of tiny particles.  
(n). Cattle trading.  
(o). Familiar with homosexual aroma.  
(p). Shriek for my just desserts.  
(q). Rodent heap.  
(r). Depart.  
(s). Low visibility.  
(t). Swag.  
(u). Waiting.  
(v). Pigeon x 2.  
(w). Site of moustache.  
(x). Source of congenital sadness.  
(y). Money maniac.  
(z). But thorn usually causes this.  

(1). Beater.  
(2). Line.  
(3). Cellar.  
(4). Scream.  
(5). Dirt.  
(6). Gang.  
(7). Masses.  
(8). Zero.  
(9). Passenger.  
(10). Gay.  
(11). Matilda.  
(12). Lip.  
(13). Press.  
(14). Fact.  
(15). Nut.  
(16). Punch.  
(17). Buoy.  
(18). Motes.  
(19). Hip.  
(20). Conversation.  
(21). Anchor.  
(22). Rose.  
(23). Genes.  
(24). Wheels.   
(25). Twig.  
(26). Dog.  
(27). Exchange.  
(28). Sealing.  
(29). Criminal.  
(30). Wine.  
(31). Low.  
(32). Pay.  
(33). I.  
(34). Pro.  
(35). Tower.  
(36). Hot.  
(37). Way.  
(38). Spinning.  
(39). Bear.  
(40). Bent.  
(41). Quire.  
(42). Aide.  
(43). Bug.  
(44). Waltz.  
(45). Hare.  
(46). Dough.  
(47). Blue.  
(48). Pouter.  
(49). Stock.  
(50). Service.  
(51). Mouse.  
(52). Shy.  
(53). Knows.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Ellison's Spanish Menu Reader*
Al Ellison, (Ellison Enterprises, 1977), 104pp.

If you think that *tarta normanda* is a French street-walker
or that *sopa de gambas* is made from stewed *violas*,
you should either avoid eating in Spanish restaurants or acquire
a copy of the *Spanish Menu Reader*, one of a series of
Menu Readers prepared and published by Al Ellison. Others
in the series provide guides to French, Italian, German,
Mexican, and Latin American menus. Except for the French
one, which has (in the edition I have) 163 pages and costs
$3.95, each of the others is priced at $2.95. I have had
recourse to the French edition and have found it quite
useful, though it must be pointed out that at about 33 dishes
per page, such a work can scarcely exhaust all of the dishes
in any national cuisine (except, perhaps, that of the United
States). &ldquo;Ellison takes the fear out of foreign restaurants&rdquo;
goes the blurb, evoking images of Milquetoasts quaking in
terror before intimidating ma&icirc;tres d'h&ocirc;tel and scornful
waiters.

All the basic dishes are here, each given an English
equivalent or translation: you can easily avoid inadvertently
ordering *cabeza de ternasco asado* (roast baby lamb's head)
or *cabeza de ternera* (roast boned veal head poached in
broth)-unless, of course, they strike your fancy. If you are
a gourmet, you may not be satisfied by a mere identification
and should then go to a more comprehensive work that lists
ingredients and recipes. But for the casual gourmand, the
Menu Readers should be sufficient and could be made more
useful only by printing them on gravy-proof paper. [Orders,
enclosing payment in full and 30(1; additional for postage for
each book, should be sent to Ellison Enterprises, 2951 S.
Bayshore Drive, Miami, FL 33133: Florida residents add
sales tax.]

## Paring Pairs No. 2

(a). Change the locals. (28,4) Alter Natives.  
(b). Person in charge of those occupying lavatories. (35,8) Lieutenant Commander.  
(c). Three-card monte. (32,10) Thimble Rig.  
(d). Hat. (44,18) Head Gear.  
(e). Trouble. (45,13) Hot Water.  
(f). Not Oxbridge. (40,1) Red Brick.  
(g). Tired horseman. (36,11) Rider Haggard.  
(h). Peter x 2. (38,19) Pumpkin Eater.  
(i). Trap. (41,2) Dead Fall.  
(j). High-grade meat. (37,12) Upper Cut.  
(k). Low-grade meat. (53,23) Bum Steer.  
(l). Trajan. (33,14) Arch Fiend.  
(m). Wardrobe mister. (27,21) Closet Queen.  
(n). Time drags behind him. (39,3) Watch tower.  
(o). Lord Tom Thumb's wife? (29,22) Lady Finger.  
(p). Duke always took it. (34,49) Eh? Train.  
(q). Out-of-town comedian. (17,5) Visiting Card.  
(r). Counterfeiter. (43,6) Paper Hanger.  
(s). Lollipop. (51,20) Good Ship.  
(t). Paris hotel. (42,25) George Sank.  
(u). Financial gains from origami. (30,7) Paper Prophets.  
(v). Oxbridge teams in Missouri? (50,9) St. Louis Blues.  
(w). A washout next to real bear. (31,15) Sham Pooh.  
(x). Slow writing. (48,24) Pen Dragon.  
(y). To easily solve. (47,26) Split Infinitive.  
(z). More than eight containers for wood defects. (52,16) Nine Pots.  

The winners of Paring Pairs No. 2 (Answer: 46. Real) are
Jolaine Munck, Albany, California, U.S. (received in Essex)
and Sean Devine, Dublin, Ireland (received in Aylesbury).

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Alpha to Omega*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Alpha-omega-life-times-Greek-alphabet/11942862500/bd)
Alexander and Nicholas Humez, (David R. Godine, Inc., Boston, 1981), xiii + 194 pp.

This pleasantly rambling book presents a fascinating
and annoying series of anecdotes, discussions, ancient chestnuts,
and chunks of familiar and unfamiliar lore, using the
letters of the Greek alphabet as twenty-four headings, plus
one extra chapter called &ldquo;Dead Letters.&rdquo; The misleading
subtitle, &ldquo;The Life and Times of the Greek Alphabet,&rdquo; does
not mean that we get a treatment of that alphabet's history
in any detail. We do not see, for instance, what Semitic sign
was the source of a given Greek one, in most cases, although
one must admit that the story is far more complicated than
was once thought. At any rate, we learn more cheerful facts
about the square on the hypotenuse. They are found,
logically enough, in the twenty-third chapter, *Psi. Ps&acute;llein*
'to twang,' is connected with *psaltery*, which &ldquo;comes from
*psallein*,&rdquo; as the book surprisingly puts it. Since Pythagoras
was a pioneer in investigating the acoustical property of
strings, we are treated to a few speculations on his life and
less speculative remarks about his renowned theorem. This
leads to a delightfully inexcusable shaggy dog story-bad
enough to be in my own repertory (the one with the &ldquo;squaw
on the hippopotamus&rdquo;; if you want the whole story, get the
book). I wish the authors had digressed still more and had
explained why the Greeks seemingly called the: hippo a
&ldquo;horse-river&rdquo; instead of a &ldquo;river-horse.&rdquo;

Under Alpha some account is given of the route
allegedly taken by the &ldquo;raw materials for the Greek
alphabet&rdquo; from the Near East, including the tradition of
Cadmus, who supposedly make a down payment of (only)
sixteen letters to the Greeks. As the authors point out,
legends usually contain cracks, as well as a few grains of
truth.

Infelicity of expression may lead the unwary reader to
conclude that the Greeks invented the procedure of using
letters for numbers. The authors seem to believe it themselves,
or almost, for they do say once (under their breath)
that the Semites did similar things.

&ldquo;Beta is for *Boustrophedon*&rdquo; brings quite a lot of bull;
for instance: &ldquo;The last aurochs on record died an elderly
cow [!] in Poland in 1627.&rdquo; *Bucolic* is said to come &ldquo;directly
from&rdquo; Greek *boukolik&oacute;s*. *Boondocks*, we are told, with a
sign, does not, &ldquo;alas,&rdquo; derive from Gk. *bous*, but there is
scant cause for grief. English *kindergarten* is not inherited
from Germanic, as the verbiage devoted to it seems to imply,
but was acquired in a different way.

&ldquo;Delta for *Diagnosis*&rdquo; brings discussion of many words,
including some on medicine. A quotation from Dr. Benjamin
Lee Gordon redeems many a sin: &ldquo;The Persians
resorted more frequently to spells than drugs, on the
grounds that although spells might not cure the disease, they
at least would not kill the patient.&rdquo; We are told more about
Aesculapius and Pythagoras than we need to know, perhaps
(and less about Galen). Avicenna is said to have been born
in Russia (I) and is also called an Arabian (!).

*Epsilon* leads to *Eureka*, which, as the authors point
out, needed to start with *h*- anyway. We encounter once
more the story of Archimedes, that ancient flasher. One account,
stemming from the medieval historian Efsher
Apokryfiliak, has it that the king responded to Archimedes'
faulty Greek and brilliant physics with, &ldquo;Ikh hob dir in
bod.&rdquo;

Since *pi* is, among other things, jumbled type, we are
regaled under that heading with a jumble of partly interesting
matters, ranging from palindromes to a mnemonic
device for remembering (what else?) the value of pi to 15
places. The Japanese are said to be masters of the palindrome,
but the addendum, &ldquo;though neither of the two
writing systems that the Japanese employ is alphabetic,&rdquo; is
curiously irrelevant. So is a remark of Isaac Asimov quoted
here; it is worth repeating, if only as a piece of pi: &ldquo;One can
always [?] have half a cup of coffee but never half a piece of
chalk.&rdquo;

&ldquo;*Rho* is for *Rhetoric*,&rdquo; and many questions, none of
them rhetorical, are treated. Contemporary abuse of the
term is not mentioned. Nor is it pointed out that *rho* is really
*hro*. And there is neither rhyme nor reason to deriving
*rhyme* from *rhythmos*. There are countless matters to
discuss, but space seems finite. &ldquo;Our&rdquo; word *camel*, said by
the authors to be from Phoenician *gimel*, probably is not.
The name of the letter does not seem to have been the same
word. (Many Semitic letter names do have fairly certain
meanings: *beth* 'house' or *imem* 'water' or *yod* 'hand'; but
*gimel* is a disputed one.)

The authors do deserve commendation for reminding
us that Copernicus was not the first to give a heliocentric explanation
of the solar system, Greeks having preceded him
by almost two millennia. Despite lots of talk about the Trojans,
however, the authors fail to tell us who they were,
ethnically, or to say what their language was, a failing they
share with many others. They seem not to recognize the fact
that the so-called &ldquo;Arabic&rdquo; numerals are really Indian,
hence they are wide of the mark in seeing something in the
Arabic number one that resembles the way Greeks wrote
their number one at times.

A bibliography of about ninety books and articles lists
only one in a language other than English. That does not
result from consideration for the monoglot reader, for the
works used by the authors are included. A strange absence is
that of any mention of a Greek etymological dictionary,
although the famous Ernout-Meillet for Latin is given. I am
well aware that this is not intended to be a treatise on
historical or comparative linguistics. And the book does live
up to some of the promises in the &ldquo;Prologue.&rdquo; We are afforded
a series of &ldquo;glimpses of the Greek world&rdquo; and are
positively assailed by countless views of Greek culture,
scenery which we could have enjoyed without the distraction
of all the old chestnuts (even the priceless ones from
Dorothy Parker). In a way, the book is a potent corrective
of many notions about Roman language and culture, all too
often given credit for what was really Greek. Authors cannot
be omniscient, except in fiction, perhaps. Ours acknowledge
the aid of many qualified individuals. But they seem to
have needed more aid in some areas, including Semitic,
Indic, Iranic, elementary phonetics, and etymology. Despite
the liability of a blurblet by the dour Edwin Newman praising
the volume, it is eminently readable.

*[Robert A. Fowkes, New York University]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Warren M. Christopher left the State Department on
in uncharacteristically flamboyant note. His face flushed,
his eyes glistening and waving to welcomers, the normally
low-keyed diplomat ...&rdquo; [From a report in *New York
Times*, January 22, 1981. *Those waving eyes get you every
time*....Both of the preceding from Elizabeth Copper, New York City]

## A Saga
*Janet Krueger, Long Beach, California*

When I first came to the big city, just a plug-ugly hillbilly
suddenly out hobnobbing with the hoi-polloi, I was
amazed at all the hustle and bustle. Everywhere I went, I
saw people dashing hither and thither, waving their pooper-scoopers
and chasing pell-mell after their dogs, with man
and beast alike running through traffic lights and instigating
numerous killer-diller fender-benders. Believe me, there was
quite a hubbub and to-do as pets ran helter-skelter with,
willy-nilly, their masters or mistresses following, huffing
and puffing. A man sitting under a banyan (or was it a
hackmatack?) tree in the park, who said he was a pet vet,
told me that all the hurry-scurry was caused by a new law
passed by the duly elected rinky-dink city officials, all of
whom, he claimed, were certified nitwits, not to say dead-heads.

&ldquo;Jeepers creepers!&rdquo; the people shouted. &ldquo;We're not going
to listen to all that claptrap and folderol or kowtow to
those crumb-bums!&rdquo; And &ldquo;Boo-hoo!&rdquo; the rich little old
ladies cried, &ldquo;What harm can one itsy-bitsy bowwow do?&rdquo;
There was many an angry powwow and much whoop-de-do,
but in the end, of course, the bigwigs won.

After that, things seemed kind of humdrum and, when
I wasn't having paydays by working as a crackerjack handy-andy,
I would watch the boob tube for a while every morning
and then go down to the Piggly-Wiggly for some
mammie-jammie or maybe some tutti-frutti ice cream, and
mingle with the lunch bunch. One afternoon someone
called out, &ldquo;Yoo-hoo!&rdquo; and here came this really hotsy-totsy-looking
girl, wearing a fancy-schmancy smock-frock and
frangipani perfume. She asked me, with a tee-hee and a
boop-boop-a-doop, if I wanted to go to a honky-tonk in
Hackensack with her and boogie-woogie. &ldquo;Okey-dokey,&rdquo; I
said, and thus I began a life full of razzmatazz, even though
Polly (Wollydoodle, in full) turned out to be a real ding-a-ling.
We had many a wingding together, however, and
even a little hugger-mugger hanky-panky. We never made
it to the wed-bed, though, because one night my lovey-dovey
told me she had to get down to the nitty-gritty and
that the truth was, I was too much of a namby-pamby for
her, besides being somewhat of a phony-baloney and also a
fuddy-duddy. In fact, I was beginning to give her the
heebie-jeebies, she said, and she no longer cared for me even
a teeny-weeny bit.

&ldquo;Holy Moley,&rdquo; I sobbed. &ldquo;I thought you were true
blue! You were my harum-scarum honey bunny, and I was
your roly-poly silly Billy! If you leave me I'll commit hari-kiri!
Or worse, I'll put a hex on you with voodoo hocus-pocus!&rdquo;

&ldquo;Hell's bells!&rdquo; she exclaimed. &ldquo;Don't give me that
abracadabra and mumbo-jumbo. You just haven't any razzle-dazzle
any more, and from now on it's no go.&rdquo;

She was right. She was hoity-toity no-show after that,
and the last I heard she was working for a jelly-bellied fat
cat as a hootchy-kootchy dancer in Hong Kong, although
the only foreign language she knows is Tex-Mex. May she
get paid in funny money and lose it all at fantan, say I.

As for me, I have become one of the ragtag band of
hobos and lost souls of the city as I wander here and there
with my hurdy-gurdy, playing my hemidemisemiquavers
from an empty bandstand in the park while the panhandlers
and rum-bums dance the villa-nella or raise their herky-jerky
voices in a sing-a-ling.

Oblivious of the hurly-burly and hubble-bubble around
me, my lodgings a hodgepodge and my few ragbag possessions
strewn about higgledy-piggledy, I find that my life has
turned to nada. My dreams are full of hobgoblins and I'm
all broken up, just like Humpty Dumpty. If only I had some
self-pelf I could get away from it all and go hunt kudus
with the Zulus, or fish for cohos, or climb the Changabang.
But I know I'm no hotshot any more-if ever I was one.

In short, my heyday is over.
Likewise, my saga.


#### EPISTOLA {Harry R. Houle}

I was pleased to read &ldquo;Take a Left at Sore Finger
Road,&rdquo; by Kay Haugaard [VI, 4] concerning place names in
Arizona. Pity that Mrs. Haugaard did not have a copy of
*Arizona Place Names* (University of Arizona Press) with her.

>*Bloody Basin*, Yavapai County, is &ldquo;said to have been
so called because of the many battles with Indians
that took place in this region.&rdquo;
*Dead Man's Wash*, at *Deadmans Flat*, about 20 miles
north of Flagstaff, in Coconino County, is so named,
according to C.J. Babbit (in the 1935 edition), because
an &ldquo;old prospector who had been hanging
around Flagstaff for some days started for his camp.
Navajo Indians found him dead several days later lying
under a cedar tree. A clear case of suicide.&rdquo;
*Horse Thief Basin*, Yavapai County, is a &ldquo;small open
area on east side of Lane Mountain about five miles
southeast of Crown King. . . . Many years ago it
was called *Horse Thief Ranch* because several noted
characters made it a 'hide-out' for traffic in stolen
horses.&rdquo;
>
>*Skull Valley*, Yavapai County, is at an elevation of
4112 feet, nearly due west of Prescott. There are various
explanations as to the origin of this name; however,*
Arizona Place Names* cites one as &ldquo;doubtless the
true story&rdquo;; &ldquo;There was a fight here in 1864, between
a bunch of soldiers under Lieut. Monteith and some
Mohave and Tonto Apaches. They left without burying
the dead Indians. Later on. Major Willis sent a
scouting party out, which found and buried the
dead, whose bones and skulls were lying around
everywhere. Major Willis named it Skull Valley.&rdquo;

While on her trek through Yavapai County, it's a
shame Mrs. Haugaard missed such places as Skeleton Ridge
and *Wagon Tire Flat*, *Swilling Gulch and Mule Shoe Bend*.
She refers to *People's Valley*, which is probably a misnomer
for *People's Valley*, named after Abraham Harlow Peoples.

Mrs. Haugaard is likewise delighted with road names.
At this juncture, I wish to put in a bid for my favorite,
located in Paradise Valley, a few blocks from this school.
The Phoenix Metropolitan Telephone Directory lists nineteen
streets, the names of which begin with the Spanish
*Camino*. The anonymous award of honor goes to *Camino
sin nombre*.

*[Harry R. Houle, Phoenix Country Day School Phoenix, Arizona]* 


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Army's Strolling Strings, Grand Marnier souffle
and Schramsberg blanc de noirs champagne were served
simultaneously for dessert.&rdquo; [From a report in *The New
York Times*, February 26, 1981, of a White House state dinner
honoring Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. *That
struck just the right cord!*]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v7n4_Spring_1981)