--- 
title: "VOL VIII, No 1 [Summer 1981]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Glaswegians and Liverpudlians
*Robert A. Fowkes, Yonkers, New York*

Denizens of No Mean Burys
Less baffling to us Americans than &ldquo;Beauchamp,
pronounced Beecham&rdquo; or &ldquo;Caius, pronounced
Keys,&rdquo; but certainly no less intriguing, and the designations
of the inhabitants of some cities in England and
Scotland.  Among the best-known examples are *Glaswegian*
and *Liverpudlian*, for inhabitants of Glasgow and
Liverpool, respectively, followed closely by *Cantabrig-ian*
(for Cambridge), *Aberdonian* (Aberdeen) and, more
remotely, by *Mancunian* (Manchester) and *Salopian*
(applying to both Shrewsbury and its county, Shropshire).
A group in *onian* (in addition to *Aberdonian*)
includes *Bathonian* and *Exonian*, which are less transparent
than *Bostonian, Etonian, Meltonian* (for Melton
Mowbray), names on which they may be patterned.

If we have such a practice in the United States, it
occurs either in nonce forms, like *Albanians* (heard once
in the sense of people from Albany) or in semifacetious
formations: *Michiganders, Trojans* (from Troy, New
York), *Sicilians* (Messina, New York), *Bozemaniacs*
(Bozeman, Montana), *Plattsb(o)urgeois*, et al.  *Gothamites*
for New Yorkers is not the same thing.

*Glaswegian*, which is not only a noun applied to the
denizens but also an adjective meaning characteristic of
that city, is said to have been made up in imitation of
the far less familiar *Galwegian*, for inhabitants of Galloway,
Scotland (not a town, granted, but a district).
*Galwegian* itself is considered an imitation of *Norwegian*,
from *Norway*.  Since earlier forms of *Norway* in
English include *Norroway*, the proportion *Norroway*:
*Norwegian* = *Galloway*: *Galwegian* would be logical,
although the claim might be demolished as an anachronism
if it were shown that *Galwegian* came into being
long after *Norroway* ceased to be current.  Even then,
the relationship of -*way*: -*wegian* might suffice.  Since
Galway, Ireland, also has -*way*, it would not be inconceivable
for that town to acquire a competing form for
Galloway's *Galwegian*.  I am not aware that it has, and it
is even possible that Ireland does not go in for such
shenanigans.

*Glasgow* has no -*way*, obviously, and perhaps its
general similarity to *Galloway* accounts for the analogical
formation.  Or maybe the *ow* sequence does it
(although *Moscow* doesn't yield **Moscwegian*, nor *Harrow*
**Harwegian*).  Why should *Norwegian* come from
Norway in the first place?  Ultimately it is because an
Old Norse form was *Norvegr* (nor(o)- 'north', *vegr*
'way').  At some time Medieval Latin gave it the shape
*norvegia* (adj.); cf. also French *norv&eacute;gien*, German
*norwegisch* (*Norwegen* = 'Norway').  In the Norwegian
language itself, the adjective 'Norwegian' is *norsk*
(which once was *nordisk*), and the name of the country
is *Norge*, with at least a written *g*, although there is now
no sound of *g* in the name.  The -*wegian* of *Glaswegian*
has acquired quasijocular character, and the whole name
is doubtless often felt as facetious, depending, of course,
on who is speaking and who is listening.  *Scowegian*
used to be heard in my high-school days as a disparaging
word for Scandinavians, along with *Scandihoovian*,
a disrespectful distortion of *Scandinavian* with suggestions
of the ending of words like *Peruvian*, perhaps.
Both seem, fortunately, dead.  If I have shied away from
any etymological elucidation of *Glasgow*, it is partly
because that hasn't too much to do with *Glaswegain* and
partly because the realm of place names is the most
precarious of etymological terrains.  If the reader
believes that Glasgow is from Gaelic *Gleschu* and
means 'dear green spot' (long ago!) or 'dark glen' or
even 'blue hound,' it is difficult to prove or disprove the
case.

*Liverpudlian*, unlike *Glaswegian*, requires little
cogitation to fathom.  The *pool* is humorously altered to
its pretended diminutive *puddle*, and from *Liverpud(d)le*
we get *Liverpudlian*.  There is some dispute
about the meaning of *pool*, but there is no agreement at
all regarding *Liver*-, which may be a chopped version of
a Norse word for 'slope,' or the name of an extinct bird,
or an adjective 'clotted,' or a Celtic word for 'rushes,' or
another meaning 'wild iris,' etc.  If it has to be a
botanical phenomenon, the resemblance to *liverwort* is
tempting—always comically reminisecnt of *liverwurst*.
But if *Liverpudlian* suggests *liver pudding* or *Lilliputian*,
that may merely reflect the state and size of the
brains of those thinking such a thing.  It is a pretty big
pool to be called a puddle, in any event, and English
understatement (litotes) must have had a hand in the
creation.  Other -*pool* names seem not to be subjected to
the process, although some music-hall comedian might
be quite capable of saying **Blackpudlian* or
**Hartlepudlian*.

A *Cantabrigian* is a student at Cambridge, or a
townsman.  The name would be a legitimate derivative
of *Cantabrigia*, often called the Latin name of Cambridge,
although the use of &ldquo;Latin&rdquo; in such instances
can be misleading.  Latin names of British places were
written by ecclesiastical scribes, then by lawyers and
scholars.  They were rewritings of English names
already there, themselves often alterations of earlier
Celtic ones, which could have come from pre-Celtic
names themselves.  *Cantabrigia* incorporates and distorts
various Celtic elements in a marvelous confusion.
*Canta*- replaces *Granta* (the British Celtic name of the
river, still found in Grantchester, some two-and-a-half
miles southwest of Cambridge; Welsh *Caergrawnt*
'Cambridge' shows the same elements as Grantchester
in reverse order).  The -*bridge* of Cambridge probably
has nothing to do with English *bridge*.  Never mind.  An
abbreviated form of *Cantabrigian, Cantab.*, is used to
refer to students (e.g., &ldquo;The Cantabs. say ...&rdquo;) or to the
degrees acquired (&ldquo;B.A. Cantab.&rdquo;).

*Oxonian* should logically follow, or precede, a mention
of *Cambridge* and *Cantabrigian*.  There is an
implied Latin *Oxonia*, possibly with accompanying
adjective.  If so, the *ford* has obviously been entirely
omitted.  Old English had *Oxenaford* and *Oxenford*.
Several Oxford graduates have pointed out to me that
*Oxford* = *Bosporus*, and most Greek teachers shudder at
the suggestion.  Yet, if the maiden Io swam that strait
after being transformed into a heifer, the etymology
seems to be more than sheer bull.  If the objection is to
equating 'ox' with 'heifer,' perhaps we should point out
that the Proto-Indo-European word for 'bovine' was
both masculine and feminine.  The words *Oxonolatry*
and *oxonianize* have deservedly failed to prosper.  And
*Oxfordian* seems confined mainly to geology.

*Aberdonian* as an inhabitant of Aberdeen, or an
adjective applying to that town, might seem superficially
to be a formation similar to *Oxonian* (and other rhyming
words: *Etonian*, et al.).  But there may be more to the
story than that.  To the north of Aberdeen (by now,
perhaps *in* the north) is the mouth of the Don; to the
south, that of the Dee.  The old town is closer to the
mouth of the Don and could appropriately be called
*Aberdonia* in a Latinized form.  *Aberdonian* would be
almost acceptable etymologically.  I say almost, because
of the *Aber*.  In Brythonic (Welsh, especially) *aber* is the
word for the mouth of a river, estuary, etc., as in
*Aberystwyth*, et al.  The corresponding Gaelic word is
*inver*, cf. *Inverness*.  Now, the territory of Brythonic
Celtic once extended northward into Scotland, and it
used to be thought that the northern limits of Brythonic
habitation could be determined by ascertaining how far
north the names in *aber* extended.  It turns out, however,
that *abers* were found farther north than they have any
right to be, as shown by archaeological and other evidence,
and this is true of the *aber* in *Aberdeen*.  (There
must have been imitation of *Aber*- names in areas of
Scotland where they did not properly belong).

The city of Bath, famed as a spa since the Roman
occupation, has its own special designation, both noun
and adjective: *Bathonian*.  A quotation from 1766 in the
*OED* has the lines: &ldquo;Whose genius guides, whose counsel
guards/The labors of Bathonian bards&rdquo; (Horace is
apparently referred to).  *Bathonian* could imply a Latinized
name *Bathonia* (complete with non-Latin thorn,
*th*), with -*onia* modeled on other such names.  But Welsh
and other evidence makes it likely that the name once
had a form *Bathon*, apparently from the dative plural
(Old English *Bathum* 'at the baths'—cf. *Baden* in Germany,
etc.).  *Bathan-caster* is also attested.  It is possible
that *Bathonian* = *Bathon* + -*ian* and involves memory,
or discovery, of that salubrious fact.

After the cleansing tone of Bath, *Salop* sounds like a
filthy letdown.  *Salop* and *Salopian* may seem not to
belong precisely to the group of words being considered,
for they now apply mainly to a county, Shropshire,
but they can also be used for *Shrewsbury*.  By now the
only resemblance to the original form is the initial *S*-,
because Old English had *Scrobbesbyrig*.  By Middle
English times, after Norman tampering or bungling, it
had become *Sloppesberie* and *Saloppesberie*, the drastic
alteration resulting from dissimilation.  *Salopia* is a
pseudo-Latin writing for *Salop*, abstracted from *Saloppesberie*.
An elderly gentleman of my acquaintance, a
native of Shrewsbury, defiantly refused to write *Salop* in
addressing letters to relatives in Shrewsbury, always
inscribing *Shropshire* in a strong, protesting hand.  The
old Shropshire lad also eschewed the pronunciation
Shrowsbury [&scaron;rouzbrI], thought in some quarters to be
the proper one (and actually a bit closer to the expected
&ldquo;historical&rdquo; form).  He attributed it to the &ldquo;toffs in
yonder school,&rdquo; as if Shrewsbury were a stone's throw
from his home in Westchester County, New York.  I later
tested his claims while staying a while in Shrewsbury
and found a certain amount of justification for them.  At
any rate, *Shrewsbury*, however pronounced, like *Shropshire*,
can represent retention of an Anglo-Saxon word in
spite of competing forms created by Norman ravages.
*Salop* may be a dirty trick.

Perhaps *Sarum* should be mentioned after *Salop*.
For, although it yields no adjective **Sarumian*, it is a
strikingly deviant derivative of *Salisbury* or its predecessors.
*Sarum* is said, with no proof, to be the product
of some misreading of Medieval Latin *Sarisburia*.  It is
the official ecclesiastical name and is used in the signature
of the bishop.  It is also encountered in ecclesiastical
terms such as 'Sarum use' and 'Sarum missal.')

Unlike *Salopian* and *Salop*, *Sarum* is, in a way,
closer to older forms of its name than is the present one
The Celtic name was rendered by the Romans and some
of their successors as *Sorviodunum* (the Celtic one
would have been *Sorbiodunon* or *Sorviodunon*).  Saxons
altered this to *Searobyrg* or the like: then it became
*Saresbury* and ultimately *Salisbury*.  Humorous usage of
*Sarum* is reflected in doggerel, limericks, etc.  One of
the latter begins, &ldquo;There was a young lady from Salisbury,
Whose life was quite halisbury-scalisbury.&rdquo;  The
rest of the rhyme escapes me.  Perhaps she had gowns
but couldn't walisbury, or wound up in someone's
halisbury.  (A note of personal prejudice: the abomination
called &ldquo;Salisbury steak&rdquo; in this country deserves
completely the faulty pronunciation usually accorded it.)

*Mancunian* for &ldquo;Manchesterite&rdquo; seems to have dispensed
with most of the second element, -*chester*, and
to have tacked on the strange suffix -*unian* (found in
some Armenian names), which is somewhat like -*onian*.
But *Mancunium* was a Latin writing for *Mancunion*, puz-Celtic
name.  Welsh *Manceinion* may reflect the same
British designation.  (A competing form *Mamucion* puzzles
me).  At any rate, Mancunians have their own
special name and need not take a back seat to Liverpudlians
or Glaswegians.  Perhaps we should rejoice in the
absence of cunianization of other names in -*c(h)ester*, or
we might have a host of unwelcome ones like
**Colcunian,* **Dorcunian,* **Worcunian,* **Gloucunian,*
and plain **Cunian*.

There have been various sources of such names.  A
few may have developed &ldquo;naturally.&rdquo;  Others imply
creativity or malice or wit of people in the scholarly or
ecclesiastical world.  Some may fill a real need; others
are gratuitous.  Most of them are a pleasure to ponder,
though not necessarily to use.  Let's hope that Shrewsbury
never gets an underground, for it might be called
the Salopian Tube.

*[Frederic G. Cassidy, Dictionary of American Regional English, 6125 Helen C. White Hall, The University of Wisconsin]*

## &ldquo;Unofficial Sectional City Names&rdquo;: Postscript
*Madison, Wisconsin*

A reader of my article in VERBATIM VII, 2, Mr.
Kenneth W. Way, has questioned &ldquo;a couple of interpretations&rdquo;
of mine, and I have been asked to reply.  The
original article was necessarily condensed.  Mr. Way's
questions are well taken and deserve fuller
consideration.

The first: &ldquo;Isn't it more likely that the Silk Stocking
group of names refers to the higher-class gentlemen
who probably inhabited those districts in colonial
times?  Dated, yes, but more likely to be validated than
the reference to women.&rdquo;  I think Mr. Way is right on
this.  Mathews's *Dictionary of Americanisms* [*DA*],
under *silk-stocking gentry,* quotes Thomas Jefferson,
1812: &ldquo;I trust ... the Gores and Pickerings will find
their levees crowded with silk-stocking gentry, but no
yeomanry.&rdquo;  I should certainly have remembered this
characterization of the wealthy and luxurious class.  I did
at least remark that the &ldquo;Silk Stocking&rdquo; place names
&ldquo;must have been widespread and firmly established to
have turned up in 54 of our responses.&rdquo;  Some could
well go back to colonial times.  On the other hand, my
attribution to women may not be altogether wrong: a
more recent transfer of the sense from men to women,
now that men no longer wear silk stockings, might
explain the preservation of this type of name until today.

The second question: &ldquo;I think ... names such as
Frogtown and Coontown, ... belong down in the ethnic
and racial slur categories rather than with the animal
names.&rdquo;  My answer is Yes and No: there are some of
each, but in our *DARE* data, even discounting some
indeterminate ones, the animal references clearly outnumber
the ethnic ones.  Our St. Charles, Missouri,
informant mentioned *Frenchtown*, and also &ldquo;*Frogtown,*
where the poor people live.&rdquo;  These may or may not be
the same place.  The Campbelltown, Florida, informant
mentioned &ldquo;*Frogtown,* lower class, wrong side of the
tracks&rdquo; but did not identify it as French.  The name was
given in places where the presence of specifically
French-derived communities are not noted: Villisca,
Iowa, and Lake Pleasant, New York, mentioned *Frog
Hollow;* there is *Frog Village* near Douglas, Massachusetts,
and *Froggy Bottom* in the District of Columbia.
The *Frog Town* near Huntsville, Alabama, and that near
Dover, Delaware, are indeterminate.

On the other hand, the *Frog Town* of Carrollton,
Kentucky, is &ldquo;down by the river&rdquo; (which looks more like
frogs than French); that in Little Falls, Minnesota, is &ldquo;a
wet area with an abundance of frogs&rdquo;; the observation
that in St. Charles, Missouri, &ldquo;a lot of water stood
there,&rdquo; does not eliminate the French but favors the
frogs.  The Wellsboro, Pennsylvania, informant clearly
says, &ldquo;There used to be a swampy area filled with
frogs.&rdquo; *Frog Level*, near Abingdon, Virginia, is &ldquo;lowland,
wet in spring; frogs were heard there first.&rdquo;  The *Frog
Pond* near New Bern, North Carolina, is not likely a
French settlement.  The *Frog Hollow* of North Prescott,
Massachusetts, named along with *Puppyville,* is probably
an animal rather than an ethnic reference.  That
some uses of *Frog Town* were ethnic cannot be denied,
but *Frenchtown* seems to have been preferred in
Pentwater and Onaway, Michigan, in Chillicothe, Ohio,
and no doubt in other places.

As to the *coon* names, we have three indeterminate
ones: *Coon Bottom* in Quincy, Florida, and Waycross,
Georgia, and *Coon's Corner* near Edenton, North Carolina.
But the reference is clear elsewhere: *Coon Bottom*
is the &ldquo;Negro section&rdquo; in Gifford, Florida, and Salem,
New Jersey, and near St. Martinsville, Louisiana, the
settlement once called *Faubourg* is &ldquo;now called *Coon
Town*, where the Negroes live.&rdquo;  On the other hand, the
Napoleon, Ohio, informant mentioned among local
names *Ratsville, Dog Town, Goose Town, Snaketown,*
and *Coon Hollow*.  Evidently his mind was running on
animals, and this is not an ethnic reference.  Also, the
*Coon Town* near Cooter, Missouri, is &ldquo;now *Holland*.  It
was just woods, then, and filled with coons.&rdquo;  The new
name may indicate a desire to avoid the appearance of
an ethnic slur, but the former name certainly referred to
animals.

In sum, it should be noted that, in the North,
*raccoon* is more likely to be used of the animal and *coon*
is now avoided by many people in reference to blacks.
Even in 1965-70, when our data were being collected,
informants would remark of such potentially insulting
words, &ldquo;We don't say that any more.&rdquo;  Consciousness
*was* being raised.  In the South, *coon* is still generally
used of the animal.  The historical fact should also be
noted that in the past century (*DA* 1832 to 1897) *coon*
was commonly used to mean simply 'fellow' or 'person'—the
equivalent of our modern 'guy'—with rural
and &ldquo;canny&rdquo; connotations but no racial ones.  A white
mountaineer might say of himself, &ldquo;This coon is getting
out of here till the trouble blows over.&rdquo;  The specialization
of application to blacks is relatively recent (*DA*
1862 forward).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

In the May 22, 1981, issue of *Publishers Weekly*,
appeared notice of a new paperback, *Analise*, by Lisa
Gregory, published by Jove.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;NO DUMPING—TRESPASSERS WILL BE VIOLATED&rdquo;
[Sign at Memorial Road and Eastern, Oklahoma City,
reproduced in the Sunday magazine section of the
*Sunday Oklahoman*, April 19, 1981.  Submitted by Tom
S. Reyenga, Oklahoma City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Center for Continuing Education, dormatory 3737
Semnry Rd Alex&rdquo; [From the *Northern Virginia* (Washington
Metropolitan Area) *Telephone Directory* of the
Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, January
1981.  Submitted by Andrew F. Downey, Jr., Washington,
D.C.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;They glut themselves, eating with their hands,
shoveling the groceries into themselves in a caricature
of infantile oral behavior.  Literally, they rape the refrigerator.&rdquo;
[From a review by Robert Taylor of *The Men's
Club,* by Leonard Michaels, in *The Boston Globe*, April
22, 1981.  Submitted by Nancy D. Goss, North Andover,
Massachusetts.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;PLEASE NOT PLACE ARTICLES OR SIT ON BED.&rdquo;
[Sign placed on a bed in the Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, just before it is to be made up for an
incoming patient.  Submitted by John R. Starrs, Detroit.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The latest [of TV's 'reality shows'] is CBS's 'That's
My Line,' which will have its premiere tonight, with
unctuous host Bob Barker introducing us to unusual
jobs.  For example, we visit a school that teaches how to
pick up girls and a blind carpenter.&rdquo;  [From *The Milwaukee
Journal*, February 3, 1981.  Submitted by Reinhold
Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin, who reports that he has
*&ldquo;heard of weird fetishes (deaf bakers and lame plumbers),
but picking up blind carpenters is bizarre!&rdquo;*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Born George William Frederick in 1738, he was
descended from the Hanoverian kings of England who
had come to the throne in 1714.  His great-grandfather,
George I, and his grandfather, George II, had paraded
their mistresses publicly and had never shown any great
love for the country they ruled.&rdquo;  [From *Home of the
Brave—A Patriot's Guide to American History*, by John
Alexander Carroll and Odie B. Faulk, page 71.  Submitted
by MacDonald Wood, M.D., Phoenix.]

## Dating Customs
*Robert Schoenfeld, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, and Karl F. Heumann, Bethesda, Maryland*

The editors, authors, and readers of VERBATIM have
a good hold on the language, but who will
straighten out the dating mess?  Not, we think, the
International Standards Organization; it has two related
standards that do not agree with one another.  One
standard recommends an all-numeric form for dates:
year-month-day, as, 19810403.[^a1]  
The other standard, designed for computers, recommends an ordinal form,
as, 1981093, the last three digits being the ordinal
number of the day in the year: the 93rd day of 1981.[^a2]
Leap years change five sixths of these latter numbers
every four years.

Another conflict in writing dates, that between
European and American practices, is well known.
Europeans write day-month-year; Americans (usually),
month-day-year.  *Science* magazine writes &ldquo;3 April
1981.&rdquo;  Some Europeans and Britons write &ldquo;3.IV.1981.&rdquo;

More exotic forms exist.  One of us recently received
a letter headed &ldquo;1518 s 28 II 81&rdquo;; we decode that as
&ldquo;3:18 p.m., Saturday, 28 February 1981.&rdquo;  Quaker dates
are to be spelled out: First-day, Eighth Month.

You will notice that we have ignored a) roman
numerals for years, b) all non-Western forms, c) dates
not connected to the common era, and d) such inventions
as decimalized time.

On the first impulse, one might be tempted to be
tolerant of this variety of customs, as being preferable to
dull conformity.  But consider the human and legal
consequences:

*Scenario 1:* A young European, visiting America,
falls in with bad company, and contracts a painful
gambling debt.  Desperately, he cables to his rich uncle
for help.  Back comes a check dated 11-3-1981.  The
Sinister Syndicate, however, is not disposed to wait the
eight months till November; and the next frantic cabled
request is for payment of medical bills.

*Scenario 2:* Calvin Q. Winterbottom, retired from a
successful career in Wall Street, is peacefully living out
his days in a small Mediterranean village.  Stricken by a
sudden heart attack, he summons Mayor and Postmaster
to his beside, to witness his signature under an important
council to his will.  Under this signature he scrawls,
with a failing hand, 4-18-1981.  The local courts refuse to
recognize the document, because there is no such thing
as an eighteenth month, and by the time the confusion
is straightened out, inflation has ravaged the estate.  The
innkeeper's daughter, for whose benefit the codicil was
intended, gets very little.

What can be done to protect the innkeeper's daughter?
It is a sad fact of life that, when the International
Standards Organization speaks, few people listen.  But
when this Organization lisps with a forked tongue,
whose ears will be fine enough?

***

[^a1]: Writing of calendar dates in all-numeric form.  ISO 2014-1976 (E)

[^a2]: Information processing interchange—Representation of ordinal
dates.  ISO 2711-1973(E)


### OBITER DICTA

My peregrinations through the Yellow Pages,
referred to in past &ldquo;DICTA,&rdquo; have revealed that the
hairdressing biz is populated by punsters, most of them
frustrated (to judge by the quality of the puns perpetrated).
Here is a fair sampling of the listings in the Fort
Lauderdale edition of the Yellow Pages:

>*A-Head of Time*      
*Blazing Scissors*   
*Clip Joint, The*    
*Company*    
*Hair I Am*          
*Hair She Goes*      
*Hair Today (Gone tomorrow?)*    
*Hair We Are*
*Hair-em South*       
*Hair-o-Dynamics*    
*Hairloom Styling*   
*Headline Hair Designs*  
*Heads Above All*  
*Heads or Tales*  
*Heads You Win*  
*Male Room, The*  
*Mane Event*  
*Shear Genius*  
*Shear Happening by*  
*Shear Pleasure*  

Others, which I found rather off-putting, were:
>
>*Head to Toe &ldquo;Natural Hairstyles for Men &amp;
Women&rdquo;*
>
>*Gabriel of Berkley South Beauty Salon &ldquo;Unisex
Haute Coiffure&rdquo;* (pompadours?)
>
>*Le Guillotine Hairstylists*
>
>*Richard's Hair Affair* (a hair fetishist?)
>
>*Samson &amp; Delilah's.*

Some made little sense to me at all:

>*Apple A Day Haircutters  
Command Performance Unisex Haircutting*

My favorite is *Who Cut Your Hair?*

From Mervyn Horder, in London, comes a report on
the state of af-hairs in that city:

>*A Cut Above*         
*British Haircraft*   
*Clipjoint*            
*Corporation*         
*Curl Up &amp; Dye*   
*Curls &amp; Capers*  
*Fringe Benefits*     
*Get Ahead*           
*Hair &amp; Now*      
*Hair Raisers Ltd. (wigs)*  
*Hair To Stay*
*Headlines*           
*Headmaster Hairdressers*  
*Minxcrest Ltd.*  
*My Fair Lady*  
*Perfecut Unisex*  
*Shyloks*  
*Snippetts*  
*Under Your Hat*  
*Uppercut*  
*Whiskers*  

While in Florida recently, I was reading some
detective novels, and the thought struck me that the
listings in the Yellow Pages under Detective Agencies
might reveal some insights into the real-life Lew Archers
of the world, especially because, for most of us (I
trust) the &ldquo;knowledge&rdquo; of how those in and along the
fringes of the under world use English comes from
books.  Here, for instance, is a passage from *Playback,* by
Raymond Chandler:

>&ldquo;... He ain't in his room.  The hotel people ain't
seen him around.  I thought maybe you and the
girl had some ideas about it.&rdquo;
&ldquo;The girl is screwy,&rdquo; I said.  &ldquo;Leave her out of it.
&ldquo;And in Esmeralda they don't say 'ain't seen.'
That Kansas City dialect is an offense against
public morals around here.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Shove it, Mac.  When I want to get told how to
talk English I won't go to no beat-up California
peeper.&rdquo;

The first listing in the Yellow Pages convinced me
that, in spite of my having read hundreds of detective
novels, I had apparently learned nothing of the lingo,
for I don't know what to make of A *Scientific Detection
of Deception Co.*  I'm not exactly sure what it is that is
confusing about that collection of words, but they just
do not seem to go together—in that order.  Passing by
the inevitable *Acme, Advance, American, Apex,* and
*Authorized* set, we come upon *Avert Security* and
*Investigations.*  Why *Avert?*  One would think that a
customer would want to have security, not avert it.
*Checkmate International Detective Agency* advertises
itself as &ldquo;one of the nation's most publicized private
investigators,&rdquo; a seeming contradiction in terms.  Among
the services offered (Evidence, Photography, Missing
Persons—again, one would expect &ldquo;Finding Persons&rdquo;
offered as a service) is Character Analysis.  It is rather
too bad that Sam Spade was not better at character
analysis: it might have spared him a lot of grief at the
hands of Mary Astor.

Bonafide Detective Agency, which uses Kilroy as a
trade mark and spells *insurance* &ldquo;insurance,&rdquo; offers investigation
into &ldquo;Habits Attitudes &amp; Beliefs.&rdquo;

Central Detective Bureau is unusual in that it offers
Voice Stress Analysis.

Many of the agencies specialize in what they call
Child Custody, when what they probably mean is Child
Custody *Cases,* since none strikes me as suitable for
babysitting services.

At length, I was compelled to turn back to Chandler:
all the mystery had gone out of the private-eye
business.

*[L.U]*

## A Nasal Encounter
*Fairfax Stephenson, Seal Beach, California*

Listed below are some states and situations in which
people often find themselves (or others) that have given
rise to idiomatic expressions involving the proboscis,
olfactory organ, or whatever you wish to call it.  Try to
come up with the appropriate expression to match the
condition or action described.  Answers are on page 8.

1.  *You're angry.*          
2.  *You're inquisitive.*    
3.  *You're busybody.*             
4.  *You're a winner.*        
5.  *You're a hard worker.*    
6.  *You're spineless.*    
7.  *You're arrogant.*        
8.  *You just made it.*            
9.  *Something displeases you.*  
10. *You don't like the smell.*  
11.  *You're thinking.*
12.  *You're uncouth (but gratified).*
13.  *You've never studied voice projection.*
14.  *You've got a cold.*
15.  *You're trying to stop a sneeze.*
16.  *You're Johnny Carson.*
17.  *You're a rabbit.*

## Bilingualism, or How to Be Tongue-tied in Two Languages
*Frank J. Jones, Flagstaff, Arizona*

Why are we so concerned about bilingualism?
If we face up to the facts about only two of our
contemporary lingoes, we must admit that we've been
multilingual for years.  We are all exposed to both
Standard English and Deejay—&ldquo;do-it-yourself&rdquo;—English.
The former is promoted by our school systems, the
latter by the electronic media across the country.  Tune
in on these samples.  Without haggling over regional
dialects, we may in time find our notions of conventional
speech &ldquo;anniliated&rdquo; by the electronic media.

One listening area recently lost one of the most
notable public service programs ever offered on any
airway when the local station gave up broadcasting its
weekday morning &ldquo;Today's Prime Word for Junior
High&rdquo;—very possibly at the request of the local public
schools.  Every morning before the kiddies took off for
school a deejay announced &ldquo;Today's Prime Word!&rdquo;
Then he named the Prime Word and carefully spelled it,
with an injunction to the listener to look up its meaning
and be prepared to use it in school that day.

One morning he announced, &ldquo;Today's Prime Word
is *ambivalent!*  A-M-B-I-V-I-L-A-N-T!&rdquo;  On another morning,
&ldquo;Today's Prime Word is ... hey, there are a couple of
different ways you can say it—'lejooms' or 'legooms'!&rdquo;

Strangely, most talented young deejays, usually in
their twenties, seem never to have picked up the notion
of looking for words in the dictionary themselves.  Well
trained in pushing the right buttons and consorting with
the microphone, they address it with assurance and
authority, not to mention an utter reliance on their
constitutional right to freedom of speech.

We nod in agreement when they remind us that
&ldquo;The region has endured two successful seasons of
drought.&rdquo;  We believe them implicitly when they tell us
&ldquo;Snow is numerous in the mountains&rdquo; and that &ldquo;Skies
are clouded all the way from Organ to West Consin and
contijuous states.&rdquo;  On such a day, we can only agree
that &ldquo;Continuing harsh weather is ineVITable&rdquo; and
shake our heads at dangerous conditions on a highway
under repair where &ldquo;The snow is conjelled with oil in a
big lump.&rdquo;  (Though there are cheery times when the
deejay says, &ldquo;This morning is overcast, but later in the
day the rain clouds will be dissipitating.&rdquo;)

We respect the reverence with which deejays mention
&ldquo;the Bishop of the Diosee&rdquo; and solemnly quote
him: &ldquo;Dust thou art, to dust thou shalt returneth.&rdquo;  We
are titillated by news that someone is up on charges &ldquo;for
subordination of perjury&rdquo; and that someone else &ldquo;will
return to Russia on his own violition.&rdquo;  We like to hear
the inside scoop on what transpires in the Legislature,
especially that so-and-so has &ldquo;strived for years&rdquo; to get a
certain piece of legislation &ldquo;past the top ekelon&rdquo; to the
floor.

At times, of course, &ldquo;plans have gone orry&rdquo; and the
&ldquo;protadjonist&rdquo; vanished into &ldquo;a closed meeting and
what transgressed was not made public.&rdquo;  If no remarks
are &ldquo;attrible&rdquo; to anyone on conclusion of &ldquo;the lengthly
debate,&rdquo; we already know the general opinion of the
solons that &ldquo;busing only exackerbates the problems,&rdquo;
and they would do better to devote their attention to
&ldquo;indignant health care.&rdquo;  Anyway, it is rumored that the
chairman is &ldquo;a metaglom ... a metagalomaniac,&rdquo; behind
his &ldquo;impenetratable&rdquo; facade—though it must be granted
that by provoking an &ldquo;impassay&rdquo; he has averted &ldquo;skism
in the party.&rdquo;

Deejay virtuosity can render even commercial
announcements in the everyday jargon of consumers: &ldquo;If
you got one of those people on your gift list that you
can't think of anything to get for them, remember: at
Blooper's there is all types of jewelry to please the one
you love and you can give them the gift that befits their
personality.&rdquo;

In sum, Deejay English does its job very adequately
for its captive listeners.  But ... &ldquo;There are others who it
feels a little uncomfortable for them.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I hope you can write six more volumes of your
autobiography.&rdquo;  [Dick Cavett to former Prime Minister
Macmillan, December 23, 1980.  Submitted by Marion
Nickel, Rhinebeck, New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Asked at a House hearing about possible revision
of the Consumer Price Index, HHS Secretary Schweiker
replied, 'Let me be explicit.  This administration may be
looking at across-the-board revision, or nonrevision, of
the index.' &rdquo;  [From *The Wall Street Journal*, March 27, 1981.     Submitted by Mrs. Andrew Koren, Lake Havasu
City, Arizona.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;His answer was that there is 'a logical relationship'
between a black bank and the Detroit community,
which is, as he put it, 'more than 60 percent minority' in
its racial mix.&rdquo;  [From *The Detroit News*, April 2, 1981,
reporting an interview with Charles E. Allen, president
of the First Independence National Bank of Detroit.
Submitted by John R. Starrs, Detroit.]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Wizard*

With permission, ladies and gentlemen, I should
like to carry on hunting the Wizard of Was this quarter.
There is a mystery about the origin of *wizard* as a
British slang term of superlative approval in the 1930s.
(Chaps in those days also exclaimed *ripping!* and *stunning
!*) I do not think that the expression ever crossed
the Atlantic.  It is now so whiskery and moth-eaten that
nobody with any linguistic sensitivity could use it,
except ironically or sarcastically.  The word was typically
an RAF term of approval during the war, when the
young men of the Battle of Britain exclaimed about
*wizard prangs*.

Until now the only explanation of the word's origin
has been given by the great WordFowler, Eric Partridge.
The earliest citation he found was &ldquo;a perfectly
wizard week&rdquo; in a book published in 1933.  He suggested
that the word became extremely popular in the
RAF between 1939 and 1945, and thence passed into
general civilian slang.  In February I published an article
in *The Times* suggesting an earlier origin.  Professor
Angus McIntosh of the Middle English Dialect Project
at Edinburgh University testifies that while he was an
undergraduate at Oriel College, Oxford, between 1931
and 1934, *wizard* became part of the jargon of the junior
common room of that college.  We wondered whether
*wizard* had been introduced to Oriel and the lexicon of
slang by freshmen from some school.

As we might have expected, if we had had any
sense, we had a vast and, in parts, instructive mail.  It
can be divided into three categories—well, four categories,
if you count one category for amiable but irrelevant
anecdotage.

First there were Old Boys from Charterhouse and
several Cambridge Colleges (and educational establishments
in between), claiming to have been using *wizard*
as a superlative of enthusiasm before Oriel discovered
it.  From them we can deduce that the word was common
currency in English schools (usually public—that is
to say, private—schools) in the years around 1930.

Then there was the aeronautical category.  Several
retired and eminent aviators pointed out that a plane
called the *Westland Wizard* was by far the most glamorous
aircraft fifty years ago.  The engine of the Vickers
Supermarine seaplane that won the Schneider Trophy
(the famous British race for aircraft) was the Merlin,
which, when developed further, subsequently powered
the Spitfire and Hurricane.  Old Schneider Trophy pilots
swore until their handlebar moustaches twitched that
*wizard* was being used as an aeronautical term of
approval in 1929-30, the time of the Schneider Cup
victories.  One had even christened his son Merlin,
because Merlin was a wizard.

Third, there was the comic category.  We were
reminded that the extremely popular children's story-magazine
called *The Wizard* was first published in 1922.
For the next 25 years, it was the favourite magazine of
boys aged between 12 and 15 and must have influenced
the growth of slang.

The question remains: where did the comic paper
*The Wizard* get its name?  It is unlikely that its hard-nosed
publishers in Dundee pulled the name out of thin
air.  Wizards were fashionable.  The early child comics of
the years after the first war often had resident wizards
appearing in their comic strips.  For instance, one called
Marzipan was a regular features in *Rainbow*.  There were
others.

Finally, I suppose, we ought to look for literary
origins.  *The Wizard of Oz* was published in 1900.  The
germ of the new meaning may be visible in Vachel
Lindsay's *Litany of the Heroes* (1918):

>God lead us past the setting of the sun  
To wizard islands of august surprise.

Lindsay was an American.  This supports a theory that
the expression was born in the States: for example,
Commander John Irving (*Royal Navalese,* 1946) wrote
that wizard &ldquo;is an adjective which has been flown from
America into the Navy by the RAF.  It implies that
someone or something is marvellous and verging upon
the miraculous.&rdquo;  In England at about the same time
(1918), Edmund Gosse wrote in *The White Throat* of
&ldquo;the wizard silence of the hours of dew,&rdquo; possibly
combining the connotation of the miraculous with the
superlative.

There you are.  That is as far as I have got.  It is
possible that the origin of *wizard* in this sense is not
exactly traceable.  We shall have to wait for the final
volume of Robert Burchfield's majestic *Supplement* to
the *Oxford English Dictionary* to find out.

Meanwhile, *wizard* in the slang sense is dated on
this side of the Atlantic.  The fashionable term of
approval among football crowds is *magic*.  &ldquo;Chelsea are
MAGIC&rdquo; they shout on the rare occasions when my sad
local team scores a goal.  I think that this new use came
down from Scotland in the 1970s.  I have an authenticated
sighting sprayed on a wall in Edinburgh outside
the stadium of a team called Heart of Midlothian in 1975. A stronger variant is *PFM* 'Pure Fucking Magic.'
Let us see if we can find an earlier instance.


#### EPISTOLA {Gerald Leonard Cohen}

*Of Cabbages and Tailors*

English slang presents an original cant term, *cabbage,*
whose origin is considered obscure by etymologists.
But the answer seems so clear to me that the only
mystery I find is how other scholars could miss it.

*Webster III,* for example, says of *cabbage[3]*: &ldquo;British
cloth remaining after the cutting of a garment and
traditionally said to be appropriated by the tailor, as a
perquisite.&rdquo;  And the origin given is &ldquo;perhaps by folk
etymology from Middle French *cabas,* cheating, theft,
literally, basket—more at *caba.*&rdquo;

And under *cabbage[4], Webster III* says: &ldquo;to take
surreptitiously: STEAL, FILCH ... but gives no etymology;
*cabbage[4]* is therefore apparently considered to
derive from *cabbage[3]* (of obscure origin).

Meanwhile, *OED,* following Farmer-Henley's *Slang
and Its Analogues,* seeks the origin of these two *cabbages
in garbage:*

>This [i.e., *Webster's cabbage*[3]] and the
accompanying *cabbage,* verb[2] [i.e., *Webster's
cabbage*[4]] appear in the 17th century.  Herrick
(1648) uses *garbage* and *carbage,* apparently for
&ldquo;shreds and patches used as padding.&rdquo;  If this was
a genuine use at the time, *carbage* may easily
have been further corrupted to *cabbage*.

Cf. also Partridge 1970 (*Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional
English*), which adheres to the *garbage*
hypothesis, and Partridge 1968 *(op. cit.),* which is silent
on the etymology of *cabbage*.

But the origin of the two slang meanings of *cabbage*
can be found just by looking at the definitions of this
word in Joseph Wright's *English Dialect Dictionary:*

>1.  Shreds of cloth cut off by tailors in cutting out
clothes, and appropriated by them; also larger
pieces purloined....  
>2.  To appropriate surreptitiously, to pilfer, rob.

Wright also adds a 1755 quote: &ldquo;Cabbage, whatever is
purloined by taylors and mantua-women from the garments
they are to make up.&rdquo;

So the solution is simply that the shreds of cloth
were likened to shredded cabbage; and since these
shreds (later, bigger ones too) were appropriated/filched
by the tailors for their own use, *cabbage* came to mean
'to steal, filch.'  Cf. also Farmer-Henley (under *cabbage*):

>... In America a corresponding term is COLDSLAW,
which consists of finely-cut cabbage, and
represents the small remnants known in other
quarters as &ldquo;carpet-rags&rdquo; or CABBAGE.

But right after this illuminating statement Farmer-Henley
add, &ldquo;The derivation is obscure,&rdquo; and then tentatively
advance their suggestion of *cabbage* &lt; *garbage*.

*[Gerald Leonard Cohen, University of Missouri-Rolla].*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;But [Collingwood Ingram's] achievements range
far beyond the garden; in his time he has been an
exceptional traveller and ornithologist, and only this
year was writing in *Country Life* on great tits.&rdquo;  [From
*The Times*, 28 October 1980, in an item concerning a
centenarian.]


#### EPISTOLA {Patricia A. Gazin}

*Some flak about ack-ack*

In a recent issue of VERBATIM [VII, 2], Benjamin
Keller listed a number of reduplicative words in English,
among them *ack-ack*.  In a letter [February 13],
Nicholas Baker of Louisville, Kentucky, called that classification
into question, suggesting that the origin of *ack-ack*
is German *acht acht* '8.8,' from the designation for
the weapon by its bore diameter in centimeters.  The
Americans, who use millimeters in such designations,
dubbed it 'eighty-eight.'  The *OED* lists the earliest
citation for *ack-ack* as a 1939 issue of *Collier's* magazine,
which gives the source as a British abbreviation for
*Aircraft Attack,* employing the British name for the
letter A (which appears also in the older *ack-emma* for
'a.m.').

We requested further corroboration of his evidence
from Mr. Baker, and he has been kind enough to send
us an affidavit from Eugene Oldach, born in Poland,
who served in the German army from February 1942 till
his capture by Americans in 1945.  Mr. Oldach's statement
reads, in part:

>... Throughout my service in the German army,
the 8.8-centimeter gun was called &ldquo;acht acht.&rdquo;
This was common usage.  I do not know if there
is any connection between this and the British
term *ack-ack*.

Mr. Baker calls into further evidence a listing from the
*German Army Handbook 1939-1945* [Arco, 1974], in
which the 8.8-cm gun is listed as a major weapon in
antiaircraft artillery and, later, as the main weapon of
the Tiger, Jagdpanther, and Elefant tanks (Tables 1, 2,
5).

Although the resemblance between the German and
British designations may be coincidental, it appears
from this incontrovertible evidence that the German
source cannot be ignored and must, at least, be considered
as an alternative to the British.

In connection with *ack-ack,* one encounters much
*flak,* and Mr. Baker suggests that its origin is an acronym
of *Flugzeugabwehrkanone*.  There is a question of
whether that or *Fliegerabwehrkanone* is the correct
source.  Mr. Oldach comments:

I am familiar with the terms *Fliegerabwehrkanone*
and *Flugzeugabwehrkanone,* and they mean the
same and are interchangeable.

Dictionaries that list one or the other would, in the
future, be well advised to list both as possible sources.

## Answers to A Nasal Encounter

1. Your nose is out of joint.
2. You're nosy.
3. You stick your nose in everybody's business.
4. You nose out an opponent.
5. You keep your nose to the grindstone.
6. You can be led by the nose.
7. Your nose is in the air.
8. You won by a nose.
9. You wrinkle (or screw up) your nose.
10. You pinch your nose.
11. You put your finger by the side of your nose.
12. You pick your nose.
13. You talk through your nose.
14. You blow your nose.
15. You press your nose under the tip.
16. You swipe your forefinger up the front of your nose.
17. You wriggle your nose.


#### EPISTOLA {Patricia A. Gazin}

Mrs. Daphne Hoffman Mebane, 238 W. Tampa Ave.
(No. 307), Venice, Florida 33595, would like to know
the origin of *part brass rags*.  She would like to find an
alternative to that appearing in *English English,* by
Norman W. Schur, which she regards as &ldquo;someone's
specious conjecture.&rdquo;  Any readers with convincing evidence
should write directly to Mrs. Mebane; a copy to
VERBATIM would be welcome: if the argument is sufficiently
convincing, we shall try to persuade Mr. Schur
to make a change in the next printing of *English
English*.

I want to corroborate and endorse everything said
by Richard Lillard in his article &ldquo;Before I Am Too Late&rdquo;
[VII, 3].  One of my pet peeves is the kid-glove use of
adjectives allied to the name of Richard Nixon.  They are
too kind.  *Former* President Nixon and *ex*, even, are not
strong enough.  He should always be labeled so that
history will recognize him for what he is: the president
who nobly proclaimed, &ldquo;I am not a crook&rdquo;; the president
who resigned under pressure; the president who
slipped through the fingers of justice; the president who
escaped impeachment.

I suggest also: the unconvicted president; the
*un*impeached president; the *resigned* president; the
*nonfelon* president; the *maleficient* president; the
*scheming* president; the *conniving* president; the *criminal*
president.

*[Patricia A. Gazin, Hermosa Beach, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Albert B. Dearden}

&ldquo;English English&rdquo; [VII, 3], whatever that is
(nomenclature even less justifiable than *Gorilla gorilla*
as used by zoologists, I should say), rubbed me a bit the
wrong way in its bland assumption that Kenneth Grahame's
Mole was known only to English children.  But
[Philip Howard] really hit a nerve with William IV.
Surely there was no substantial number of Jacobites in
1837, when that monarch, from whatever cause, died.  I
should think Jacobins were more likely.  Surely your
English correspondent meant William III, or is that a
Freudian slip, perhaps?  He is so much of the old
dispensation he can't give the usurper his accepted title.

So much for the genuine error.  Let's turn to a matter
of opinion.  I should like to let loose a long, loud dissent
to everything said and just about everything implied or
even apparently thought of in Mr. Lillard's article.  Even
his lead-off quotation makes no sense, by his lights.  He
is hardly willing to distinguish between *former* and
*late,* although such a distinction is the whole point of
Mr. Debs's plaint.

No, Mr. Lillard is just plain wrong.  Except for a few
examples of awkward writing, which unfortunately can
show up anywhere, all his deriding is based on his
failure to see that the &ldquo;now&rdquo; to which everyone is &ldquo;late&rdquo;
is the time of reading, or at least of writing, not of
acting.  His very example, Lucius Beebe—had the writer
not used *late,* he would have been bothered by 10,000
railfans asking for Beebe's address.  Of course using *late*
helped there.

*[Albert B. Dearden, Ridgewood, New Jersey]*


#### EPISTOLA {J.H. Elder}

Perhaps I am not a charter subscriber to VERBATIM.
It may have taken a year to discover you.  But I do have
a file from Volume II, Number 1 to the present, and I
shall keep it rather than pass it on to the local library, as
I do with most of my periodicals, because it continues to
provide much pleasure and satisfaction as a reference
source.

Thus, it is with reluctance that I discontinue my
subscription.  The reason for doing so must be good, and
I believe it is.  I feel that I must concentrate all of my
time and energy toward preventing nuclear destruction
of our planet.  At this time, it appears I may have chosen
a losing cause, but unless we can solve this one, it does
not matter what we read, what we think, or even where
we live.

There are reports of anti-nuclear fanatics.  I am not
one and reject the term.  I do lay claim to being a realist.
My concern is that several in places of power are living
and playing games in an unreal world.

I'm sure you can manage without me.  In the
meantime, carry on your good work.  Hopefully, as they
say, I may join you later.

*[J.H. Elder, Pullman, Washington]*


#### EPISTOLA {Daniel McDonald}

On the subject of Richard Bauerle's article, &ldquo;Watching
Our g's and q's&rdquo; [VII, 3]: a student recently turned
in a paper on *Hamlet* which made several references to
&ldquo;King Claudius's *quilt*.&rdquo;  In my comments, I told her I
was familiar with his &ldquo;incestuous sheets,&rdquo; but this was
the first I'd heard of his quilt.

*[Daniel McDonald, University of South Alabama]*


#### EPISTOLA {J.D. Sadler}

Eric Winters in his &ldquo;Odd Couples&rdquo; [VII, 1] requests
additional Latin-Greek equivalents.  Instead of supplying
more, which would be easy, I wish to diminish his
list.  *Syntax* is no match for *composition*; *synthesis* is.
The *pro*- in *projection* means 'forward,' and the *hyper*-
in *hyperbole* means 'beyond.'  Latin *re*- has a number of
meanings, none of them 'up,' the meaning of Greek
*ana*-.

*[J.D. Sadler, Sherman, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Gilbert C. McArdle, M.D.}

A well-known and publicized defect of spoken English
is that there are several words that sound alike but
have widely different meanings: *bear, bare,* etc.  In this
modern age of the dictating machine and computer, as a
hospital surgeon, I often dictate patient histories and
operative notes and have been amazed at the final
altered appearance of my dictated words—though I have
to admit that when hurried I mumble.

Here is a brief list of some of the alterations:

| DICTATED                 | FINAL COPY              |
| ------------------------ | ----------------------- |
| *dermatofibroma*         | dramatic fibroma        |
| *estimated blood loss*   | estimated blood bath    |
| *juxtaposed*             | just pushed             |
| *rule out occult*        | rule out a cold         |
| *malignancy*             | malignancy              |
| *male in extremis*       | male, an extremist, ... |
| *contiguous*             | continued quest         |
| *hypertrophoic papilla*  | hyperfried papilla      |
| *splotch*                | botch                   |
| *repaired in the manner* | repaired in the manner  |
| *of Ravitch*             | of ravage               |

*[Gilbert C. McArdle, M.D., Gettysburg, Pennsylvania]*


#### EPISTOLA {Leon E. Boodey}

Difficult as it is for me to adjust to the notion that
$3.95 for a paperback book is a &ldquo;marvelous buy,&rdquo; I took
Jack Luzzatto at his word [VII, 3] and bought the
*Crossword Puzzle Compendium*.  I am disappointed.  I
should have digested Mr. Luzzatto's review more thoroughly
before making this purchase.  I would then have
realized from his listing of the &ldquo;best&rdquo; constructors that
the *Compendium* is not the book for me.  It is crammed
with the type of puzzle that no longer appeals to me; not
even a sample of the cryptic type and no rules or hints
regarding the construction and marketing of this preferred
type of puzzle.

And how can biographies of &ldquo;Today's Best Constructors&rdquo;
not include Frank W. Lewis (with 1867
superb weekly puzzles), E.R. Galli and Richard Maltby,
Jr. (constructors of the unbelievable Twelfth Night
Dodecahedron), Emily Cox, and Henry Rathvon?  And
how can one possibly include a biographical sketch of
Jack Luzzatto without a mention of his great Anglo-American
Crosswords?  Did I say disappointed?  It's a
better word I need.

It appear that the proper crossword book is yet to
be written and necessarily must be written by Jack
Luzzatto.  When he does write this much-needed book,
perhaps he will include a tiny footnote explaining why
constructors, never, ever answer their fan mail.

*[Leon E. Boodey, Broomall, Pennsylvania]*

## Pathologic Pantry
*Alan and Janice Coulson, Stockton, California*

It is a commonplace that technical jargon, though
precise and clear enough to the specialist, is generally
meaningless to the layman.  When trying to describe
highly technical phenomena, the expert must resort to
comparisons with objects from everyday experience.  It
is striking how frequently medical terms are &ldquo;translated&rdquo;
by comparisons with articles of food, perhaps the
earlierst of which is *cancer*, from the resemblance of
*carcinoma* to the spreading claws of the crab.  The
following is a list of terms used to describe the shape,
size, color, consistency, or other characteristics of pathological
conditions.

>*amyloidosis*  
*anchovy paste*  
*apple-jelly nodules*     
*atherosclerotic material*  
*bacon spleen*  
*bipolar fusion of renal anlagen*  
*breast cancer*  
*calcium of hamartoma*  
*carcinoma of the breast*  
*cauliflower tumor*        
*cavernous angioma*  
*cheesy*                  
*chicken breast*          
*chocolate cysts*        
*chronic perihepatitis*  
*coffee ground emesis*   
*Colles's fracture*  
*colon cancers*  
*corkscrew esophagus*     
*creamy*  
*cutaneous tuberculosis*  
*diffuse esophageal spasm*  
*discharges*  
*doughnut kidney*          
*Ewing's tumor*  
*forkful*                 
*gastic bleeding*  
*hard-baked spleen*        
*Hodgkin's disease*  
*hydatid mole*  
*melon-sized*  
*miliary tuberculosis*  
*millet seed*             
*napkin rings*           
*onion-peel sign*        
*orange-sized*           
*osteochondroma*  
*ovarian endometriosis*  
*oyster ovaries*          
*pea-sized*  
*pear*                   
*peau d'orange*          
*plum-sized*  
*popcorn*                
*porphyria*  
*porridge*               
*port wine urine*        
*potato nodes*           
*rickets*  
*sago spleen*            
*sarcoidosis*  
*schizophrenia*  
*soupy*  
*strawberry nevus*       
*sugar icing liver*      
*Swiss cheese*           
*tumors*  
*ventricular septal defects*  
*word salad*             


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Major crimes, excluding burglaries, are almost
nonexistant.  Burglaries, however, do occur.  We find
ourselves climbing toward the national averages and
find ourselves with the problem of unwanted criminals
in our homes.&rdquo;  [From a letter to residents from the
Chief of Police of East Brandywine, Pennsylvania, submitted
by Stanley G. Barnes, Guilford, Connecticut.  *We
had the same problem, so we moved*.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Cockney Dialect and Slang*](https://www.abebooks.com/Cockney-Dialect-Slang-Wright-Peter-Batsford/14136645189/bd)
Peter Wright, (Batsford, 1980), 192 pp.

Visiting word-fanciers venturing into the London
Underground this summer may have noticed, as they
passed up or down on the moving staircase, two advertisement
panels of particular interest to them.  One
demanded: &ldquo;Where should I swap my dear old Dutch?&rdquo;
The other proclaimed: &ldquo;If your old China is all she's
cracked up to be, you'd like her replaced as new.&rdquo;  The
first recommended the services of an auctioneer, the
second of an insurance company.  And both, of course,
were making play with Cockney slang.  *Dutch,* short for
*duchess,* is a 'costermonger's wife.'  *China* is abbreviated
rhyming slang for friend or pal: china plate, 'mate.'

So Cockney lives, and this new book has appeared
with the aim of making better known the vocabulary,
grammar, pronunciation, and quirks of speech of the
indigenous inhabitants of famous *Lunnon Tahn*.

Its author, Peter Wright, a member of the Department
of Modern Languages at Salford University, England,
thinks it a shame that &ldquo;whereas the dialects of
many country villages have been meticulously collected,
that of London with its teeming millions has
been almost studiously ignored.&rdquo;  As long ago as 1952,
he was &ldquo;sent around the metropolis&rdquo; to discover
whether, in fact, any Cockney dialect remained (a
famous dialectologist wrongly doubted this).  Armed
with a list of &ldquo;some 1800 unloaded questions,&rdquo; he
pursued his enquiries in five main districts, from *Sahf
'Ackney* 'South Hackney' in the East End of London to
Walton-on-the-Hill in Surrey and Farningham in Kent: a
span, overall, of 35 miles north to south and 32 miles
east to west.  Not only was Cockney dialect, particularly
among the elderly, still found to be alive and kicking;
Mr. Wright's assiduous legwork also established a
remarkably homogeneous standard of speech throughout
this extensive area.  Cockney dialect has followed the
new housing estates, the roads, the tube stations, and
the general geographical enlargement of what is now
&ldquo;the most complex and spread-out city in the world.&rdquo;
Nor has the Thames, as was once suspected, cut its
traditional speech into two halves.  &ldquo;Countless masses of
Londoners cross the Thames daily by train, car and on
foot,&rdquo; says Mr. Wright, &ldquo;and great rivers like the
Thames, provided they are crossable, have been meeting-places
of dialects and communication, not barriers.&rdquo;

In London you don't take a taxi, you *catch a cab,*
Mr. Wright warns; and if, having caught one, you keep
your ears open, and have the luck to be driven by a
pleasantly talkative *cabbie* and not one of the morose
or—worse still—mad variety, you will probably hear
quite a number of the words mentioned in this up-to-date
and entertaining book.  It is unlikely that you will
be greeted with the welcoming *Wotcher, cock!* 'What
cheer, cock sparrow!' But, at the end, the announcement
*That'll be two smackers* 'two pounds,' *guv'* will not be
out of order: indeed, should your ride have taken you,
say, from *Emma Smif* 'Hammersmith' to the *Menshun
Aas* 'Mansion House' or the *Tahr* 'Tower of London,'
the fare on the clock will be far more.

With London in a state of constant social flux, its
language is bound to reflect this condition.  Mr. Wright
has some amusing pages on the modified Cockney
spoken by West Indians and other recent immigrants,
who have often mastered the pronunciation of their new
surroundings but not the technical vocabulary. (&ldquo;*She
goes rahnd, she don' show de lightin'* &rdquo;, exclaimed one
indignant expatriate, as a lady driver turned a corner
sharply without using her indicator).  He is good, too, on
the distinctive glottal stop (*bu'er for butter,* etc.), to
which the ears of all students should be attuned and the
use of which, according to him, is actually increasing
among the younger Cockneys.

Some of his listings are pretty arcane, and short of
going round the pubs and barrows with one's own tape
recorder, it is difficult, even for one who lives and works
in London, to be satisfied about all the findings.  Do
even Cockney *grandads,* as Mr. Wright seems to claim,
still use words like bowk to 'belch,' *pissimire* an 'ant', or
*'oppin' the wag* 'playing truant'?  One feels faintly sceptical.
And should he have included so many words
which, though no doubt Cockney in origin, have long
since passed into the stock of general use—*greedy-guts*
'glutton,' *kisser* 'mouth,' *scrounge* 'to steal,' to mention
just three?  Here he might have been more rigorous in
his filtering.

Yet a living language *is* hard to pin down.  The
words collected in this book are like a lot of cheeky
schoolboys: they will not stay in sedate rows for the
end-of-term photograph but keep pulling faces, getting
up, running about, and occasionally bringing off that old
schoolboy feat of managing to appear in the same
picture twice by rapidly sprinting from one end of the
group to the other while the camera on its aged tripod
swivels slowly round and the conscientious dialectologist-operator
breaths heavily beneath his black cloth.
Some of them, in fact, seem to have nipped round three
or four times, so difficult does Mr. Wright seem to find it
to control his material.

He makes the odd slip here and there.  The once
stuffy Earls Court Road is no longer Kangaroo Alley, the
Australians whose presence there caused it to be so
named having been pushed out by newer breeds.  And
Mr. Wright misses a trick in his discussion of rhyming
slang (which some people misguidedly think is all there
is to Cockney).  Evidently not one who fancies a flutter
on the '*orses,* at the risk of returning home *b'rassic
(borassic lint: skint)* 'broke,' he fails to mention that
Cockney racegoers and bookies, though as loyal and
patriotic a bunch as any in the land, have been heard to
refer to their Sovereign, with apparent irreverence, as
The *Boiled*.  In fact they are using an affectionate piece
of rhyming slang: *boiled* is short for *boiled bean,*
'queen.'

The trouvailles, however, far outweigh any small
faults.  Did you know the name for a slovenly woman
whose house is *any owd'ow* and who *'angs fings up on
de floor*?  She is called *Mrs Tidy*, while her friend from
Whitechapel, who cusses and swears—or &ldquo;f&rdquo;s and
&ldquo;b&rdquo;s—*somefink' orrible,* is, by an opposite phraseology,
*Mrs Effer*.

The Cockney *sparrer* 'sparrow' is a strange sort of
bird, with his flat intonation and his temperamental ups
and downs.  This well-researched book will alert many
readers to the vigour, expressiveness, and general wonder
of his speech.

*[Rivers Scott, London]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Safire's Political Dictionary: An Enlarged, Up-To-Date Edition Of The New Language Of Politics*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=4143304951&searchurl=kn%3DSafire%2527s%2BPolitical%2BDictionary%253A%2BAn%2BEnlarged%252C%2BUp-To-Date%2BEdition%2BOf%2BThe%2BNew%2BLanguage%2BOf%2BPolitics%26sortby%3D20&cm_sp=snippet-_-srp1-_-title1)
William Safire, (Random House, New York), xxx + 820pp., index.

Why did I have to wait until its third edition—the
first was published in 1968—before I knew that such a
work existed?  How often, before deciding, with some
hesitation, to use a current political catchword or clich&eacute;,
has one said to oneself, &ldquo;I wonder how that originated,
what its real meaning is (or was), and whether, if I
knew, I would still be prepared to use it&rdquo;?  Well, now I
shall consult *Safire*.  Perhaps one day *Safire* will itself
enter the political vocabularly and have an entry of its
own in Safire, for never did a blurb quote a sillier
commendation than that of *Newsweek:* &ldquo;the definitive
work on the subject.&rdquo;  The mark of a great dictionary is
that no edition is definitive: there will, I doubt not, be a
day when *Safire,* like *Liddell and Scott,* will reach its
ninth edition.

By being called a &ldquo;political dictionary&rdquo; and relegating
to a subtitle the expression &ldquo;the new language of
politics,&rdquo; the book avoids defining, and thereby limiting,
its field.  The heart of it consists of neologisms, invented
or imported words that previously had no meaning at
all, such as *mugwump* (from Natick (American Indian)
mugquomp), or words which existed as proper names
before but since a certain event have become generic
terms, such as *Watergate* (for 'scandal unsuccessfully
denied') derived from the hotel building in Washington,
D.C. Curiously, these specific proper names can spawn
a whole vocabulary—the tribe of words compounded
with -*gate* and signifying various implied scandals or
with -*nik* and intended to recall the *sputnik*.  Incidentally,
why does *Safire* not have that most precious
Russism, *apparatchik*?

Then there are phrases which have a literal meaning
in themselves but which have become clich&eacute;s, used
by those of whom not one in a thousand could identify
the occasion which first gave them currency.  Such is
*hundred days* used to mean 'any dynamic, or even just
any, initial period of a government,' with no conscious
allusion to Napolean I's 1815 episode—a good example
of the way in which a clich&eacute;, cut completely loose from
its allusive origin, can with use become so general as to
be no longer evocative.  On the other hand, one can have
direct quotations which always remain such and are
meaningless to anyone who does not know the original
context.  I remember being puzzled by Wedgwood Benn
referring to himself, in a speech in the House of Commons
in the late 1950s, as &ldquo;one of a hundred flowers,&rdquo;
because I had not then heard the Mao Tse-Tung saying.
A special case is quotation of part of a well-known
proverb, e.g., &ldquo;changing horses&rdquo; used in a sense determined
by its context in the proverb against changing
horses while crossing a stream.

Much, if not all, language is metaphor, and metaphor,
being an effective rhetorical weapon if well handled,
is a fruitful source of political vocabulary and
political humour.  The examples are legion: *caretaker,
steamroller, gag, passing the torch,* and *domino theory*
are among them, though *whip* (abbreviation of the
foxhunting term *whipper-in*) is not metaphorical in the
sense often erroneously supposed.  Sometimes perfectly
general metaphors of immortal applicability, such as
*whirlwind campaign* or *whispering campaign,* have
acquired a special historical application in the politics of
a particular country; Safire often, as in these instances,
instructively documents the relevant American occasion.
An English instance is the connection of *finger on the
trigger* with the British 1951 general election and Winston
Churchill.

This last is one of the cases where an English
expression has migrated to the States, rather than vice
versa, assuming there the more technological form *finger
on the button,* but an English user of *Safire* will be
impressed—and not, I think, mistakenly, just because
Safire is himself American—with the volume of originally
native American political language which has been
imported and naturalized, without acknowledgment or
consciousness, in Britain.  There is something about the
American style of speech, of humour, and of politics
which predisposes to the creation of apt and striking
expressions.  What would we do without *carpetbagger* or
*hats in the ring*?  Incidentally, is *gravy train* (which
strangely is not in *Safire*) American?

Even, however, with expressions of European origin,
Safire has astonishingly few lapses from accuracy
and perception.  I noticed *snake in the tunnel,* meaning
'an exchange rate limited to fluctuate up and down
between close margins.'  *Safire* not only distinguishes
the true ('line on a graph') from the false ('snake in the
grass') origin of the metaphor, but notes the peculiar fact
that we have now replaced the *tunnel* by the snake itself
and talk about &ldquo;entering the snake.&rdquo;

Beyond all the above categories, *Safire* includes
straightforward albeit neologistic terms for American
and other political inventions (e.g., *New Deal, Medicare,
Peace Corps*) and even has articles on quite general
political concepts, linguistically viewed, such as *Conservative,
card metaphors, new economics, sports metaphors,
most-favored nation*.  This stretches the subject
matter to the extreme but makes the dictionary more
valuable as a students' companion, especially in United
States history.

The articles themselves are written in excellent and
perspicuous English—which makes all the more curious
the revelation in the Introduction that the lexicographer,
a journalist by profession, is fully capable of the gravest
journalistic crimes against language, especially in the
misuse and inadmissible mixing of metaphors.  He really
ought not to write about &ldquo;stereotypes that *trigger*
approval or hatred&rdquo; or how &ldquo;the choice of a word can
*crystallize a mood* and turn it to action&rdquo; nor speak of
&ldquo;the use of *Hottentots* as a *symbol* of underdeveloped
nations.&rdquo;  Perhaps there have been two (or more) hands
at work, or is this just the mark of the poacher turned
gamekeeper?

I wonder if there is room for an *English* political
dictionary.

*[J. Enoch Powell, House of Commons]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;DUO TOMACULA BUBULA CONDIMENTUM PECULIARE LACTUCA
CASEUS MURIAE UNIONES IN PANE SESUMINATA&rdquo;
[found in the Papal Wastebasket by a friend of Egdon H.
Margo's, Reseda, California.]

## Graphonics No. 1
*Axel Hornos*

*In the first paragraph of the story below there are
three words which, when paired with three words in the
second paragraph, form, phonetically, three new words.
You'll find these words in the third paragraph, but in the
guise of synonyms*.

&ldquo;Just because I want to punish this woman for stealing
bread—yes, 'stealing' is the right term for it—you
raise such a hue and cry?  It's beyond any sensible man's
understanding,&rdquo; said the judge irritably as he banged the
desk with his fist.

&ldquo;But Your Honour, keep in mind that the bread was
for the woman's starving children and that they have an
innate right to eat&rdquo;, replied the attorney for the defense.
&ldquo;These should be your main concerns in judging the case,
it really seems to me.&rdquo;

Considering that the woman had acted with a legitimate
purpose, the judge, being a compassionate man
who had people's happiness very much at heart, decided
to put an end to the whole sorry episode: he gave the
order to let the woman free.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The choice we have is a simple one: either we will be
prisoners and hapless victims whirled around by the impending
world events, or we will come to grips with the
fact that no matter what we have planned to do with our
lives, forces much greater than those we control will shape
our lives profoundly.&rdquo;  —Revolutionary Communist Youth
Brigade, Ann Arbor, Michigan. [Submitted by Bert G.
Hornback, Ann Arbor, Michigan, who apostrophizes, *Some
choice, huh?*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

A sign outside the secretarial pool at the Pentagon during
World War II: ALL OFFICERS WISHING TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THE SECRETARIES IN THE POOL MUST FIRST REPORT
TO ROOM 403 TO SHOW EVIDENCE OF THEIR NEED.  [Submitted
by Murray Schwartz, Nyack, New York.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Death benefits are payable to dependents when accidental
injury or occupational disease results in death for
20 years or up to $250,000.00 whichever is greater.&rdquo;—*Summary
of Illinois Workmen's Compensation Act and Illinois
Occupational Diseases Act as Amended 7-1-77*.  [Submitted
by Clark Holt, Park Ridge, Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;This coupon is redeemable for one FREE HANDFUL
SAMPLING (2 oz.) of our delicious 'California Pistachios.'  Just
fill in the form below and enclose a $1.00 bill (no checks,
please, our bank can't handle them) to cover postage &amp;
handling.  We'll rush you your FREE HANDFUL SAMPLING so
that you can discover what you've been missing!&rdquo;  —Text on
a coupon from the Fresno Trading Co., Fresno, California.
[Submitted by Hugh B. McManus, Jr., M.D., Redlands,
California, who observes that at $1.00 plus 15&cent; postage, the
customer is paying $9.20 a pound; Fresno's regular price is
just under $5.00 a pound, about the average.]

## Pairing Pairs No. 4

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z);
the answers are given in numbered items which must
be matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some
cases, a numbered word may be used more than once,
but after all matchings have been completed, one numbered
word will remain, and that is the correct answer.
Our answer is the only correct one.  The solution will be
published in the next VERBATIM along with the names
of the winners*.

(a). Deficit may result in early winter.  
(b). Let the shilling remain as auxiliary support.  
(c). Dresser has pullout feature.  
(d). Bloody offspring is no plum!  
(e). Potential energy from down east water.  
(f). Source of smelly col' cream.  
(g). Where bishops buy their hats.  
(h). Lay on one of these and you still have nothing.  
(i). Descend into the warehouse.  
(j). Bury soprano up to her waist.  
(k). Able to mimic an hors d'oeuvre.  
(l). Australian stinger.   
(m). Used-car salesman's hint.  
(n). Dos Passos quartet?  
(o). Nana, the flunky.  
(p). Fleet Street Coiffure?  
(r). P.M. or notorious TV star?  
(s). Hitchhikers pay this.  
(t). Pussy's moan for a jewel.  
(u). Insane purpose will get you there.  
(v). Regatta on the Isis or fourth down.  
(w). Such a vessel would surely sink.  
(x). Viceregent subsiding.  
(y). Heavily pressing need.  
(z). Dramatis personae absent. Marooned?  

(1). Ape.  
(2). Auto.  
(3). Egg.  
(4). Dog's.  
(5). Body.  
(6). Mitre.  
(7). Spring.  
(8). Short.  
(9). Tacks.  
(10). Dam.  
(11). Joint.  
(12). Cast.  
(13). Cutter.  
(14). Agua.  
(15). Suggestion.  
(16). Goose.  
(17). Son.  
(18). Lunatic.  
(19). Mezzo.  
(20). Bob.   
(21). Fall.  
(22). Loco.  
(23). Caliente.  
(24). Sad.  
(25). Motive.  
(26). Can.  
(27). Factory.  
(28). Manhattan.  
(29). Stay.  
(30). Sin.  
(31). Transfer.  
(32). Thumb.  
(33). Down.  
(34). That.  
(35). Drawer.  
(36). Inter.  
(37). Wasp.  
(38). With.  
(39). King.  
(40). Punt.  
(41). Cher.  
(42). Stone.  
(43). Fringe.  
(44). Digger.  
(45). Sigh.   
(46). Ol'.  
(47). Away.  
(48). Go.  
(49). Formation.  
(50). Main.  
(51). Iron.  
(52). Cat.  
(53). Proud.  

Winners will receive either a copy of the Collector's
Edition of Thomas Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value $30) or a copy of *English English,* by Norman
Schur (retail value $24.95).  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send
their answers (on a post card please) to VERBATIM, 2
Market Square, Aylesbury, Bucks., England All others
should send them to VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT
06426, U.S.A.

To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
on which we depend for the delivery of VERBATIM and
to make it fairer for those who live far from either one of
our offices, we shall arrange to collect all correct
answers for 21 days, starting with the day we receive the
first correct answer, and to draw one name in Aylesbury
and one name in Essex, with a prize awarded from each
office.  Please indicate on your answer card which book
your would like to receive.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Tom Brokaw, after the *Columbia* had been safely
landed, advised in a live broadcast from Edwards Air
Force Base, California, that Young and Crippen had
given their spacecraft &ldquo;fulsome praise.&rdquo;  [Submitted by
Robert Joseph Powers, Shreveport, Louisiana.  *And here
we thought they rather liked her*.]

## Paring Pairs No. 3

Answer: 50.  Service.

(a). More than a discussion on sex. (29,20) Criminal Conversation.
(b). Damager of toupees.  (43,1) Rug Beater.
(c). Surf 'n' Ski acrobatically.  (36,26) Hot Dog.
(d). Church singer.  (41,17) Quire Bouy.
(e). Bashful helper's visor.  (52,42) Shy Aide.
(f). Treacly church rituals.  (31,7) Low Masses.
(g). Queue for liquid refreshment.  (16,2) Punch Line.
(h). Miner's serendipitous strike.  (32,5) Pay Dirt.
(i). Basic ursine datum.  (39,14) Bear Fruit.
(j). Complaint merchant.  (30,3) Wine Cellar.
(k). Inclined tree source.  (40, 25) Bent Twig.
(l). Ironing work force.  (13,6) Press Gang.
(m). In favor of tiny particles.  (34, 18) Pro Motes.
(n). Cattle trading.  (49,27) Stock Exchange.
(o). Familiar with homosexual aroma.  (53,10) Knows gay.
(p). Shriek for my just deserts.  (33,4) I Scream.
(q). Rodent heap.  (51,35) Mouse Tower.
(r). Depart.  (37,21) Way Anchor.
(s). Low visibility.  (28,8) Sealing Zero.
(t). Swag.  (44,11) Waltz Matilda.
(u). Waiting.  (38,24) Spinning Wheels.
(v). Pigeon &times; 2.  (48,9) Pouter, Passenger.
(w). Site of moustache.  (45,12) Hare Lip.
(x). Source of congenital sadness.  (47,23) Blue Genes.
(y). Money maniac.  (46,15) Dough Nut.
(z). But thorn usually causes this.  (22,19) Rose Hip.


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA

A study of the word *town* shows an interesting shift of
emphasis through the centuries.  For us moderns a *town*
signifies an 'urban concentration as opposed to more sparsely
populated countryside,' but earlier usages had a generally
rural connotation.  Derived from the Old English *tun,* an
'enclosure,' *town* in early days signified an 'enclosed piece of
ground such as a field or yard or garden,' whence the compounds
*aeppel-tun*, an 'apple orchard,' *cyric-tun,* the
'churchyard,' *wyrt-tun*, a 'vegetable garden,' and so on.  At
the end of the 14th century Wyclif translated Matthew
22:5: &ldquo;But thei ... wenten forth, oon in to his toun....&rdquo;
this rendering the Greek *agros,* a 'field.'  From that it was
but a short transition to the 'enclosed land surrounding a
dwelling, i.e. a manor or a farm.'  Piers Plowman wrote of
&ldquo;threshing and dyking fro town to town,&rdquo; and in 1785 John
Mill remarked, &ldquo;Some hill towns had a good deal of corn on
the ground to shear.&rdquo;  This application to a farmstead has
endured as a peculiarly Scottish usage.

The term town or *township* was also applied to a
'village or hamlet with relatively little organisation.'  It was
especially applied to the 'cluster of houses adjoining the
church,' in full the *churchtown*.  *Churchtown* remains as a
place name in modern Southport and no doubt in many
other places as well, and there are many completely rural
place names still in existence such as *Town End, Towns
Green* and *Top of the Town* (a farm in a particularly
isolated situation near the Shropshire Union Canal).

Only gradually did the term come to signify a 'collection
of dwellings larger than a village,' and to be used of an
urban settlement distinct from or contrasted with the country.
Pope drew this contrast in 1715:

>As some fond Virgin, whom her mother's care  
Drags from the Town to wholesome Country air.

*Country* has had in its time a number of shifts of emphasis.
It originally signified a 'region or district or tract of
land,' so that Wyclif could speak of &ldquo;Al the contrey aboute
Jordan.&rdquo;  Derived via the Old French *contr&eacute;e* and the Late
Latin *contrata* from the Latin *contra* 'against,' it signified
literally 'that which lies opposite, the landscape spread out
before you.'  Then it was applied to a 'district with distinct
characteristics of its own'—*chalk country, fen country,
sheep country, corn country*—or to a 'district limited or
defined by human occupation, e.g. owned by the same lord
or inhabited by a specific group of people.'  In this sense
men spoke of *O'Neil Country* or *Lochiel's Country*.  Two
farmers, living perhaps three or four miles apart, might
meet each other and enquire, &ldquo;What's the news in you
country?&rdquo;  Two parishes might be spoken of as different
*countries* in this sense of the word, certainly countries were
so described: &ldquo;In Leycestershyre, Lankesshyre, Yorkeshyre
... and manye other countreyes,&rdquo; wrote Fitzherbert in 1.     When the Prodigal Son &ldquo;took his journey into a far
country,&rdquo; there is no reason to suppose that he left his native
land; the Greek word which *country* here translates similarly
meant simply 'district, region, or place.'

Today, of course, we generally apply the word to a
'land under a particular government or inhabited by a particular
ethnic or linguistic group'—&ldquo;To bee of one countrie,
of one nation, of one language,&rdquo; as Grimalde wrote in
1553—or else to 'rural regions or farming districts as opposed
to the city.'  In Cowper's frequently quoted saying,
&ldquo;God made the country, and man made the town.&rdquo;

The specialized uses of the word are numerous: as a
mining term *country* signifies the 'rock on each side of a
lode;' as a nautical expression, a 'region of the ocean, or
aboard ship, an area for common use,' like *steerage country
or wardroom country;* in cricket slang, the 'part of the field
which is remote from the wicket.


### OBITER DICTA

Today the actor when he *rehearses* preserves the last
use of a word which originally meant to 'recite or repeat a
lesson.'  &ldquo;Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief,&rdquo; says the
Catechism.  It could also be used in the wider sense of 'narrating,
describing at length, enumerating,' as in the
Authorised Version's &ldquo;There shall they rehearse the
righteous acts of the Lord.&rdquo;  There was also a provincial
usage in which *rehearse* was used of indigestible food
repeating: &ldquo;Them be strong onions surelie, thaay re'erses ahl
daay.&rdquo;  Finally comes our actor's use of the word when he
'practises in private what he will later perform in public.'


### OBITER DICTA

The Prayer Book use of *indifferent* to signify 'without
partiality or favour' instead of its modern meaning of
'apathetic or unconcerned.'  The old significance of the word
is fully defined in the oath administered to the Manx
deemsters: &ldquo;You shall, without respect of favour or friendship,
love or gain, consanguinity or affinity, envy or malice,
execute the laws of the Isle justly between the Lord and his
people of this land and betwixt party and party so indifferently
as the herring backbone doth lie in the middle of
the fish.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {Marjorie Sykes}

That much-abused word *nice* was beginning to lose its
proper meaning as far back as Jane Austen's time, when
Henry Tilney teased Catherine Morland for misusing it.
There are regrettably few today who employ it in its correct
senses of 'acute, discerning' (a *nice* criticism), 'delicate, subtle'
(a *nice* question), 'accurate' (*nicely* balanced), or
'fastidious,' as in R.G. White's &ldquo;A gentleman should be
scrupulously nice in his person.&rdquo;  Perhaps this last represents
an old-fashioned ideal, obsolescent in our times.  But it
would be unwise to start pontificating about this Protean
word, for which the *Oxford English Dictionary* lists some
fourteen different meanings, many with their own subsections,
ranging from 'stupid, wanton, and indolent' to
'modest, appetizing, and thin!'

*[Marjorie Sykes, Macclesfield, Cheshire]*


#### EPISTOLA {J.D. Lorentzen}

In connection with Mr. Eisiminger's article [VII, 1], I
would like to point out that Icelandic has rather successfully
been kept free of foreign words.  The Norwegians also consciously
strive to keep their language &ldquo;pure,&rdquo; and though
they haven't capitulated to the degree the Germans seem to
have done, they have been fighting an uphill battle,
especially since the discovery of oil in the North Sea, with
its accompanying flood of semi-technical terms.  The following
story may help to illustrate some of their difficulties.

A number of years ago, hydrofoil boats were put into
use as part of the coastal transportation system.  Since
*hydrofoil* is a construction distinctly alien to Norwegian, the
Spr&aring;kr&aring;d (the language advisory committee) sat down to
produce a new Norwegian word for this new type of boat.
After seven years of deliberation and debate, they finally
agreed upon *vingeb&aring;t/vengjeb&aring;t* ('wing-boat,' in two forms,
as there are two written forms of Norwegian).  However, by
that time everybody had got used to the term *hydrofoil*, and
nobody seemed to realize what a &ldquo;wing-boat&rdquo; was, so in the
end the Spr&aring;kr&aring;d voted to adopt *hydrofoil* as the officially
recognized term.  I am quite in agreement with Mr. Eisiminger's
observations on the desirability of languages' remaining
open to foreign influences, particularly as regards
&ldquo;world languages&rdquo; like English or French, and other
&ldquo;strong,&rdquo; widely-based languages, like German.  The cases
of Icelandic, with only 225,000 speakers, and Norwegian,
with its four million speakers, a wide variety of dialects,
and two written forms, are somewhat different.  Such narrowly
based languages are in danger of being overwhelmed
by the influence of English, in particular, and, without the
critical attitude of the purists, may be in danger of being
destroyed, or at least changed into unrecognizability.  That
is not to say that all foreign influences are bad, even for
languages spoken by few people, but just that foreign words
should not be accepted into a &ldquo;weak&rdquo; language unless they
serve some very good purpose that native words cannot.  To
put it quite simply, the defense mechanism mentioned by
Mr. Eisiminger is much more important and must operate
more consistently in small countries than in big ones.

*[J.D. Lorentzen, Naestby, Norway]*


#### EPISTOLA {Tony Hall}

How thoughtful of Robert A. Fowkes to contribute
his article, &ldquo;Blends, Blands, and Blunds&rdquo; [VII, 2], thus
offering me the chance to mention something that has
lurked in my mind for two or three years.  Some roadworks
in a town not far from here had made the
pavement (U.S. *sidewalk*) impassable, and a kindly
member of the gang digging the hole had painted on a
board an unforgettable warning: PATH CLOSLED;
PLEAUSE OTHESIDE.

I don't know whether the strain of deciding where
to insert the redundant L in the first line had so wearied
him that he couldn't bear the effort of spelling out in full
the words in the second, but every time I think of his
effort I am fascinated by the way the meaning comes
through, despite the disappearance of parts of some
words up the exhaust pipes of the ones in front!  I
wonder in how many languages one could achieve this
feat?  And I dread to think what further game of compressed
language readers of VERBATIM may be lured
into producing.

I enjoyed Mr. Fowke's article in its own right, of
course, but I would quarrel with his ascription of
&ldquo;Scall—er, call—a skycab.&rdquo;  I would suspect that this
was an aborted example of that great linguistic form, the
spoonerism.  Spoonerisms have a great appeal to me,
perhaps because my mother is a great natural exponent
of a form of the art that involves whole words rather
than initial letters.  An especially prized contribution of
hers, many years ago now, was to tell me to look at a
local shop which had &ldquo;a lovely carpetful of windows.&rdquo;

Sports announcers, mentioned by Mr. Fowkes as a
source of blends and blunds, manage some startling
efforts in Britain, too.  Usually they are produced in full
spate when talking at speed about events before their
eyes, but a beautiful extended spoonerism of my
mother's type came in a leisurely report on BBC radio
recently.  Speaking of one team's victory over another,
the announcer said of a particular player that he had had
&ldquo;the feet in their hand.&rdquo;  It took me a moment to
ungarble this: the player had in fact had &ldquo;a hand in their
defeat.&rdquo;

One of the great exponents of blends, oddly not
mentioned in Mr. Fowkes's article, was Lewis Carroll.
It comes as a faint shock to realize that words in
everyday use (at least on this side of the Atlantic) such
as *whiffle, galumph, burble,* and *chortle,* were invented
by him in &ldquo;Jabberwocky&rdquo; (and glossed by him as &ldquo;portmanteau&rdquo;
words—a term that has also passed into
accepted usage).

*[Tony Hall, Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire]*


#### EPISTOLA {Ernest Walton}

Mr. Sterling Eisiminger, in &ldquo;Borrowing and Biases
in German and English [VII, 1], overstates his case.  It is
true that transliteration, particularly under the Nazis,
was at times overdone.  For example, in Frankfurt on the
Main there was a large sports facility known as the
&ldquo;Stadium.&rdquo;  The Nazis &ldquo;verdeutscht&rdquo; this into *Sportsfeld*
'sportsfield' without realizing that they had to borrow a
word of recent English origin to make a &ldquo;German&rdquo; word
out of the Greco-Latin predecessor.

However, the word *Gel&auml;ndewagen* hardly proves
Mr. Eisiminger's point.  I know that the word existed in
1936 when Germany rearmed, and this was a number of
years before the first jeep was built (1941?) or named.
The word *camera* is not an English infiltration into the
German language, let alone of recent origin as the
article suggests.  My *Muret-Sanders German-English*
dictionary of 1908 contains the word *Kamera* already;
both the English and the German words were derived
from the Latin *camera* 'chamber,' itself a borrowing
from Greek *kamara* 'vault.'  *Blumenlese* 'anthology' does
not mean &ldquo;flowers of reading&rdquo;: it means 'selection of
flowers.'  [Ed. Note: In that sense, it may be parallel
with English *garland* 'a literary miscellany.']  The word
is a combination of *die Blume* 'the flower' and *die Lese*
'the choice, selection.'  It has nothing to do with the first
person singular *ich lese* or any other form of the verb
*lesen* 'to read.'

Anent Eric Winter's &ldquo;Odd Couples&rdquo; [VII, 1], when
I was a child, the German cocks all crowed *Kikeriki,* not
&ldquo;das Kikeriku&rdquo; and, like all the other cocks mentioned
in the article, omitted the definite article when they
yelled their heads off early in the morning.

May I add, with respect to Mr. Hereford's suggestion
that GI can be traced to &ldquo;General Infantry&rdquo; [VI, 3],
that I have heard of *infantry, infantry of the line,
motorized infantry, armored infantry, airborne infantry,
chairborne infantry, mountain infantry, and even
mounted infantry*.  I have also come across *musketeers,
grenadiers, fusiliers, tirailleurs, light infantry, J&auml;ger,
Sch&uuml;tzen, Chasseurs, Bersaglieri, Chasseurs d'Alpine,
Janissaries, Zouaves, Askari, Rangers, Commandos,
Raiders, not to mention parachute, glider-borne,* and
*marine infantry,* but never, never have I come across
&ldquo;General Infantry.&rdquo;  In my 3&frac12; years of service in the
U.S. Army in WW II, we were all *GIs* and thought it
meant 'General Issue.'

*[Ernest Walton, New York City]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dr. H.H. Macey}

Floreat Park is a suburb some two miles from the
sea.  Between them lies another suburb called City
Beach, the residents of which tend to get a bit hot under
the collar on the subject of public transport, which is
very poor—the reason being lack of support: everyone
in City Beach has a car.  The following opus was circulated
there last autumn:

>Bloody City Beach
>
>This bloody town's a bloody cuss,  
No bloody trains, no bloody bus,  
And no one cares for bloody us,  
In bloody City Beach.  
Everything's so bloody dear—  
Fifty cents for your bloody beer—  
And is it drinkable?  No bloody fear,  
In bloody City Beach.  
No bloody sport, no bloody games,  
No bloody fun—the bloody dames  
Won't even give their bloody names!  
In bloody City Beach.  
Best bloody place is bloody bed,  
With bloody ice on bloody head.  
You might as well be bloody dead  
In bloody City Beach.  
—*Anon*.  

*[Dr. H.H. Macey, Floreat Park, Western Australia]*


### OBITER DICTA: *Language and Law - I*

Once upon a time, when you and I were younger than
we are now, a newspaper reported the capture of the
perpetrator of a crime.  The headline (probably) read something
like, MURDERER OF B**** CAUGHT, DEPARTMENT STORE
THIEF APPREHENDED, or, possibly, EMBEZZLER ARRESTED AT
MEXICAN BORDER.  You probably know the rest: a clever
defense lawyer proved (in court, that is) that the identification
of a suspect as &aacute; criminal was prejudicial to the jury.
Moreover, until found guilty, any suspect termed a criminal
in the press could sue for libel, slander, defamation of
character, and for having beans stuffed up his nose.

As a result, all &ldquo;suspects&rdquo; are now &ldquo;*alleged or suspected*
assassins/thieves/burglars/hijackers, etc.&rdquo;  That seems a bit
spurious and even slightly inane when one considers certain
events, the attempted assassination of President Reagan for
one, that of Pope John Paul II for another, the removal
from an airplane of half a dozen hijackers for a third.  In the
second case, it seems very unlikely that anything reported in
American printed media or on TV or radio would come
under the libel laws of a foreign country, especially since
this Mehmet Ali Agca isn't even a citizen of Italy, where he
will presumably be tried, and doesn't therefore have rights
to pursue civil action there against an entity in a foreign
country.  Yet, despite the facts that (1) Agca has admitted
doing the dastardly deed and (2) a substantial number of
people who saw him do it almost killed him for it on the
spot, *The New York Times* feels it must refer to the Young
Turk as &ldquo;the suspected assailant.&rdquo;  It is unfair to pick only on
*The New York Times,* of course, since all the media do it:
Agca has been called the &ldquo;alleged/suspected assailant/
assassin&rdquo; (you can mix and match those any way you like)
by all the American media.

Likewise, Hinckley, the &ldquo;alleged&rdquo; or &ldquo;suspected&rdquo; attacker
of President Reagan, cannot be called &ldquo;the attacker,&rdquo;
&ldquo;the assailant,&rdquo; or anything else that is not preceded by a
mitigating adjective.

All of this may be proper legal procedure, but, in the
real world, it is nonsense: when millions of people watch
Harry Ruby shoot Lee Harvey Oswald on television, how
can the media convince anyone that *alleged* and *suspected*
are not devoid of meaning?  And then, when a crime is committed
and a &ldquo;real&rdquo; *suspect* is found and arrested— and by
&ldquo;real&rdquo; is meant 'someone who is suspected of the crime but
no one can be certain he committed it, and he might be let
go if insufficient evidence precludes a trial, or, if a trial
takes place, he might be acquitted'—applying the empty
words *alleged* or *suspected* to such an individual prejudices
his case to his disfavor more pointedly than to that of the
criminal observed in the act.

A *suspect* is a *suspect* is a *suspect*.  The word is used in
English *mainly* to mean 'someone who is suspected of having
done something'; *suspect* (verb) means ' &ldquo;1. to believe to
be guilty ... with insufficient proof or with no proof.  2. to
believe to be rightly chargeable with something stated,
usually something wrong, ... on little or no evidence.&rdquo; '
Alleged means ' &ldquo;declared or stated to be as described;
asserted.&rdquo; '  [Verb and adjective definitions are from the
*Random House Unabridged*.]  In strictly legal terms,
something alleged is an *allegation,* defined as ' &ldquo;the statement
of the issue which the contributing party is prepared
to prove,&rdquo; ' in Steven H. Gifis's *Law Dictionary,* Barron's,
1975.

Thus, in ordinary English, an *allegation* is ' &ldquo;an assertion
made without substantial proof,&rdquo; ' while in legal
English it is ' &ldquo;an assertion made by a party in a legal proceeding,
which he undertakes to prove.&rdquo; '  [Both from *RH
Unabridged*.]  Yet, somehow, by virtue of the constant
repetition of *alleged* preceding such words as thief, *assassin,
rapist, murderer, mugger,* etc., in the media it has taken on
the sense 'we don't *know* whether he did it or not' rather
than 'we haven't yet proven whether he did it or not.'  The
question arises, therefore, whether it makes sense to refer to
criminals *known* to have committed crimes (without a trial)
as &ldquo;alleged&rdquo; criminals: a subsequent release or acquittal does
not, necessarily, mean that the defendant did not *commit*
the crime for which he was tried, only that he was *not
found guilty* of it.  That might be for any number of reasons;
a common one in America was that the suspect was not
&ldquo;read his rights&rdquo; at the time of the arrest, a result of the so-called
Miranda rule [384 U.S. 436, 444-45]; other reasons
abound.  *Alleged* appears to have acquired the status of a
legal loophole; it allows the media to call anyone anything
they please, as long as it is preceded by *alleged*.

*[L.U.]*


### ETYMOLOGICA OBSCURA
*Marjorie Sykes, Macclesfield, Cheshire*

When the Chancellor of the Exchequer unfolds his
*buget* we shall all be so familiar with the term's present-day
meaning that we are unlikely to spare a thought for the fact
that this is the last survival of an old word whose meaning
was originally quite other.

In the first instance the word *budget* signified a 'workman's
bag or wallet generally made of leather, especially a
tinker's wallet or the leather pouch in which a mower carried
his whetstone.'  So a country song speaks of &ldquo;The jolly
mowers With budget and with bottle,&rdquo; while in the 16th
century Abraham Fleming wrote of the tinker's curs which
carried &ldquo;big budgetts fraught with Tinckers Tooles and
mettail.&rdquo;

The word was also applied to a 'leather or skin bottle,'
as a *water budget*, or to a 'back-can, a milk can shaped to
fit the back.'  In other specialised senses it was used of a
'kind of boot in a carriage for carrying luggage and of the
leather socket which held the butt of a cavalry carbine on a
journey.'  &ldquo;The two dragoons,&rdquo; wrote Sir Walter Scott,
&ldquo;have their carabines out of their budgets.&rdquo;

From these original meanings the word came to be applied
to the 'contents of a bag or wallet in the sense of a
stock or store,' especially used in a figurative sense of 'news,'
so that Thackeray could speak of Frank bringing &ldquo;a budget
of news from home.&rdquo;  This led to the use of the word as a
popular title for a journal, like the *Pall Mall Budget* and the
*Young Folk's Weekly Budget*.

An 18th century pamphlet *The Budget Opened* likened
Sir Robert Walpole to a mountebank opening his 'wallet of
quack medicines and conjuring tricks'—a less polite explanation
of the term budget in its financial sense than the
discreeter view that it refers to the 'Chancellor's leather bag
or dispatch box,' hence to its contents.

*Caddie* is an almost obsolete noun which survives today
only in the golfer's vocabularly.  The word, which was principally
used in Scotland, though not exclusively so, had
three meanings and many more spelling variants, for it has
appeared as *caddie, cadie, caddy, cady, caudie, cawdie,
cawdy, caddee,* and *cadee*.  The variations in spelling no
doubt resulted from the fact that it was a term more often
used in speech than in writing.

It was employed in the 19th century as the equivalent
of a 'cadet in the army'; it also signified in familiar speech
'lad or young fellow':

>A' ye canty, cheerie caddies,  
Lend a lug to Jamie's tale.

But the chief usage seems to have been to denote the
'men or lads who hung about the streets on the lookout for
casual employment, as messengers, errand boys, porters and
the like.'  &ldquo;The next time you didna ken your road, ask ane
of the caddies at the street corners,&rdquo; advised Whithead in 1876.     Sir Walter Scott used the word in his novels in this
sense, while Macaulay in his *History of English* spoke of
&ldquo;every Scotchman, from the peer to the cadie.&rdquo;

In particular, the term was applied to a 'sort of corps
of commissionaires' in 18th-century Edinburgh.  Burt wrote
of them about 1730: &ldquo;The Cawdys, a very useful BlackGuard,
who attend ... publick Places to go of Errands;
and though they are Wretches, that in Rags lye upon the
Stairs, and in the Streets at Night, yet are they often considerably
trusted....  This Corps has a kind of Captain
... presiding over them, whom they call the Constable of
the Cawdys.&rdquo;

Most of these usages have come from Scottish sources,
but an interesting instance from England occurs in instructions
issued to mail guards in coaching days: &ldquo;Only two outside
passengers are allowed whose station must be one on
the Box and one on the Roof ... pretence of taking up a
Cadde or Helper will never be admitted as an excuse for
disregarding this order.&rdquo;  So wrote the Post Office official in
charge of mail coaches in 1805.  Now the *caddie* who acts as
the golfer's attendant is the only one to survive, and he
perhaps precariously.

The word *snob* provides an interesting example of a
slang term which rose in the world to gain a quite respectable
specialized meaning.  Originally it was a dialect term
for a 'cobbler or shoemaker' and was still used in that sense
in quite recent times.  In 1781 Hone referred to &ldquo;Sir William
Blase, a snob by trade.&rdquo;  It could also refer to the 'cobbler's
boy': &ldquo;He had entered the craft in the usual way by being
what the villagers called a 'snob.' &rdquo;

In Cambridge parlance it was a slang term for 'anyone
not a gownman, i.e. a townsman.'  As the *Saturday Review*
remarked in 1865, &ldquo;Happily the annals of Oxford present no
instance of a 'snob' murdered in the streets.&rdquo;

It was also a term for a 'person without any pretensions
to gentility, one who belonged to the lower classes of society,'
so that a mid-19th century writer on Australia could
say, &ldquo;The majority of the colonists are essentially snobs, and
they are justly proud of the distinction.&rdquo;  From this the word
came to signify a 'person without breeding or good taste,' as
Thackeray explained: &ldquo;A vulgar man in England ... chiefly
displays his character of snob by ... swaggering and
showing off in his coarse dull stupid way.&rdquo;

In terms of industrial action, a *snob* was a 'blackleg or
knobstick, who either refused to strike or undercut his
fellows.'  &ldquo;Those who work for lower wages during a strike
are called snobs, the men who stand out being 'nobs'.&rdquo;

Finally comes its present meaning of a 'person who
regards wealth or position rather than character, one who
toadies to the eminent or affluent and despises those whom
he considers his inferiors.'  &ldquo;He was ... such a snob, he felt
pleased his clerks should hear a butler ask for a situation.&rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {John L. Hannaford}

In his article, &ldquo;Unofficial Sectional City Names&rdquo;
[VII, 2], Frederic Cassidy refers to a sectional name,
*Little Canada*, in Massachusetts.  He might be interested
to learn that there is an incorporated city in Ramsey
County, Minnesota, bearing the official name *Little
Canada*.  As might be imagined, the area was settled by
French Canadian immigrants.

*[John L. Hannaford, St. Paul, Minnesota]*


#### EPISTOLA {Sylvia Khan}

Not being an expert of any kind, let alone in matters
of language, I hesitate to comment adversely on an
article in VERBATIM.  There were several statements,
however, in &ldquo;Unofficial Sectional City Names&rdquo; [VII, 2],
which struck me as being removed from social reality.

Mr. Cassidy writes that names &ldquo;more or less unfavorable&rdquo;
to the foreigners settled in a section together
include *Polack Town, Jig Town, Jew Town, Wop Town,
Wop Flat, Dago Town, and Dago Center*.  &ldquo;More or less
unfavorable&rdquo; to whom?  Self-respecting Jews, Irish,
Italians, and Poles consider such names exemplary
expressions of bigotry and parochialism.  (A good many
of us descendants of immigrants are still considered
foreigners.)

Mr. Cassidy also states that blacks are the &ldquo;most
conspicuously separate or segregated group of people in
American cities—no doubt because of their numbers
and racial distinctiveness, which makes them slower to
assimilate....&rdquo;  Either Mr. Cassidy failed to express
what he really meant, or he believes that the victim is
the cause of his victimization.  And to describe blacks
calling each other &ldquo;nigger&rdquo; as merely indulging in
friendly &ldquo;joking&rdquo; is to be astonishingly naive about the
real meaning of the relationship and the bitterness of
the comedy.

Not mentioned in the article are *Ghost Town,* an
unfavorable expression for the black ghetto in Southern
California, and the *Barrio,* the section in East Los
Angeles settled almost exclusively by Mexican-Americans
and Mexican immigrants.  *Barrio* appears to be a
neutral designation, but I wouldn't recommend its use
by outsiders because of the faint scent of condescension,
which is suspected if not intended.

It's not only how you say what you say, but who
says it to whom.

*[Sylvia Khan, North Hollywood, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Hager}

In reference to Frederic G. Cassidy's article: some
years ago, in a neighboring community, a section known
as Eucalyptus Hill was subdivided and sold by a developer
whose last name was Hill.  Some buyers, thinking
they had paid too much for the property, renamed the
area *You clipped us, Hill*.

*[Robert Hager, Goleta, California]*


#### EPISTOLA {Jennings Parrott}

Mr. Cassidy lists *Coontown* and *Coon Bottom*
among names he considers &ldquo;intolerably countrified&rdquo; and
says they refer to animals.  I believe this is misleading.

The thought that raccoons, who fight for their territory,
might congregate in sufficient quantities to give
their name to an area doesn't fit with my memories of
growing up in rural Arkansas in the 1920s and 1930s.

The pejorative *coon* would refer to the slum where
the community's blacks lived.  It seems quaint now; old-fashioned,
it probably faded from general use some
years ago, along with minstrel shows.

*[Jennings Parrott, Sherman Oaks, California]*

[*Such was the opinion of a number of readers*.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Sometimes they beat wives.  (10)  
2\. How to live next door to a laughingstock, so I hear.  (4)  
3\.  What he did since at first he didn't succeed.  (4, 6, 5)
4\.  With language like this can more tell whoppers?  (7)
5\.  In judging booze, would this beat Brand X?  (6)
6\.  A host who could make a pig of himself.  (5)
7\.  Is a censor disturbed by today's Hollywood material? (9)
8\.  Mission impossible is not his bag, but then, he's just a kid. (6,3)
9\.  A possible gourmet ... (5)
10\. ... or a glutton like this.  (3, 3)
11\. Seven shot for one old fool.  (7)
12\. King Tut and the oil of Arabia.  (6, 9)
13\. Server of liquor even though everybody's higher than a kite.(4)
14\. He doesn't want to get even, just rich. (4,6)

**Down**

1\. Competition for banks.
2\. Make a charge at the portal for bad weather protection. (5,4)
3\. It helps in drawing the long bow?  Yes, sir, but no sir!  (5)
4\. Bags to keep in a chest.  (7)
5\. Up lift the common man.  (7)
7\. Gold for Brass.  (5)
8\. They are less than inches per foot.  (4)
9\. A page about Peter with the proper endowment.  (8)
13\. Despite a role coming up roses this is no jolly winner. (1, 4, 5)
15\. Lyrical music to one's ears, according to the composer.  (4, 4)
17\. Explain the oddly inert and then pert. (9)
19\. I got in bed all alone, being wedded only to my own opinions.  (7)
20\. Americans who have had teeth pulled?  (7)
23\. Make a match of it, jibe notwithstanding. (5)
25\. An indescribable something, yet on the tip of one's tongue.  (5)
26\. One needs fundamentals or is without basics, of course.  (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Ascot tie (a scottie);   
5\. Scrawl; 
9\. Capital offenses (of fences);  
11\. SA-m-U-ra-I;  
12\. Unrigid;  
13\. RENEWAL OF POLICY (anagram of I ONLY COP WELFARE);   
15\. Power of the press;  
21\. L-iss-O-m-E;  
22\. L.A.st run;  
24\. Changing clothes;  
25\. The-OR-y;  
26\. Stat-Utes.  

**Down**

1\. ACCUSER;  
2\. COPYMAN;  
3\. Tutor;  
4\. Ill will;  
6\. Clear s-O-up;  
7\. Assegai;  
8\. Last Day;  
10\. Fluff;  
14\. WARMONGER (anagram, GO WARN 'EM);  
15\. P-o-LECA-t;  
16\. W-a-stag-E;  
17\. FREON (in-FERNO);  
18\. HELLCAT (call the);  
19\. Ears-hot;  
20\. Sin-uses;  
23\. (la)ST OUT.

## Spy Euphemisms
*Victor Lasseter, The California State College (Bakersfield)*

In John le Carr&eacute;'s *The Looking Glass War*, a British
intelligence official seeks government approval to
forge some passports.  &ldquo;I propose,&rdquo; he explains to an
Under Secretary, &ldquo;to use a cover story for security
reasons: a pretended training scheme is the most appropriate.&rdquo;
The Under Secretary is momentarily puzzled by
the euphemism.  &ldquo;Cover story?  Ah yes: a lie.&rdquo;

Spying naturally requires cover, or disguise: candor
is a small virtue in espionage.  Espionage may also
require euphemism.  *Euphemism*, according to the
*Oxford English Dictionary,* comes from the Greek verb
'to speak fair' and is 'the substitution of a word or
expression of comparatively favourable implication or
less unpleasant association, instead of the harsher or
more offensive one that would precisely designate what
is intended.'  When one 'speaks fair,' one uses vague,
imprecise, indirect, frequently polysyllabic, and always
misleading language.

Euphemism in spying, however, seems paradoxical,
since so many examples of failed euphemisms (*protective
reaction* for 'bombing raid,' *surreptitious entry* for
'breaking and entering') suggest that euphemism is
translucent, if not transparent: it holds its cover only
temporarily.  Why, then, should the spies—with their
sophisticated and potent array of invisible inks, cryptograms,
scramblers, lie detectors, and poison dart guns—
bother to use the frail euphemism?

Literature about the United States Central Intelligence
Agency suggests that the euphemisms are coined
not to mislead the enemy but to soothe the conscience
of the spy and to guide public opinion.  An example of
euphemism as a kind of Maalox for the conscience of the
spy appears in *The Man Who Kept the Secrets* (1978),
Thomas Powers's biography of Richard Helms.  Powers
tells of a major in Castro's army recruited by the CIA to
assassinate the Cuban leader.  The major had already
shown his prowess by killing Batista's head of military
intelligence.  After the killing, however, he had a nervous
breakdown.  In his later negotiations with the CIA,
he refused to use the word *assassinate*; he preferred
*eliminate*.

Euphemism has a more public purpose as well.  A
former CIA officer, John Stockwell, reveals in *In Search
of Enemies* (1978) that as the word *mercenary* became
embarrassing in CIA Angola, the agency simply banned
the word from memos and reports.  The replacement
term was *foreign military advisor*.  Similarly, William
Colby, in *Honorable Men* (1978), explains that he took
the agency's poison dart gun before the Church Committee
to dispel the CIA's &ldquo;James Bond&rdquo; and &ldquo;Maxwell
Smart&rdquo; image.  He therefore introduced the weapon to
the committee not as a poison dart gun but as a *Non-discernible
Microbioinoculator*.

This deceptive quality of euphemism contrasts to
the more candid possibilities of jargon.  Although jargon
may be euphemistic, it does not have to be.  Both jargon
and euphemism are indirect and cryptic, but euphemism
conceals and begs for belief, while jargon may
function precisely as shop talk or insider's shorthand.
No spy talking to another spy would call a poison dart
gun a *Non-discernible Microbioinoculator*.  John le
Carr&eacute;'s spies, however, call a bodyguard a *babysitter*.
*Babysitter* is oblique to the outsider, but, once its new
meaning is understood, precise.  Similarly, *to burn* is spy
jargon meaning 'to blackmail' but is a more revealing
expression than *political action*.  Thus, jargon may be a
useful linguistic device in a specialized trade.  *Cold
pitch*, for instance, is CIA jargon for 'approaching a
potential agent on the street without any introduction.'
Sometimes such jargon is quite candid: 'sabotage
instructors' at the CIA training school are known as *the
burn or blow boys*.  When Trevanian, in *The Eiger
Sanction*, ridicules such &ldquo;cryptic jargon&rdquo; as *demote
maximally* for 'purge by killing,' *biographic leverage* for
'blackmail,' *sanction* for 'counter-assassination,' and *wet
work* for 'killing,' he is parodying such CIA euphemisms
as *terminate with extreme prejudice*.  Only *wet
work*, with its menacingly clear understatement, is
jargon.  Of course, spy jargon is a more private language
than spy euphemism, but literature about the CIA provides
many more examples of distorting euphemism
than of candid jargon.

Euphemisms appear throughout the world of the
CIA.  According to Victor Marchetti, in *The CIA and the
Cult of Intelligence* (1974), the CIA calls its spies
*penetrations*, an impersonal word that connotes a kind
of objective, perhaps inevitable, physical phenomenon
and avoids the sneaky connotation of *spy*.  A *technical
interview* is the 'lie detector test given to prospective
CIA employees.'  *Technical penetration* is the public-relations
term for 'electronic surveillance, or bugging.'
According to E. Howard Hunt's *Undercover* (1974), *alias
documentation* is the CIA euphemism for the 'making of
false identity papers and disguises.'  A dazzling euphemism
is the Orwellian *authentication*, which means
'forgery.'  Here euphemism has become Doublespeak.

For the sake of public relations, a CIA front
becomes a *proprietary organization*.  The 'secret use of
foundations, newspapers, and colleges'—where the CIA
may employ *campus sources*, or 'informers'—becomes
an *interface*.  'Propaganda' becomes *disinformation
activities*; 'giving a secret CIA assignment to a reporter'
becomes *prior tasking*.

One of the best known CIA euphemisms is *covert
action*.  The phrase connotes merely a 'secret action,' but
in fact refers to the 'secret intervention in the internal
affairs of foreign countries.'  According to the June 1980
issue of the *Covert Action Bulletin*, even this bland
term is being replaced by the blander *special activities*.
A rather extreme form of covert action is *destabilization*,
or the 'overthrow of a foreign government.'

Much of this spy talk is so euphemistic that it
succeeds in suggesting the board room rather than the
hidden microphone.  Just as business favors action-oriented
expressions (as Kenneth Hudson points out in his
*Dictionary of Diseased English*) like *aggressive manager*
and *fast-moving convenience foods*, the CIA relies
on aggressive business expressions for cover.  *Political
action* means the 'bribing of foreign politicians or the
framing of Soviet officials.'  *Executive action* means
'assassination of heads of state.'  According to Harry
Rositzke, in *The CIA's Secret Operations* (1977), *preventive
direct action* means 'sabotage, anti-sabotage,
and demolition.'  *Positive intervention* is an 'attempt to
unseat a Communist government.'

To the public, the Central Intelligence Agency is
the CIA; to its employees, the CIA is *the firm* or *the
company*.  Given this logic, the 'relationship between
the spy and his handler' becomes the *agent-principal
relationship*, 'foreign nationals working for the firm'
become *assets*, 'areas of specialization' become *accounts*
(as in *the Iranian account*), and 'casing the office of
Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist' becomes a *feasibility
study*.  For employees who displease their superiors, the
firm may, in the words of William Colby, *arrange a
circumstance where employees can be helped to leave
government service early*.  If the employee is one of
those purged in the CIA's recent mole hunts, the dismissal
is called a *negative career development*.

Since a democratic society holds its intelligence
services accountable to the people, the CIA often makes
plans for *plausible deniability* (a 'lie that the President,
Congress, the press, or the public will buy'), but it may
have to fall back on *distancing* ('stonewalling').

Euphemism, in short, does not really keep the
secrets, but—through the manipulation of language—
helps make some CIA practices seem more respectable.

## To Bury the Hatchetmen
*Dwight Bolinger, Palo Alto, California*

How is one to deal with the image of the linguist
as arch-permissivist—a reputation partly earned
no doubt but mostly bestowed by critics who see the
questioning of authority in language as a threat?

The critics come in all degrees, from serene to
apoplectic, but the latter unfortunately tend to win the
largest audiences.  This is especially true at a time when
business and government are alarmed at what they see
as a growing illiteracy, schools are being told to cut out
the frills and get back to basics, and programs once dear
to the hearts of many linguists—such as bilingual education—are
on the defensive.  Some statements that have
emanated from the profession in the past have invited
the role of scapegoat, such as the one from an eminent
linguist in the 50s who saw no contradiction between
saying that one language is as good as another and
saying that all should be preserved because one might
turn out to be better.  This was in the days of structural
linguistics, &ldquo;a benighted and despicable catering to
mass ignorance,&rdquo; as John Simon calls it, apparently
unaware that structural linguists departed the seat of
power a quarter century ago.

I can't speak for all my fellow linguists—and this is
enough to refute the caricature of a profession that
speaks with one voice about anything, including correctness—but
what I set down here I believe would be
agreed upon by most.

As dedicated professionals, linguists agonize
between a cultivated detachment and a passionate fondness
for the object of their study.  The first means that
whatever affects language commands their respect,
which includes the forces of conservatism as well as
those of change.  If the prescriptivists in our schools
have succeeded in banishing *He don't* and making *ain't*
simply funny, that is a datum on a par with the pronunciation
*congradulate* as evidence of what happens to
consonants when they occur between vowels, or *wanna*
and *gonna* as indications of the continuing formation of
auxiliaries.  But fondness is a temptation to advocacy.
The linguist who devotes a lifetime to fieldwork among
the Hopi can hardly be blamed for resenting the assimilators
who want to replace the Hopi language with
English.  That same fondness colors views about black
and Chicano English and folk speech everywhere.  It
may blind some linguists to the importance of other
arguments when political decisions have to be made,
such as whether a minority group is better served by
preserving its heritage or moving into the mainstream.

But linguists are by and large as much part of our
literate culture as anyone else.  When we write and
speak we obey the conventions.  Some even defend
English spelling on the ground that it shows relationships
that would otherwise be blurred.  (*Ignite* and
*ignition* are both spelled with *t*, but would not be if the
-*ition* in *ignition* were treated like *shun*.)  Most of us, I
suspect, value the distinctions we have learned to make
and regret their loss as a new generation comes along
and confuses them.  In this we may feel like insisting,
alongside any standpat purist, that schools teach the
difference between *infer* and *imply*.  When we write
dictionaries we faithfully contribute to the notes on
usage—like the one soon to appear that warns against
using *refute* in the sense of *deny*.  But we do it knowing
what we are up against.  *Refute* is under pressure from
*refuse*, which implies rejection only and not disproof.
And the proper synonym in the refusal sense, *controvert*,
is not one that we are likely to have much success
in promoting.

Still, linguists are able to view such losses with a bit
more equanimity than most because we know that for
every distinction lost another is gained.  As often as not
it is confected from leftovers, sometimes from the very
usages that prescriptivists condemn.  The *Harper Dictionary
of Contemporary Usage* prescribes *drunken*
before the noun, *drunk* in the predicate: *drunken
driver, the driver was drunk*.  But that distinction is no
good except for rhythm, like *sunken eyes* and *luncheon
date* rather than *sunk eyes* and *lunch date*.  People prefer
distinctions of meaning, and nowadays a judge who
fines a drunken driver is dealing with someone who
lurched into the dock; a drunk driver could be cold
sober.  (Would you say *drunken driving*?)  A *swelled
head* is not a *swollen head; he surely loves you* is
doubtful; *he sure loves you* is not.  As Carol Burnett says,
*I'am a better actor than I am an actress*.  The language
will survive because it can't help surviving.  There is a
genie inside us who wastes nothing and repairs everything
eventually.

What linguists sometimes forget is that the genie
says no as often as yes.  The negatives are all the times
we correct ourselves or make a choice in the recesses of
our minds that never even surfaces as a correction.  It is
most often a choice dictated by a rule so deep-seated
that we have no occasion to formulate it: *Are we set
asiding the law?* is corrected to *Are we setting aside the
law?*  because we know automatically where to attach
-*ing* and mistakes are only fumbles.  Or it may be a rule
prescribed by explicit grammars, such as the one that
radio commentator Paul Harvey might have exemplified
had he corrected himself after saying *And they all lived
happily ever after till death did they part*.

The linguist cannot deny either no-saying, but
would like the prescriptivists to inform themselves, if
only to measure their chances of success.  *Disinterested*
was a lost cause from the beginning.  Trying to exclude
the common meaning of *interested* is as useless as
telling a juror to ignore the purple bruises on a witness's
face.  *Lie* rather than *lay* is another forlorn hope.  So,
probably, are contrary-to-fact conditions with their
requirement of the pluperfect (*If he did it—If he had
done it—I would have known*).  A language cannot
tolerate indefinitely a finespun distinction hinged to
forms so easily confused.  But it might be worth the
trouble to work on *substitute* and *replace*.  (&ldquo;Wages
Substituted by Profit Sharing,&rdquo; reads a headline in the
USC *Daily Trojan*—for &ldquo;Profit Sharing Substituted for
Wages&rdquo; or &ldquo;Wages Replaced by Profit Sharing.&rdquo;) Or on
*minimal* and *at least minimal*.  (Did the person who
wrote *The channels are organized so that minimal
accuracy is maintained* mean that the goal was the least
possible accuracy or an accuracy that did not go below a
certain minimum?)

I stress the *might*.  These are questions of strategy,
and strategy involves discussion, which ought to be
informed discussion.  One hit list of incorrections after
another may entertain a public insecure about its status
but will not achieve any of its avowed aims.  The issues
that language raises—cultural barriers, social stigma,
truth, manipulation, solidarity, fairness in courts of law,
understanding between classes and nations, the very
organization of reality—are too important to be confined
to the level of linguistic theory or table manners.  It is
time for rule-givers and linguists to talk to one another.
It will be good for both sides and may get the discussion
of language into the public arena, where it belongs.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Rats Live on No Evil Star: The BackWords Puzzle Book*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780896961227/Rats-Live-Evil-Star-Kuhn-0896961222/plp)
Joaquin and Maura Kuhn, (Everest House, 1981), 127pp. 

Even the most hardened puzzle-solver should
approach this book with caution, because it has the
power to trap one in a time-consuming struggle to
master almost impossible riddles.  How much time do
you have for such a game of wits?

This should tell you that the crossword answers
needed to fill in even the few blanks in these little
stumpers will give you pause, testing your ingenuity to
the utmost.  Thus warned, let us examine this book and
see what it is made of.

It offers 100 skeletonlike crosswords, sometimes
using no more than four crossing words (or phrases) and
sometimes up to ten or more.  But these crossings are
few and far between, not enough to turn a glimmer of a
clue into a gleam.  If you are palindrome-minded from
having fooled around with them by choice or from
simply having relished them, you have a head start in
this sort of puzzle.  Also, cryptogram fans will have an
advantage, for they are schooled in the deciphering and
intuitive grasp of short words.  The authors have made
every single word or phrase used in their puzzles
palindromic, so you know what you are up against.
Some are as simple as LEVEL or DEWED, easily defined,
and others as impossible as REVIGORATE TAR O GIVER
and MEGABUCKS ASK CUBA GEM (and the weird syntax
makes the unimaginable answer almost impossible to
define easily!).  The extraordinary difficulty of creating
long and funny palindromes is a reasonable excuse for
such sense and syntax.

The husband-and-wife team, authors Joaquin and
Maura Kuhn, must have spent hundreds of man/woman-hours
making up these baffling riddles, and the end
result, for sheer bulk and unflagging enthusiasm, is
awesome.  It will appeal to those dogged solvers who
believe &ldquo;if they can make it, we can break it,&rdquo; which is
where the time-consuming element comes in.

For those who find brain-racking more painful than
pleasurable, there are answers in the back of the book.
There is no law against stealing a look just to help
yourself a little.  It must be noted that as you do this sort
of thing, your skill improves, as does your awareness of
which words and which types of word structure suit the
creation of palindromes.

The book is ingenious, challenging and outrageous,
and often funny.  I have made up one sample (it is not in
the book) just to show you what to expect in the way of
clue and answer in these crosswords.  Amazingly
enough, they are themed crosswords.

Clue: Noted angler unaware of game warden. (6, 4,
3, 3) [Numbers give size of answer words.]

To solve this puzzle you must first ask yourself &ldquo;who is
this noted angler?&rdquo;  If your mind is clear and names do
not elude your memory bank, you should come up with
WALTON.  Since this phrase is a palindrome, you know
that WALTON begins the answer and ends it too, though
written in reverse.  That leaves only the middle four
blanks unfilled.  A study of the clue could lead you to
the missing word: SEES.  Thus, you answer the riddle:
WALTON SEES NOT LAW.  This is typical of the syntax
and spirit of the palindromes you find in the crosswords
by the Kuhns.

The meagerness of the crossing (keyed) letters is
what makes it so difficult.  In the case I used as an
example there were no crossings, but that is an easy one
and is just for demonstration.  To conclude: these crosswords
make the ones in your daily paper look like
child's play and *The* [London] *Times* (and VERBATIM)
crosswords like mild cerebral challenges.

*[Jack Luzzatto, Bronx, New York]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Nelson's Expository Dictionary of the Old Testament*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=30755854995&searchurl=sortby%3D20%26tn%3Dnelson%2527s%2Bexpository%2Bdictionary%2Bold%2Btestament&cm_sp=snippet-_-srp1-_-title1) and [*An Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words, with Their Precise Meanings for English Readers*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/BookDetailsPL?bi=31071257693&searchurl=kn%3D%2AAn%2BExpository%2BDictionary%2Bof%2BNew%2BTestament%2BWords%252C%2Bwith%2BTheir%2BPrecise%2BMeanings%2Bfor%2BEnglish%2BReaders%2A%26sortby%3D20&cm_sp=snippet-_-srp1-_-title1)
Merrill F. Unger and William White, Jr., eds., xii + 509 pp. and W.E. Vine., xv + 1324 pp. Both from Thomas Nelson.

The average reader of the Bible soon realizes that
one has to resort to aids of various kinds to fathom the
language used to formulate the word of God.  God's
word there has been couched in human language centuries
old, first written in Aramaic, Greek, or Hebrew,
depending on the Old or New Testament book in
question.  Since it is the product of a long line of
development and did not drop from heaven in one
piece—much less in King James's English—its language
often creates problems.  This condition is, of course,
compounded for those who cannot read the original
languages and check the nuances carried by a given
English translation.  Hence, one often has to have
recourse to dictionaries, especially of the expository
sort, which try to explain the varied meanings of a given
biblical word.

Both of the books under discussion here are of this
type, one treating the vocabulary of the Old Testament,
the other that of the New.  The first, dealing with the
words of the Old Testament, is new, having been first
published in 1980; it is the result of the collaborative
work of twelve American Old Testament scholars who
have assisted the two editors.  The second, discussing
the vocabulary of the New Testament, is a recent
(undated) reprint of an older work first issued in two
volumes in 1939 and reissued as one volume in 1952; it
is the work of one person, W.E. Vine, and is fitted out
with two forewords (one by W. Graham Scroggie, 1939,
and the other by F.F. Bruce, 1952).

The books have in common the listing of the English
words of each testament, distinguishing them
according to parts of speech and listing the Aramaic,
Greek, or Hebrew equivalents, not only in the original
scripts but also in an (often questionable) English transcription;
the occurrences in the various books of the
Bible are grouped according to thematic meanings.  In
general, the articles devoted to each word thus enable
the English reader to gain some feel for the sense of the
Semitic or Greek equivalents and to see how the word is
used in the same or in different meanings in various
places in the Bible.  The person who learns to use these
dictionaries intelligently should be able to understand
better the meanings of biblical words.  Since the articles
are not merely philological discussions but often
include the theological senses of words, the reader will
be able to cull from them the religious dimensions of
biblical passages.  The comments on various occurrences
of the word in question are &ldquo;expository&rdquo; in that they
seek to explain the precise meaning of a word in
context.  In the New Testament volume, a paragraph
sign (&para;) is used to note that all of the occurrences of the
word under consideration have been mentioned in the
given heading or subheading.

There are differences between the two works.  That
devoted to the words of the New Testament is built on
the vocabulary of the King James Version and the
revisions of 1881-1885.  Since it was produced in 1939, it
antedates the Revised Standard Version and later translations.
For this reason the dictionary is limited, as it is
also devoid of the use of more recent material brought
to light since 1939 (e.g., the bearing of the discovery of
the Dead Sea Scrolls on the study of the New Testament).
On the other hand, the volume devoted to the
words of the Old Testament has also made use of the
New English Bible, Today's English Version, the New
American Standard Bible, the Revised Standard Vrsion,
the New International Version, the Jerusalem Bible, and
the New American Bible.

These books have been written within conservative
evangelical circles of modern Protestantism and accordingly
manifest its strengths and weaknesses.  Among the
former must be mentioned the welcome respect for the
inspired character of biblical writings and for the Christian
traditions proceeding from them that surrounds the
discussion.  Among the latter would be an exaggerated
emphasis on the truth of the Bible, often narrowly taken
as historical truth.  Scroggie's foreword in the New
Testament volume even refers to &ldquo;the dispensational
teaching of the New Testament&rdquo; (p. viii), thus revealing
that the intended users of the dictionary are mainly
those of Protestant Dispensationalism.  The names of
eight of the twelve collaborators on the Old Testament
volume do not appear in the most recently issued
membership list of the Society of Biblical Literature.
Hence, these volumes do not share all the wealth of the
critical study of the Bible to be found in other Protestant
circles or in (more recent) Roman Catholic interpretations.
A certain wooden literalness is detected in many
of the expository comments; and it even results in a
strange—surely erroneous—transcription of Hebrew
(with the silent schwa often transcribed as vocal).

The result is that the interested reader of the
English Bible, for whom these works are in general
intended, would do well to consult them in conjunction
with other dictionaries of more scientific and enlightened
Christian origin.  Since the New Testament volume
is in many ways outdated today, the reader should
always compare the articles written by Vine with those
in the three-volume *New International Dictionary of
the New Testament* (ed. C. Brown, Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1975-78), which, though it too stems from
an evangelical background, is more critical in its treatment,
being a translation of a recent original German
work.  Other well-known works of reference, such as
Kittel's *Theological Dictionary of the New Testament,
the Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament*, and
*the Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible,* are the sort of
control that should be used for both of these volumes.  In
a'word, use these expository dictionaries by all means,
but use them with a discernment born of other
interpretation.

*[Joseph A. Fitzmyer, S.J., The Catholic University of America]*


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v8n1_Summer_1981)