--- 
title: "VOL VIII, No 2 [Autumn, 1981]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Searching for Soma
*Mary M. Tius, Kavala, Greece*

Until the late 1960s the identity of Soma, the
inspiration for the Rig Veda, had been one of the
most intriguing and intractable problems of Vedic scholarship.
The hymns to Soma date back more than 3,000
years and were composed in Vedic, the parent-language
of Sanskrit, by the poets or priests of the Aryan peoples
who invaded the Indus Valley region.  These invaders
were cattle-breeders and grain-growers with elaborate
myths and a tribal religion rich in ritual and served by
an hereditary priesthood.  Around 1000 B.C. the Vedic
hymns, composed in widely separated regions over a
period of 500 years or more, were gathered together and
the canon was then closed.  The text of that canon has,
miraculously, come down to us intact.  In their pantheon
of gods were, among many others, Indra, god of the
thunderbolt; Agni, god of fire; Parjanya, god of thunder
and, according to one tradition, the father of Soma.
Soma, too, was a god—a god and an inebriant; a plant
and the juice of that plant.  But what plant?  Our only
source of information on the subject is the Rig Veda,
1,028 hymns, of which 120 are entirely devoted to Soma.
Yet, for 2,500 years, the identity of Soma was unknown.

Even before 1000 B.C., Soma substitutes were being
used in the rituals, which indicated a breakdown in the
lines of communication between the scattered invaders
and their source of supply in the Himalayan Mountains
(for Soma grew only in the mountains).  This use of
substitutes complicated the problem of identifying
Soma.  There were other complications, too.  Inevitably,
names for plants familiar to the invaders in their distant
homeland would in the new environment be bestowed
upon other plants which resembled them in some way.
In addition, generic terms for flower, herb, tree, etc.
may well have been based on a system of classification
different from our own post-Linnaean one.  Nevertheless,
the descriptions of Soma, though couched in poetic
language full of metaphor and almost deliriously lyrical,
were as precise as they were varied.  In the past 200
years, since Western countries have discovered the
languages and cultures of their Sanskrit and Vedic
relatives, many plants—from hemp and henbane to rhubarb—were
proposed as likely Soma-candidates, but
none finally passed the test of congruence with the
descriptions in the Vedic hymns.

In 1968 that situation changed, with the publication
of R. Gordon Wasson's *Soma, Divine Mushroom of
Immortality.*  This book was the outgrowth of an earlier
book, itself the fruit of many years of research conducted
by its authors, R. Gordon Wasson and his wife,
Valentina Pavlovna Wasson.  The origin of the epic
search, which neither of the Wassons had forseen might
lead to Soma, is best told in Mr. Wasson's own words.
The search began in

... August 1927 (when) my bride, as she then was,
and I took our delayed honeymoon ... in the
Catskills.  She was a Russian born in Moscow ...
(and) had fled from Russia with her family in the
summer of 1918, she being then 17 years old.  She
qualified as a physician at the University of London
and had been working hard to establish her
pediatric practice in New York.  I was a newspaper
man in the financial department of the *Herald
Tribune.*  On that first beautiful afternoon of our
holiday in the Catskills, we went sauntering down
the path for a walk.  ... Suddenly Tina threw down
my hand and darted up into the forest.  She had
seen mushrooms....  She cried out in delight at
their beauty....  Such a display she had not seen
since she left her family's dacha near Moscow,
almost a decade before....  She began gathering
some of the fungi in her apron....  That evening
she seasoned the soup with fungi, she garnished
the meat with other fungi....  I ate nothing with
mushrooms in it.  Frantic and deeply hurt, I was led
to wild ideas: I told her I would wake up a
widower.

She proved right and I wrong.

>... A little thing ... this difference in emotional
attitude toward wild mushrooms.  But my wife and I
did not think so, and we devoted most of our
lecture hours for decades to dissecting it, defining
it, and tracing it to its origins.
>
>—*The Road to Eleusis: Unveiling the Secret of the Mysteries*, by R. Gordon
>
>Wasson, Carl A.P. Ruck and Albert  
>Hofmann, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,  
>New York and London, 1978, pp. 13-17.

Some thirty years later, in May 1957, only seven
months before Mrs. Wasson's death, the results of their
years of patient research were made known in *Mushrooms,
Russia and History* (Pantheon Books, New York).
The woodland path they took that day in August 1927
had led them by winding trails to distant parts of the
world and to the beginnings of civilization in prehistoric
times.  In the process of delineating the gap separating
their two peoples, a gap which divides all Indo-European
peoples into two camps, mycophiles and
mycophobes (words of the Wassons' coining), they had
rediscovered the role of the hallucinogenic mushrooms
of Mexico in religious rites being performed there today
as they had been for centuries before the Spanish
Conquest.  The Wassons had also glimpsed

>a period long ago before our ancestors knew how to
write, when those ancestors must have regarded a
mushroom as a divinity or quasi-divinity ...
evoking awe and admiration, fear, yes, even terror.
When that early cult gave way to new religions and
to novel ways emerging with a literate culture, the
emotions aroused by the old cult would survive....
In one area the fear and terror would live on,
either of a particular mushroom (as in the case of
*Amanita muscaria*); or else, as the emotional focus
through tabu became vague, of &ldquo;toadstools&rdquo; in
general; and in another area, for a reason that we
cannot now tell, it was the spirit of love and
adoration that survived.

That first great pioneering work had opened up a new
field of study to which the Wassons gave the name
ethno-mycology (a branch of ethnobotany).  Eventually it
also led to Mr. Wasson's inspired unraveling of the
Soma mystery.

The winding trail to Soma leads back to the Tree of
Life and the Herb of Immortality, central images in
folklore from China to the Near East.  For Siberian
peoples, the Tree of Life was the white birch.  Was it
only coincidence that the fly agaric, *Amanita muscaria,*
the Sacred Element in the shamanistic rites of Siberian
tribes (such as the Koryaks, Voguls, et al.), will grow
only where the white birch—and the pine and fir—can
grow?  European mycologists learned of the mycorrhizal
association of the fly agaric and the birch, pine, and fir
only in 1885, but the native peoples of Siberia must
have observed the fact thousands of years before.  There
is linguistic evidence for use of the fly agaric dating
back to the period when a common Uralic language was
spoken, before its division into the Samoyed and Finno-Ugrian
languages.  According to some linguists, Uralic
ceased to be spoken around 6000 B.C.; according to
others, around 4000 B.C.

Another fungal growth is associated with the white
birch: *Fomes fomentarius,* the bracket or shelf fungus
used as punk, tinder, touchwood, wick for thousands of
years, perhaps even before 10,000 B.C. (Remains of punk
still attached to birchwood have been found in the
excavations of Star Carr in Yorkshire.)  White birch, fiery
red fly agaric with its striking white &ldquo;warts&rdquo; or speckles,
and the fire-catching punk formed a trio: Tree of Life,
light for the soul, heat for the body.  At the roots of the
Tree of Life, say the legends, lies a snake—a chthonic
spirit like the Delphic Python, the toad (which elsewhere,
as in England, became associated with all mushrooms
and with the fly agaric in particular), and
mushrooms themselves.  In the topmost branches of the
Tree is a bird—the &ldquo;Bird of Paradise.&rdquo;

But why &ldquo;fly&rdquo;-agaric?  The connection between flies
and madness must have seemed obvious to a herdsman,
for when botflies lay their eggs in an animal's nostrils, it
becomes frantic until the larvae mature and desert their
host.  Such English expressions as *bats (bots) in the
belfry, a bee in one's bonnet, bughouse, a flea in one's
ear,* and others are vestigial remains of the belief that
insects, flies especially, cause insanity.  Flies are also
associated with A.  *muscaria* because of the (perhaps
tabu-induced) belief common among Slavic and most
Germanic peoples, as well as in certain parts of France
(Fr. *tue-mouche* 'kill-fly,' *'A. muscaria'*), that flies die
after eating it.  This is not strictly true, though a fly may
be stupefied by the ibotenic acid contained in *A. muscaria*
and may then die by &ldquo;misadventure.&rdquo;

Gk. *myxa* (cognate with Gk. *myk&eacute;s* 'mushroom')
means both 'nasal mucus' and 'lampwick.'  There may be
two reasons for this: first, a fresh mushroom when
crushed or pressed becomes a soft mucoid mass; the
second could be an ancient connection between *Fomes
fomentarius* and the fly agaric, which, if improperly
prepared and then ingested, might lead to the same sort
of frenzied, hyperactive behavior observed in botfly-infested
animals.  For many primitive peoples there was
also a connection between the creation of fire and sexual
procreation, and in some languages, e.g., Greek and
Japanese, the word for mushroom can also mean penis
(the phallic shape of the emerging mushroom may also
be partly responsible for this usage); in the same way in
English, *flame, punk,* and *spark* have erotic
connotations.

So, too, with *mouse,* which in German as in English
may mean 'mistress.'  Mice and insects tend to appear in
sudden swarms, and mice, like insects that metamorphose
from one &ldquo;life&rdquo; to a different one, belong to two
worlds: living some of the time underground, they
appeared to be messengers from the netherworld—
chthonic spirits, like mushrooms.  There seems to be an
etymological connection between Latin and Greek for
fly and mouse: Lat. musca, N. Gk. *myga*, Gk. *myia* 'fly';
Gk. *mygal&emacr;* 'shrewmouse'; Lat. *mus*, Skt. *mus*, Gk. *mys*
'mouse, muscle.'  And in Turkish, keme 'truffle, fungus,
rat'; Fr. '*rat* rat; whimsy, maggot; taper.'

Whoever reads any of the Wasson studies is likely
to find himself thinking of the ancient mushroom-cult
connotations when he reads certain words, such as
*bang, bogey, bot, botch, bug, dole, fly, fungus, funk,
grub, mad, maggot, match, moth, mouse, mucus, pink,
punk, speckle, sponge, spunk, string, tick, urine, wick*.
But words and expressions with mushroom-cult links are
found not just in Indo-European languages but in many
Ural-Altaic ones, such as Magyar (Hungarian), Mordvin,
Selkup, and (as I think) Turkish.  They may even be,
though Mr. Wasson makes no such claim, worldwide;
for when we consider the *maggot-match-mucus* complex
and look beyond (Indo-) Europe, we find:

>Malay *amok* 'furious attack'  
Virginia Algonkin *attamusco* 'it is red'  
(Sp. fr.) Taino *maguey* an agave, source of pulque  
Nahuatl *malacatl* 'spindle'  
(nat. name in) Yucat&aacute;n *max* 'weevil'  
Nahuatl *mecatl* 'rope'  
Nahuatl *mexcalli* 'mescal'  
Gullah *moco* 'magic'  
Tupi *moco* 'mouse'  
Fula *moco'o* 'medicine man'  
Jap. *mogusa* 'moxa'  
Mass. Algonkin *m'skok* 'it is red'  
(Pg. fr.) Tupi *mu&ccedil;urana* 'cord'  
Turk. *muhat* 'mucus'  
Jap. *mushi* 'bug'  
Nahuatl *negual* 'demon'  
Nahuatl *nextli* 'ashes'  
Taino *nigua* 'chigoe'  
(nat. name in) S. Afr. *noki* 'rock rat'  
Turk. *s&uuml;m&uuml;k* 'mucus'  
Kongo *timuka* 'fly' 

Or, when we glance at the *bang-bogey-bug-funk-punk*
complex, there are also:

>Tshiluba *bwanga* 'charm, fetish'  
Chin. *fang&sup1;* 'medicine'  
Turk. *fingirdek* 'fickle, playful'  
Turk. *fink* 'joy; wild'  
Quechua *ppiqui* 'Mauritius hemp'  
Del. *punk* 'ashes'  
Atjehnese *&umacr;eng* 'beetle'  
Kimbundu *wanga* 'witchcraft'

And, looking at *tick*, we find:

>Malay *a&#92;?&#92;akka, a&#92;?&#92;ekka* 'betel palm'
(of Afr. orig.) *djigga* 'jigger'  
Turk. *gidiklamak* 'to tickle'  
Wolof *jiga* 'insect'  
Yoruba *ji&sup1;ga&sup3;* 'jigger'  
Tupi *tacyba* 'ant'  
Nahuatl *tecamaca* 'incense'  
Turk. *tike* 'spot'  
Maori and Marquesan *tiki* 'idol'  
Tag. and Bisayan *tiki-tiki* an alcoholic beverage  
Turk. *tiksirmak* 'to sneeze'  
Turk. *tiksirmek* 'to loathe, feel disgust'  
Turk. *titiz* 'fussy, ticklish'  
Turk. *tiz* 'rash, sharp, spunky'  
Nahuatl *tlalaxin* 'tick'  
Xosa *utikoloshe* a friendly spirit residing in rivers  
Nahuatl *xico* 'bee'  
Papuan *zogo* 'god'  
(nat. name in) Altai Mts. *zokor* 'mole rat'

With the exception of the Turkish words, all the
foregoing were found during random raids on the etymological
entries in Webster's Third International Dictionary.
A more purposeful search through Turkish
dictionaries turned up a great many related groups of
words which show Haoma-Soma-mushroom-cult links.  A
few of them are

>*ben* 'freckle, spot, bait'  
*bendetmek* 'to bind, fascinate'  
*bengi* 'immortal'  
*benk* 'henbane, bhang'  
*ba&gbreve;i* 'magic'  
*b&ouml;cek* 'bug'  
*b&ouml;&gbreve;* 'poisonous spider'  
*b&uuml;velik, b&uuml;ye, b&uuml;yelik* 'bot'  
*b&uuml;y&uuml;* 'sorcery'  
*odluba&gbreve;a* 'toad' (O. Turk. odlu 'poisonous, fiery')  
*dolama* 'felon, hangnail'  
*dolaman* 'truffle; boil, tumor'  
*dolan* 'deceit, swindle, dole'  
*fit* 'incitement'  
*fitil* 'wick'  
*fitil almak* lit.  'to take wick; to become furious'  
*fitil olmak* lit. 'to become wick; to become very drunk'  
*fitil fitil burundan gelmak* lit.  'to come wick wick  
from the nose; to pay for (something)
&ldquo;through the nose&rdquo;  
*ha&scedil;a* 'blasphemy'  
*ha&scedil;arat* 'vermin'  
*ha&scedil;efe* 'penis'  
*ha&scedil;ha&scedil;* 'opium poppy'  
*ha&scedil;ari* 'wicked'  
*ha&scedil;i&scedil;* 'bhang, hashish'  
*ha&scedil;yet* 'awe, dread'  
*humar* 'stupor'  
*humma* 'fever; fire'  
*h&uuml;ma* 'phoenix, bird of paradise; lofty, exalted'  
*umaci* lit.  ' &ldquo;uma&rdquo;-man; bugbear, bogey'  
*i&scedil;emek* 'to urinate'  
*i&scedil;emi&scedil;* past participle of isemek; i.e., 'pissed'  
*i&scedil;&uuml;m&uuml;&scedil;* 'orgy, revel'  
*kibrit* 'match; god'  
*ahmer kibriti* lit.  'red match; the philosopher's stone'  
*peri* 'fairy'  
*peri&scedil;an* 'perturbed'  
*pervane* 'moth'  
*perve* 'fear, dread'  
*soma* 'first draw of unflavored raki from the still'  
*somat* 'feast, food'  
*somata* 'almond or pumpkin-seed sherbet'  
*zom* 'dead-drunk'

It seems likely that similar fossilized remains of
those ancient religious practices may be found in many
other non-Indo-European languages.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The fact that no consumer advocate has yet strode
forth to defend and protect the interests of those who can
afford a $30,000 coupe is probably not the least bit surprising.&rdquo;
[From an advertisement for BMW in *The New Yorker*,
March 24, 1980.  Submitted by D. L. Emblen, Santa Rosa,
California.  *It is surprising, though, that no advocate of
proper English has stridden forth to replace that
copywriter.*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

BLOCK PATROLLED BY UNIFORM GUARDS.—Sign on East
94th Street, New York City.  [Submitted by Norman A.
Ross, New York City.]

## Revolting Arabs, Injured Livers, and Streaking Indians
*Harold J. Ellner, M.D., Richland, Washington*

How often does one see a headline which, if the
text were not read, would inspire one to misconstrue the
meaning?  The late Theodore M. Bernstein called these
&ldquo;two-faced heads&rdquo; in *Winners &amp; Sinners,* an occasional
newsletter issued from his desk at *The New York Times,*
where he was Assistant Managing Editor.  Un-Januslike,
these double headers can scarcely be regarded as household
gods, lares and penates guarding access to that
abode where our common sense resides.  What would or
could a visitor from outer space (or even from the next
parking space) make of this headline in *The Pittsburgh
Press* on the day following Election Day 1980?

>REAGAN ROLLS UP HUGE VICTORY;  
>SPECTER TOPS STATE GOP SURGE

One suspects that Reagan and his Republican colleagues
had help from a revenant from the Great
Beyond.  A later headline casts aspersions on the President's
golf game:

>REAGAN FIRES 1,845

One might expect the following head in Chicago, the
Windy City, but this one led into an AP dispatch
published in a Washington newspaper:

>PENTAGON WON'T MOVE GAS
>
>(Gastroenterologists please copy.)

The paraphernalia of sports being what it is, the reader
may easily become convinced that Central American
politics might well have taken on the trappings of
athletic events, deposed officials carrying away whatever
they can lay their hands on:

>SOMOZA IS REPORTEDLY READY    
TO FLEE WITH SUPPORTERS

Audrey of the same name might be pleased (surprised?)
to learn that

>JOCKS SPILL AT MEADOWS

Rodolfo, Colline, et al. would probably have had less
sympathy for their heroine had they known about her
first husband's shenanigans:

>MIMI'S FIRST TOSSES JOCK—AFTER VICTORY

Moving right along, we have all been impressed by
Pope John Paul's vigor; does his versatility know no
bounds?

>POPE'S 63-YARD PUNT RETURN SPARKS EAST WIN

... and, as any Oxonian can tell you, 63-yard punts are a
rarity on the Isis.

Indecent exposure (except of the feet) imperils clean
sport, as this banner bears witness:

>STREAKING LYNN LEADS SOX

Staunchly maintaining that white man's inhumanity is
for the birds,

>STREAKING INDIANS RIP JAYS

The line has been drawn, we are pleased to note,
against participation by athletes in the face of major
organ impairment, reported as

>INJURED LIVERS MAY NOT PLAY

There is an etymology afoot for *kick the bucket* holding
that *bucket* comes from French *bouchet,* some sort of
frame on which animals were strung up for slaughtering
in the abattoirs of Paris (or of the Midwest).  It appears
that the uncooperative beasts were known to &ldquo;kick the
bouchet, or bucket&rdquo; in their death throes.  Little wonder,
then, at this news from Fayetteville, Arkansas:

>TWO PORKERS SUSPENDED

Representatives of Walesa's Solidarity have surfaced in
Washington state:

>DAMAGED POLE BLACKS OUT OKANOGAN VALLEY

Hepatitis being a somewhat less than desirable affliction,
one can be only grateful for the health authorities
who forbid the taking of clams, oysters, etc., in our tidal
waters.  But this is going a bit too far:

>WARNING ON ALL SOUND SHELLFISH

And leave it to the Californians to take the Equal Rights
business just one step too far:

>HOMOSEXUAL TO REPLACE MILK

The Pacific Northwest being what it is, this intelligence
from the *Seattle Post-Intelligencer* (Oct. 17, 1980) need
not be viewed with alarm:

>CHIPS FLY AS BEAVERS AND DICKS MEET

And, finally, it would appear to be in doubt whether
penal institutions had the right to incarcerate those with
the pox:

>ESCAPE ARTIST BELIEVED SPOTTED

—at least one might expect an accurate diagnosis.

## Graphonics No. 2
*Axel Hornos*

*In the first paragraph of the story below there are
five words which, when paired with five words in the second
paragraph, form, phonetically, five new words.
You'll find these words in the third paragraph, but in the
guise of synonyms.*

&ldquo;Look, Mother,&rdquo; said Maud proudly, &ldquo;I've just
finished my first dress.  I worked at it all through the
afternoon.&rdquo;  After a short pause she went on, &ldquo;You know,
it occurred to me that I should add to my weekly income
by sewing for others.  Besides, it's great fun.  I hope you
won't argue the point, won't you?&rdquo;

Mrs. Wilson turned the garment around.  There was
some tension in her voice as she said, &ldquo;I know you meant
well, but on the other hand one mustn't lean too much
toward indulgence in this matter.  The fact is, there are
still a few things to be done in the dress.  For instance,
the pleat is missing in the skirt, and the trimming around
the neckline too.  These details are most important.&rdquo;

She smiled.  &ldquo;I don't want to sound preachy, and being
sentimental wouldn't help a bit.  You must learn that
a job like this requires a great deal of concentration,
since an unfinished dress isn't much better than no dress
at all.  But let's put an end to this discussion: it's nearly
six o'clock and dinner is waiting.&rdquo;

## Proper Names into Adjectives
*Don Salper, California State University, Northridge*

The use of the adjective *Fonsecaian* by Michael
Gorman in his lead article on the book by Jose da
Fonseca in VERBATIM [VII, 4] deepened my pondering
on the precariousness of becoming famous.  Before one
knows it, one's proud family name can be turned into an
unfortunate adjective.  On first sight, proofreader's error
might seem to save this one, but a second look (and
attempted utterance) reveals a five-syllable throat-stopper.

Oh, we have become quite used to *Shakespearean*
and *Freudian and Einsteinian,* and maybe &ldquo;getting used
to&rdquo; is what it takes, because some &ldquo;proper adjectives&rdquo;
that have recently appeared in print or on the air are not
easily assimilable, and not only for reasons of sheer
pronounceability.  I submit the following examples:

>Saul Bellow and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow
have been modified into the modifiers *Bellovian* and
*Longfellovian.*

Film directors have been said to work &ldquo;in the
*Mankiewiczian* style&rdquo; or &ldquo;the *Hitchcokian* tradition.&rdquo;

Composer Gustav Mahler transmutes to *Mahlerian,*
and this sentence appears in a review: &ldquo;Conductor
George Solti knows the secret of tightening the *Mahlerian*
sprawl and tempering the *Mahlerian* bombast without
devaluing the *Mahlerian* spirit.&rdquo;  After reading this,
one feels vaguely overcome by a tropical disease.

Those who follow in the footsteps of or are likened
to Swiss learning theorist Jean Piaget (pee-ah-ZHAY)
have been called in print *Piagetian*.  Now, is this to be
said &ldquo;pee-ah-ZHAY-shun&rdquo; or &ldquo;pee-ah-ZHAY-tee-uhn&rdquo; or
perhaps, to honor the original pronunciation of the
name, &ldquo;pee-ah-ZHAY-ee-uhn&rdquo;?  This last repeats the case
of *Fonsecaian*.  The mouth wants to say &ldquo;fon-SECK-ee-uhn&rdquo;
and &ldquo;pee-ah-ZHAY-uhn,&rdquo; but the spelling won't let
it.

It is somehow demeaning to the reputation and
memory of one of the world's greatest conductors when
his style is referred to as *Toscaninian*.

Somewhere along the way *Aristotelian* stopped
sounding peculiar, and perhaps the same happy fate
awaits author Bernard Malamud.  Meanwhile,
*Malamudian* doesn't quite make it.  Maybe a little inventiveness
is in order for some of these newly famous
names.  In this instance, how about *Malamudic?*  That
seems to me perfect, borrowed from the manner of
*Platonic,* yet with *Talmudic* overtones.

Now, I have seen *Frostean* for Robert Frost, which
doesn't ring quite right, at least yet.  So one tries out
&ldquo;Frostlike,&rdquo; gets playful with &ldquo;Frosted,&rdquo; and hurtles
ahead to &ldquo;Frozen.&rdquo;

And what about philosopher Martin Buber?  I have
heard *Buberian* on the radio, which is pretty bad.
&ldquo;Buberic&rdquo; would be no better.  &ldquo;Bubonic?&rdquo;  At this point,
I rise to my *Salperean* heights (&ldquo;Look, Ma, I'm
famous!&rdquo;) ... and quit.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...Simply slip it through your arm.&rdquo;  [From a mail-order
catalog advertisement for a doughnut-shaped
Bisque Wine Cooler, published by *The Stitchery*, Wellesley,
Massachusetts.  Submitted by Nancy B. Watson, Colebrook, New Hampshire.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Abbreviations Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/abbreviations-dictionary/author/sola-ralph/)
Ralph De Sola, (Sixth Edition, Elsevier North-Holland, 1981), xvi + 966pp.

This is a useful book and should appeal to the
individual or library acquisitions director with a limited
budget.  Listing &ldquo;over 178,000 entries,&rdquo; it is somewhat
less complete than Gale Research Company's *Initialisms
&amp; Acronyms Dictionary,* which contains &ldquo;over
211,000 entries,&rdquo; with an additional 13,000 in a *Supplement*.
A complementary volume to the Gale work is
*Reverse Abbreviations...*, in which one can find the
abbreviations if the full form of the term is known.  The
Gale book is more expensive, but it offers more.

There are some curious, though interesting, appendices
to the De Sola work that, as far as we could tell,
haven't the remotest connection with abbreviations.  For
example, &ldquo;American Eponyms, Nicknames, and Sobriquets&rdquo;
lists less than two pages' worth of items like
*American Historical Painter:* Emmanuel Lentz&eacute;, and
*American Prose-Poetry Novelist:* Thomas Wolfe.  &ldquo;Birth-stones—Ancient
and Modern,&rdquo; &ldquo;Capitals of Nations,
Provinces, Places, and States,&rdquo; &ldquo;Civil and Military Time
Systems Compared,&rdquo; &ldquo;Nations of the World and Nationalities,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Superlatives&rdquo; (starting with *Africa's Easternmost
City* and ending with *Youngest Province)*, and
&ldquo;Winds of the World.&rdquo;  However useful these may be,
they have no abbreviations associated with them, and it
is unclear why they have been included.

Turning to the main text of the book, we found
missing such items as *ILA,* International Linguistic Association,
*BAAL,* British Association for Applied Linguistics,
and others.  Included is *ADI,* American
Documentation Institute, the former name (till about
1966, as far as we can recall) of the *ASIS,* American
Society for Information Science, but with no indication
that the name has been out of use for 15 years.  That is to
say, the abbreviation ought to be in for bibliographic
and other reasons, but its defunct status should be
noted.

Although entitled *Abbreviations Dictionary,* it contains,
even in the main part of the book, a great deal of
material that has nothing to do with abbreviations.  Some
of these are just plain silly (*Asia's big five:* elephant,
leopard, rhinoceros, tiger, water buffalo; *porte&ntilde;os:*
(Spanish—port people)—in Argentina means the people
of Buenos Aires and in Chile those of Valparaiso), others
of such strange provenance that one wonders how anyone
looking for them could expect them to be in this
book (*Portage La Prairie Girls:* Correctional Centre for
Women at Portage La Prairie, Manitoba).  Among the
abbreviations we find *poop.:* nincompoop, and *ZZZ-ZZZ-ZZZ:*
sawing or snoring (cartoonist symbol).  With a
heavy interlarding of such extraneous matter—including
stage names, pseudonyms, and other paraphernalia—
occupying about 30 per cent of the book, the actual
number of entries is closer to 125,000; moreover, our
count showed about 100,000 entries (average of 100 per
page times 966 pages), not the 178,000 claimed.  Thus,
the number of actual abbreviations listed seems to be
about 70,000.

Withal, the book contains much useful information
and is quite handy and compact.


### OBITER DICTA: *Onomastica Nervosa*
*[L.U.]*

Naming the baby?  Want to discover the meaning of
your given name?  There are many books available—
some quite good—that provide etymological information
about names.  It is interesting to note, however, that
given names themselves have given rise to denotative
and are associated with connotative uses in the language.
We are not including words coming from the
names of particular people, like *einsteinium, watt,
curium, henry,* and other eponyms: we refer here only
to first names that have acquired meanings of their own
or that, by association, have acquired special connotations.
The following list is not exhaustive, but it is a
beginning; readers may wish to offer addenda.  The label
*connotative* is inserted to indicate those words and
meanings that come from a source other than the name
in the headword but are nonetheless closely associated
with it.

*Abigail,* ladies' maid.

*Albert,* *Prince Albert,* long-tailed frock coat.

*Alexander,* cocktail made with cream, cr&egrave;me de cacao,
and gin or brandy.  Also called *brandy Alexander.*

*Bennie,* 1. overcoat.  Also, jocular, *Benjamin.* 2. (*connotative)*
benzedrine; any stimulant.  3.  *Benjamin,*
benzoin.

*Betty,* baked dessert, e.g., apple brown betty.

*Bill,* *(connotative)* invoice.

*Cassandra,* *(connotative)* bearer of bad prophecy.

*Charlie, Charley,* 1.  *Charlie horse,* leg cramp. 2. *good-time
Charlie,* (a) someone intent on the pursuit of
enjoyment, usually at the exclusion of more worthwhile
activity.  (b) a fair-weather friend.

*Dagmar(s),* torpedolike bumperguard(s) on old Cadillac.

*Dottie, Dotty,* crazy; daft.

*Ernest,* *(connotative)* earnest.

*Frank,* *(connotative)* frank; candid.

*George,* 1. Also, *real George.* wonderful, marvelous. 2.
*(in oaths)* by George!

*Guy,* 1. any male (or, recently, female). 2. a strengthening
support of wire or rope.

*Hector,* pester.

*Jack,* 1. any male.  2. lifting device.  3. *Jack-in-the-box,*
children's game.  6. *jumping jack,* children's toy. 7.
*union jack,* special kind of flag.  8. *Union Jack,*
national flag of Britain.  9. *jack off* (from *jerk off)*
masturbate.

*Jake,* okay.

*Jane,* 1. any female.  2. *plain Jane,* any unattractive
female.

*Jenny, Jennie,* 1. *(connotative)* spinning jenny.  2. *(connotative)
Genny, Genoa*. large jibsail.

*Jerry,* *(connotative) Jerry-built.*

*Jimmy,* 1. a burglar's crow-bar.  2. *(Australian)* an
immigrant.

*Joe,* 1. any male, esp. in a good *Joe*.  2. (Brit. equiv.,
*Tommy Atkins)* *G.I.Joe,* private in the infantry.  3. *Joe
Blow* (from the Windy City).

*John,* 1. prostitute's customer.  2. toilet.  3. *Dear John
letter,* a note of farewell to a former lover or spouse.  4.
any male.  5. *John Bull,* symbol of Great Britain.

*Johnnie, Johnny,* 1. *stage-door Johnnie*, someone who
loiters about the stage door of a theater, usually a fan
or suitor of one of the performers.  2. a child's potty.  3.
*johnnycake,* a fried cornmeal cake.  4. *Johnny-comelately,*
last-minute participant.  5. *Johnny-jump-up,*
either of two kinds of flower.  6. *Johnny-on-the-spot,*
someone who is present and willing to do something. 7. *Johnny Reb,* (a) a Confederate soldier.  (b) any
southerner.

*John Thomas,* penis.

*Jonah,* bad luck.

*Jonathan,* *Brother Jonathan,* symbol of America.

*Judy,* any girl (e.g., *This Judy is by no means a rutabaga.*—Damon
Runyon).

*Larry,* call made at the start of a children's game, as in
marbles, the first to say it claiming the right to play
first.

*Laurence,* blackish, shimmering reflection seen at the
surface of a paved road on a hot summer's day.

*Lulu,* 1. outstanding example of its kind.  2. perquisite of
an elected official.

*Magdalene,* (&ldquo;maudlin&rdquo; silly, tearful sentimentality.

*Mary,* 1. *Bloody Mary,* cocktail made with tomato juice
and vodka.  2. *Virgin Mary,* a Bloody Mary without the
vodka.  3. male homosexual.

*Mary Jane,* marijuana.

*Matilda,* *Waltz(ing) Matilda (Australian),* swag or hobo's
bundle on a stick.

*Mickey, Mick,* 1. Irishman.  2. potato, esp. when baked
in the coals of an open fire.  3. *take the Mickey out of,
(Br.)* ridicule.

*Molly,* 1. a sleevelike expansion plug for fastening a
screw into plaster or plasterboard.  2. *(connotative)* an
aquarium fish.

*Nancy, Nance,* *(Br.)* pimp or homosexual.

*Patsy,* sucker; dupe.

*Pete,* *Sneaky Pete,* cheap wine, as that drunk by
derelicts.

*Peter,* 1. penis.  2. *peter out,* diminish.

*Phoebe,* bird.

*Pierre,* *Lucky Pierre,* &ldquo;always in the middle.&rdquo;

*Reuben,* sandwich of hot corned beef, sauerkraut, and
melted cheese.

*Roger,* okay; understood.

*Sam,* *Uncle Sam,* symbol of America.

*Simon,* 1. *simony,* buying or selling sacred articles.  2.

*Simple Simon,* nursery-rhyme character.  3. *Simon sez,*
children's game.

*Susan,* *lazy Susan,* circular tray on a pivot.

*Suzie,* *Suzie Q,* dance step.

*Tom,* 1. *(connotative) tomfoolery,* horseplay.  2. *(connotative)*
tommyrot, nonsense.  3. *Tommy Atkins,* British
G.I. Joe.  4. *Tom and Jerry,* cocktail; cartoon characters. 5. male of the cat family.  6. *tomcat,* behave like a
rou&eacute;.

*Tom, Dick, and Harry,* just about anybody.

*Veronica,* 1. plant.  2. (a) image of Christ on a handkerchief.
(b) the handkerchief itself.  3. special kind of
pass in bullfighting.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our authoritative appraisal (on our letterhead) is
essential for appropriate insurance and your own piece
of mind.  An appointment is necessary for this important
service.&rdquo;  [From an advertisement for Jacobs, jewelers,
in the Minneapolis Tribune, January 18, 1981.  Submitted
by Laura D. Platt, St. Paul.  *As we've been telling
you, what this country needs is a good five-cent
prefrontal lobotomy.*]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard*

I agree with most lexicographers that usage rules.
That is rather like Margaret Fuller's declaration: &ldquo;I
accept the universe&rdquo;—and Carlyle's comment: &ldquo;By God!
she'd better.&rdquo;  Horace said it before we did in *The Art of
Poetry:* Language changes

>&ldquo;si volet usus,  
quem penes arbitrium est et ius et norma  
loquendi.&rdquo;

For those without an old-fashioned English gent's education:
Language changes if usage wants it to, for usage
has the authority and the rule and the government of
language.  However, I do not go along with the linguistic
relativism that all usage is equally good, that all change
is for the better in language, and that a language is
perfect for the uses of those who are speaking and
writing it now.  Some change seems to me to be for the
worse.  For example, in my country and I think yours,
the subjunctive appears to be dying.  In *The Times,* we
ignore or misuse it continually, so confusing the readers
and vexing the old fogeys.  Here are some recent examples
to show what I mean.

&ldquo;It may well have not happened last weekend, but
it was bloody well going to happen some time&rdquo;; a
middle-ranking policeman was speaking after the riots
in Brixton.  In fact it *did* happen last weekend.  He would
have made his point without ambiguity if he had said:
&ldquo;It might well have not happened....&rdquo;

From our Legal Correspondent on the front page of
*The Times:* &ldquo;The judge can insist that the trial continues.&rdquo;
He would have been &ldquo;correct&rdquo; and annoyed our
punctilious readers less, and caused me fewer letters to
answer, if he had written either that the judge can insist
the trial continue, or should continue.

From a soccer report: &ldquo;From this penalty Sorensen
scored a goal that may not have come by other means.&rdquo;
That is puzzling, but not misleading.  But how about
(footy again): &ldquo;In a melee in the six-yard area a goal may
have been scored.&rdquo;?  That *may* suggests to those who
use the subjunctive that the ball possibly crossed the
goal-line without the referee or the linesmen seeing it.
All that the writer meant was that with a little bit of luck
and a good bounce the ball might or could have been
put in the back of the net.  This could become serious if
we wrote of some public figure that he may have taken
bribes, when all that we mean is that he might have
taken bribes, if he had been dishonourable.

From our Political Editor: &ldquo;Now the Government
cannot tailor its announcements to Labour's internal
measure; but practically they may have done better to
wait until after Monday....&rdquo;  They might have done
better, and so might Fred Emery.

Peter Hain: &ldquo;Had it not been for the media's willingness
to report news of the charge in the sceptical
terms they did, I *may* not have been acquitted.&rdquo;  But you
*were* acquitted, dammit, Peter.

I think I can understand why this confusion of *may*
and *might* and of the indicative and subjunctive generally
has arisen, apart from the fact that our children are
no longer taught prescriptive grammar in school.  When
used in the present tense, *may* and *might* are almost
interchangeable.  &ldquo;He may come&rdquo; differs from &ldquo;he might
come&rdquo; by only a slight degree of probability.  But when
used in the past tense, as in reporting or any narrative,
*may* indicates uncertainty in the mind of the speaker at
the moment of speaking, as in, *He may have sent her
flowers on her birthday; but I have no means of
knowing whether he did or not.  Might* indicates a
possibility that lay in the power of the doer at the time
of the action described, as in, *He might have sent her
flowers on her birthday, but the slacker was too idle or
too mean to do so.*  By muddling the present and the
past uses, we darken our meaning.

Language does not decay and fall, like the woods in
autumn or the Roman Empire.  Decay and decadence
are not illuminating metaphors to apply to language—or,
for that matter, to civilizations.  But it does seem to me
that some of the changes in usage are changes for the
worse, because they reduce the number of fine discriminations
available to users of the language.  I take the
decline in the exact use of the subjunctive to be such a
change for the worse.  However, if the loss of the
subjunctive leaves a serious gap in the language, as it
surely will, usage will find a way of filling the gap.
*Natura vacuum abhorret* in language as in physics.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;LOST &amp; FOUND—Found vicinity of 24th-28th &amp;
South, male brindle Boxer, wearing choke chain with
broken lease.&rdquo;  [From the *Sunday Journal and Star*,
Lincoln, Nebraska, January 4, 1981.  Submitted by Doris
Cole, Lincoln.  *Landlord problems?*]


### OBITER DICTA: *Foreword*

The year of 1982, whatever other significance it may
hold in store for us, marks the centenary of the plan for
*The Century Dictionary,* one of the most impressive
works of lexicography ever published and, undoubtedly,
one of the best.  Certainly, it is the most comprehensive
dictionary ever published in America, and those fortunate
enough to own a well-reserved set of this massive,
ten-volume book can attest to the incomparable quality
of its definitions, citations, and illustrations; the number
of sets surviving in good condition are a tribute to the
craft of bookmaking—the heavy durable boards, sturdy
binding, high-quality paper, and other ingredients that
have allowed the *Century* to withstand almost a century
of use.

The first edition was published in 1889, and supplementary
matter was added till the last printing in 1911.
Also, two supplementary volumes were produced, a
*Cyclopedia of Names* (in 1894) and an *Atlas and Gazetteer*
(in 1897).  With these additions, the title of the
entire work was changed to *The Century Dictionary
and Cyclopedia.*

It is with special pride that we are able to present to
the readers of VERBATIM advance notice of the
reprinting of this important dictionary: Gale Research
Company, of Detroit, will publish a facsimile reprint of
the entire work (exclusive of the *Atlas and Gazetteer)* in
1982.  Robert A.  Fowkes, Professor Emeritus of Germanic
Languages, New York University, has prepared a
Preface for the reprint, and we are pleased to have
obtained permission from the publisher to print it in this
issue of VERBATIM.  Professor Fowkes's name is, of
course, familiar to our readers.  But it should be made
clear that our reason for publishing his Preface here is
that it is, in itself, an important statement about the
English language, for it details information that is often
overlooked and only rarely documented.

It must be emphasized that the *Century* will not be
offered as a relic (in the way that a reprint of Johnson's
*Dictionary* might): it is a vast, useful resource, providing
access to information about English that is difficult
to find in most other sources.  To be sure, it has its
shortcomings—Professor Fowkes points out the faults in
the pronunciation system and the fact that, lacking the
data that has since become available, some of its etymologies
could scarcely be said to reflect the latest in
scholarship.  Furthermore, users will not find terms like
*transistor, gridlock*, and *electronic banking* in its pages,
because they did not exist at the turn of the century.
Nonetheless, the *Century's* definitions are a model of
clarity and, as Professor Fowkes points out, its citations
were adduced to illustrate a particular context, syntactic
relationship, or nuance of meaning lacking in the selection
of citations for a work like the *Oxford English
Dictionary*, which, being a dictionary based on historical
principles, was largely satisfied to find the earliest
instances of word uses assignable to a particular meaning.
Professor Fowkes comments on the differences and
similarities between the *Century* and the *OED*, but
readers should take heed of an essential distinction
between the two works: the *Century* was conceived and
executed as a reference book for everyone to use; the
*OED*, both in concept and execution, is a reference book
for scholars of the English language, and it consequently
contains huge quantities of information—especially
etymological information—of little use to those
unable to bring to the book a working knowledge of Old
and Middle English, Sanskrit, Greek, Latin, Arabic, and
the other languages reproduced in their original forms
in its etymologies.

As for their comparable ages, during the period of
publication of the *Century,* 1889-1911, letters A through
R of the *OED* were published, with parts of S and T.
Thus, almost 89 per cent of the *OED* is older than the
last editions of the *Century.*  To be sure, the *OED
Supplement* of 1935 provided up-to-date materials for
the earlier parts of the alphabet, but not a great deal for
the latter parts.  The current *Supplement,* now available
in two volumes (A-G and H-N), effectively brings the
earlier parts more up to date than did the earlier
*Supplement*, which it includes.

Notwithstanding, the *Century Dictionary and
Cyclopedia* is a monumental work of lexicography, and
we can all be grateful to Gale Research Company for
making the reprint available.

For those segments of the language that have not
changed, the *Century* remains an accurate, well-written,
and easy-to-use dictionary for the modern reader.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Preface
*Robert A. Fowkes*

The appearance of the Century Dictionary once
more in its renowned second edition is a cause for
congratulations all around.  To many of us who have long
been browsers and readers of its fascinating pages the
event is a source of gratification.  For the *Century* is
decidedly a dictionary to be read and enjoyed and not
merely consulted on occasion.  Despite claims frequently
heard that dictionaries are &ldquo;made to be used
rather than read,&rdquo; even the ones uttering those claims
will admit that they themselves are at times tempted to
browse in some dictionaries—not all, because dictionaries
vary widely in their readability.  The appearance of
the *Century* invites us to read in it—its typography, its
illustrations, the arrangement of its articles all render it
extremely attractive.  It has none of the forbidding aspect
of dry pedantry that often turns readers away from
dictionaries or confines their use of them to brief consultation
on some specific point, with no inclination to read
on or to dip into other sections.

Dictionaries probably increase in readability as they
become more encyclopedic, thus perhaps trespassing on
the territory of the encyclopedia itself.  There are dictionary
makers who aim at rigorously excluding all
encyclopedic material, and some useful dictionaries
have, admittedly, been produced on the basis of such
separation of functions.

The *Century Dictionary,* however, had no such
reservations from the start.  Its design originated in 1882.
Thus the word *century* has, fortuitously and *ex post
facto,* a special pertinence to our time.  It was to be a
&ldquo;general&rdquo; work, one for &ldquo;every literary and practical
use.&rdquo;  It was intended to include encyclopedic matter,
not to exclude it.  In an age that was, in some ways, more
fortunate than our own, space was not a primary concern.
There was no need to curtail definitions to allow
room for etymologies, nor the reverse.  As the work
progressed, its size and scope extended far beyond the
limits originally foreseen, and the expansion evidently
had the blessing of the publisher, Roswell Smith, president
of the Century Company.  I have not been able to
verify the assertion that the Century Company had
made a fortune on the *Century Magazine* and was
looking for a venture in which to invest the profits.  It
was, at any rate, a suggestion of Mr. Smith himself that
led to the project in the first place.  The plan was to
adapt to American needs and conditions a British work,
the *Imperial Dictionary* by John Ogilvie, as revised by
Charles Annandale.  The Century Company had actually
reprinted Annandale's version in the United States.
Blackie &amp; Son, publisher of the English work, then
granted the *Century Dictionary* permission to use material
from the *Imperial Dictionary.*  There may be some
slight irony in that permission, for allegations had been
made by certain American copyright owners that the
*Imperial* had itself made excessive use of protected
matter.  The publishers of the *Century Dictionary,* however,
apparently made proper arrangements with those
owners, as a statement on the reverse of the title page
reveals.  This points to the intriguing circumstance that
the British dictionary of which the *Century* was to be an
adaptation was itself in large measure dependent on
American materials, and some lexical chickens came
home to roost.  As a matter of fact, the *Imperial Dictionary*
was based upon Webster.  In 1838 Blackie &amp; Son
had asked John Ogilvie to undertake a revised and
augmented version of Noah Webster's *American Dictionary
of the English Language.*  Ogilvie finally utilized
the 1841 edition of Webster, the last one the author
himself amended and corrected, for Webster died in
1843.  Ogilvie's *Imperial Dictionary, English, Technological,
&amp; Scientific, Adapted to the present State of
Literature, Science, and Art; on the basis of Webster's
English Dictionary* (a somewhat peculiarly worded title,
it must be admitted), was issued in parts, beginning in
1847, and published in complete form in 1850.  A supplement
followed in 1855.  (The mere appearance of
Webster's name on the title page was no guarantee that
a work was really based upon the dictionaries of the
American lexicographer.  For example, the great rival of
Webster, Joseph Emerson Worcester, found to his dismay
that the English publisher of his *Universal Dictionary*
had printed a statement on the title page of that
work that it was &ldquo;compiled&rdquo; from the materials of Noah
Webster, a charge—or boast—that Worcester insisted
was quite untrue.  It was apparently a &ldquo;selling point&rdquo; in
England to claim connection with Webster!) At any rate,
the modifications and improvements introduced by Dr.
Ogilvie did not, it seems, greatly alter the size or nature
of Webster's dictionary but did impart a somewhat more
encyclopedic character to it and embodied additional
technical terms.  One outstanding feature on which the
*Imperial* prided itself was the inclusion of a great
number of pictorial illustrations, a feature described in
the preface to Annandale's revised edition as distinguishing
it from all other English dictionaries.  Yet it was
conceded that the idea was not entirely new: Nathaniel
Bailey had used woodcuts in the two-volume edition of
his *Universal Etymological English Dictionary*
(1726-27), chiefly to illustrate heraldic and mathematical
terms.  Subsequent editions of Bailey, notably *Dictionarium
Britannicum* (&ldquo;collected by several hands,&rdquo;1730)
had woodcuts illustrating terms of chemistry, architecture,
military installations, and mechanics, in addition to
heraldry and mathematics.  Bailey himself certainly had
predecessors in the use of illustrations.  It is often
difficult to discover the real beginning of a practice.
Nevertheless, Ogilvie expanded the practice greatly.

In its first edition, the *Imperial Dictionary* enjoyed
considerable success and was widely regarded as a
standard lexicon of English.  For a quarter of a century it
was steadily bought, and presumably read, by the public.
The time was really ripe for such a work, because
the ones previously available in Britain were either
American imports or revisions of Samuel Johnson's
venerable dictionary.  There had been a noteworthy
exception, that of Charles Richardson (1836-37), one
characterized by copious quotations.  Despite its merits,
Richardson's work for some reason did not achieve the
recognition that might have been expected, and its
effect on lexicography in England was only slight, other
dictionary makers preferring to emulate Johnson or
Webster.  They did not even take advantage of his
wealth of quotations, which, according to the Historical
Introduction of the *OED*, were a &ldquo;natural storehouse&rdquo;
(for plundering?).  Yet some attention must have been
paid to Richardson by the *OED*, for we are told that the
original idea was to bring out a volume &ldquo;supplementary
to the later editions of Johnson or Richardson, and
containing words omitted in either of these
dictionaries.&rdquo;

When Ogilvie died (1867) he had been busy with a
revision of the *Imperial*.  That revision was then
entrusted to Charles Annandale, under whose editorship
the dictionary became essentially a new work.  Although
the additions were largely in the realm of scientific and
technological terminology, the new dictionary (1882-83)
also included works culled from literary writers, old and
new, not previously quoted.  Americanisms, foreign
words, even slang and colloquialisms were included,
provided they occurred in literature.  There was no effort
to collect words from speakers; attestation in respectable
print was the criterion.  New attention was paid by
Annandale to definitions and to the arrangement of
articles.  The *Century Dictionary* was often able to
include Annandale's definitions unaltered, at times
slightly emending them.  The engraved illustrations
were supplemented by numerous additions to those in
Ogilvie, and very many of them were used in the
*Century* too.  Mr. Robert Blackie was in charge of selection
and arrangement of most of the illustrations and did
his work creditably.

The *Imperial* aimed at catholicity and inclusiveness,
but the realistic admission was made that it was
impossible to contain all the words in every art and
science.  Still, the boast was that the work included far
more such words than the average reader was likely to
encounter in general literature, which was, of course, a
surmise.  As an encyclopedic work, it was to prove
valuable as a reference work and also to avoid the
charge often leveled against dictionaries of being unattractive
reading.  Thus the notion of the dictionary as a
book to be read has early precedent.  Some dictionaries
refer to their &ldquo;readers&rdquo;; in the seventeenth century they
were &ldquo;gentle readers.&rdquo;  In this consumer age, when
people &ldquo;use&rdquo; doctors, lawyers, plumbers, piano tuners,
and all the rest, it is not surprising to encounter &ldquo;user&rdquo;
to designate those who read or consult dictionaries, as
well as other terms like customers, buyers, owners,
clientele, consultants, and &ldquo;lookers-up.&rdquo;

*The Century Dictionary*

The *Century Dictionary* was especially fortunate in
having as its editor-in-chief William Dwight Whitney
(1827-94), who devoted most of the last decade of his
life to the task.  A member of a distinguished family
numbering several scholars and scientists among its
sons and daughters (Mt. Whitney was named for his
brother, Josiah Dwight Whitney, the geologist), Whitney
was for a time mainly interested in the natural sciences.
At the age of nineteen he began the study of medicine
in a doctor's office, as was often the custom.  The second
day of his study, however, he came down with the
measles and while convalescing picked up the Sanskrit
grammar by Franz Bopp, which his geologist brother
had intriguingly enough brought back from Germany
along with a few hundred other books.  Whitney seems
to have been fascinated by that Sanskirt grammar and
took it with him when he accompanied his brother on a
United States geological survey of the region of Lake
Superior in 1849.  Whitney acquired a respectable
knowledge of Sanskrit through self-instruction.  He went
to Yale for one year (after graduation from Williams) and
studied Sanskrit under Edward Elbridge Salisbury, who
himself had been a student of Franz Bopp in Germany.
In 1850 Whitney went to Germany, as so many American
graduate students did at the time, and studied for
three semesters in Berlin (with Bopp and others) and
two in T&uuml;bingen, where Rudolf Roth was his Sanskrit
professor.  After his return to the United States, Whitney
was appointed to a new chair of Sanskrit at Yale, a post
created through the efforts of his old professor, Edward
Elbridge Salisbury, who helped raise the funds
required.  Whitney occupied that post from 1854 to 1894,
resisting a tempting offer from Harvard in 1869.  While
in Germany he laid the foundation for much of his
subsequent scholarly research and publication, particularly
in Sanskrit, but also in the areas of linguistics,
modern languages, and lexicography.  Another special
enthusiasm of his was spelling reform.  The work that is
considered his main scholarly achievement, perhaps,
the *Sanskrit Grammar,* was published in Leipzig in
1879.  The publishers Breitkopf and H&auml;rtel were planning
a series of grammars of Indo-European languages
and aimed at having a leading expert as the author of
each.  It is significant that Whitney, an American, was
chosen to write the Sanskrit volume in that distinguished
series.  That the grammar is still valuable today,
more than a century later, is vindication of the wisdom
of their choice.  Recent writings on Sanskrit here and
abroad still recommend the book as a definitive work,
not merely as one with historical interest—as would
have to be said of Bopp's grammar, from which Whitney
derived his own first knowledge of Sanskrit.  A German
translation, by Heinrich Zimmer, followed the same
year (1879), and a revised edition by Whitney himself
(of the English work) appeared in 1889.

It has been said that Whitney was the first great
American linguist, and it would be difficult to refute that
assertion.  He was the first president of the American
Philological Association and served for many years as
corresponding secretary of the American Oriental Society,
edited its journal, and was also its president.  His
work in linguistics was outstanding and has been shown
to have anticipated several later developments, including
phonemics.  He was emphatic in distinguishing
between philology and linguistics, usually preferring to
call the latter the &ldquo;science of language.&rdquo;  This could
have been his equivalent for German *Sprachwissen-schaft,*
rather than an indication that he regarded the
subject as something akin to science in the English
sense.  But there is evidence in his writings that he
favored grouping linguistics with sciences like chemistry
and geology.  His book *The Life and Growth of
Language,* with the subtitle *An Outline of Linguistic
Science* (1875), was translated into six languages and
enjoyed international esteem.

Although Whitney's linguistic method in many of
his prolific writings was synchronic, descriptive, and
statistical, this book shows a lively concern with comparative
and historical matters as well as considerable
skill in setting them forth, often for the &ldquo;general
reader.&rdquo;  He also made important contributions to the
tremendous seven-volume Sanskrit dictionary of Otto
B&ouml;htlingk and Rudolf Roth (St. Petersburg, 1879-1889),
commonly referred to as the &ldquo;St. Petersburg Dictionary.&rdquo;
As early as 1864 he had shown his skill as a writer
of definitions for the Webster edition of that year.

As editor-in-chief of the *Century,* Whitney was
largely responsible for devising the plan of the work and
for seeing that all aspects of the project (orthography,
pronunciation, definitions, etymologies, arrangement of
articles, etc.) were carried out in keeping with that plan.
He also read all the proofs.

All the features that had been claimed to be strikingly
successful in the *Imperial* were adopted and
enhanced in the *Century*.  The first duty of the *Century*
as a comprehensive dictionary was to be &ldquo;collection, not
selection,&rdquo; and it was considered better to err on the
side of inclusiveness than of narrow exclusiveness.  This
resembles very closely the stated aims of the *Imperial*.
The number of quotations, already extensive in the
earlier work in both of its editions, was further
increased.  Very often the *Imperial's* quotations are
retained in the *Century* and additional ones provided
for better clarification of definitions or for more complete
discussion.  Very often there are more specific
bibliographical references for the quotations.  When,
however, the *Imperial's* definition is regarded as fully
adequate, the *Century* keeps it.

The definitions in the *Century* evince a skill that
often evokes admiration even today, especially, but not
exclusively, in some of the longer articles.  The quotations
are expertly utilized to illustrate and to justify the
semantic divisions perceived by the definer.  Here art is
patently more at work than science, but the presentation
of successive gradations of meaning transcends art, too,
and often reveals a carefully wrought technique not too
remote from the scientific.  At times the literal and the
figurative may overlap and merge.  But even that overlapping
is adroitly handled by means of appropriate
juxtaposition and significant sequence.  For instance, in
the definitions of the word *cool*, there are literal senses,
less literal ones (&ldquo;fuzzy areas,&rdquo; some would say now),
and various figurative senses.  After treating the word
*cool* in its literal sense (with reference to relative
temperature, etc.), the definer gives an example, &ldquo;Under
the cool shade of a sycamore&rdquo; (Shaks., LLL V, 2, line
89), still not far from the literal, though showing a kind
of semantic transfer, followed by &ldquo;The British soldier
conquered the cool shade of aristocracy&rdquo; (W. F. P.
Napier, *Peninsular War*, pagination not given), in which
we see a no-man's land between the literal and the
figurative, as *cool shade* (as contrasted with the more
literal sense in the quotation from *Love's Labour's Lost*,
above) acquires the figurative sense (not *cool* alone); the
next group of citations is specifically called &ldquo;figurative,&rdquo;
the first quotation being,

>O gentle son  
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper  
Sprinkle cool patience.
>
>(*Hamlet* III, 4)

Comparison of the three occurrences bears with it
justification of the classification.

There is, to be sure, some stylistic difference
between literary and technological definitions, quite
conspicuous at times, although some words may belong
paradoxically in both categories.  Illustrations are of help
in explaining the vocabulary of many technical fields.  It
is hardly necessary to point out that subsequent developments
in most areas have been more revolutionary
than the writers of the *Century* could have imagined.
But even in the less involved and relatively concrete
and literal terminology of those fields in those times
complete definition was rarely possible, strictly speaking.
It might indeed be claimed that our so-called
definitions are really not that at all.  As a label, however,
we know what the term refers to, whether we grasp it
philosophically or not.  Arguments have raged over what
it is that a definition &ldquo;defines.&rdquo;  Is it the word or the
thing?  Is it the symbol or the referent?  Simeon Potter
reminded us (*Our Language*, 1950, p. 105) that Michel
Br&eacute;al warned of the impossibility of complete definition
(*Essai de S&eacute;mantique*, 1891) and of the complexity of
the relationship between word and thing.  Similar caveats
have been uttered by successors.  In the opposite
chronological direction, Aristotle also worried about the
problem of defining.  Nevertheless, lexicographers work
on the assumption that some sorts of definitions are
possible, if not *sub specie aeternitatis*.  One type of
definition always looks slightly ludicrous: who, for
example, would look up a word like *dog* or *hand* or *five*
or *shoe* in a unilingual dictionary?  (Conceivably someone
not sure about the spelling or the plural formation,
but hardly one seeking a definition.)  Yet dictionaries
perform intricate contortions to contrive definitions of
words perfectly familiar, as if the definition were a feat
demanded of the dictionary maker for every single
word—not as a service to the reader.  A kind of farce is
indulged in, with the dictionary pretending that an
explanation is needed, while the reader already knows,
in his own pragmatic way, what a dog or a hand or a
shoe is and even realizes that five is 'one more than
four,' or 'one less than six,' or 'half ten,' or '= 5 or V or
v.'  Another mildly ridiculous feature, of which the
*Century* is relatively free, is the annoying &ldquo;any of...&rdquo;
(followed by words like &ldquo;two-toed, slimy, monocotyledonous...,
etc.&rdquo;) In view of the limited space (=
money) available for dictionary articles, much could be
saved, it seems, by the elimination of hundreds of
hopeless attempts to define the obvious.  The word itself
could be printed and, in some cases, accompanied by a
picture; and the remainder of the article could treat
other matters, if desired.  Nathaniel Bailey in his *Universal
Etymological English Dictionary* (1721) designated
*cat* as 'a creature well-known,' *horse* as 'a beast well-known,'
*hand* as 'a member of the body,' *finger* as 'a
member of the hand,' *tree* as 'a thing well-known,'
*bread* as 'the staff of life,' and *five* as 'V or 5.' Bailey's
nondefinitions no doubt stemmed from his realization of
the futility of attempting to provide the unprovidable,
rather than from any admission of defeat where no
victory was reasonably demanded.  (In 1730 he did essay
a definition of a tree, but he appended to that effort,
&ldquo;needing no description.&rdquo;)  Some of Samuel Johnson's
substitutes for definitions seem to reflect a similar attitude.
That practice is also followed in a number of
&ldquo;practical&rdquo; dictionaries in other languages too.  I have
various dictionaries on my shelf (French, German, Italian,
Dutch, Turkish, Welsh) in which *dog* is called (not
defined) in the relevant language, &ldquo;one of the oldest
domestic animals,&rdquo; or &ldquo;well-known domestic quadruped,&rdquo;
and the like.  The reader is, in some cases,
referred to an accompanying illustration, although no
speaker of the language in question needs a picture to
let him know that *dog* = 'dog.'

There is one category of potential users that would
profit from even superfluous pictorial specificity, namely
foreign students of the language.  I am well aware that
many people find it almost nonsensical to think that one
dictionary could serve the needs of both natives and
foreigners.  Yet that is contradicted by experience and
practice all over the world.  I have myself used unilingual
dictionaries with considerable profit in studying
several languages.  The dictionary makers who prepared
them may have had no such use in mind, but that makes
scant difference.  To be sure, A.A. Hill quotes (*Language*
46 [1970] 254) a statement once made to him by
Noam Chomsky to the effect that &ldquo;the only kind of
reliance on meaning which is certain to fail is the
attempt to define meaning by pointing to objects and
classes of objects in the outside world.&rdquo;  The outside
world presumably refers to the nonlinguistic world.  Is
language, then, the &ldquo;inside world&rdquo;?  That sounds to me
more like Weisgerber than Chomsky.  Be that as it may,
it is debatable that such a prediction of guaranteed
failure (of reliance on meaning) would vitiate a a lexicographical
practice of &ldquo;showing,&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;telling,&rdquo; in
situations where &ldquo;show and tell&rdquo; is neither feasible nor
necessary.  (Encyclopedic dictionaries like the *Century*
may have valid reason to discuss a word like *dog*, quite
apart from the definition, and to supplement the discussion
with pictures, sometimes abundantly.)

Whitney, in his preface to the first edition of the
*Century*, expressed the opinion that the chronological
arrangement of definitions and attestations was the most
desirable one, a belief that he shared with the Grimm
brothers.  Whitney also claimed that this order had been
followed whenever possible.  The historical order is,
however, not always known with complete certainty,
and the earliest attestations, even when clear, are often
of meanings now obsolete.  It is of dubious value to the
general reader to encounter such a meaning in the first
definition given, despite all precautions taken to mark it
as obsolete or archaic.  The *Century* frequently enough
abandons the historical order and common sense
prevails.  It also professes to deduce the &ldquo;primitive
sense&rdquo; of each word from a comparison of all the
principal forms and to make that process clear to the
reader.  This probably demands uncommon sense.

The size of the collection of quotations—probably
more extensive than any previously assembled for an
English dictionary, with the sole exception of the
*OED*—was viewed by Whitney and his staff as enabling
the *Century* definitions to reflect the facts of language
more clearly than its predecessors had.  It was also
regarded as assuring a greater refinement of technique
in arriving at various subdivisions of meaning.  A saturation
point could, of course, be reached, and too huge a
collection of citations might well result in &ldquo;information
overload,&rdquo; as the jargon has it.  If the semantic area of a
word vaguely resembles the spectrum, an almost infinite
number of gradations would be theoretically possible,
and detecting hosts of meanings would be anything but
desirable.  Eliciting significant levels of meaning is part
of the art, not the science, of dictionary making.  The
distinctions presented in the *Century* seem justified and
even easily perceived.  The printing and typography aid
that perception, too.  The results, while buttressed by
the evidence of a rich collection of quotations, cannot be
uniquely valid or all-inclusive, but they are impressive,
even in these days, and the definitions they make
possible are superior to those of some recent
dictionaries.

One topic closely allied to definitions is synonymy.
The task of treating synonyms was entrusted to Henry
Mitchell Whitney, brother of the editor-in-chief.  He
supplemented the overall definitions by synonyms for
some 7,000 words.  This treatment brought together
statements found in the definitions in various parts of
the dictionary and also touched upon many literary
aspects of words.  That was the aim, but it was not really
attained in full.  The synonymy must actually be
achieved by the reader through following the cross-references,
and the &ldquo;bringing together&rdquo; becomes a do-it-yourself
project for the reader—not necessarily an
unenjoyable task for those who have the leisure.  In
some cases he will wonder why certain words are
denoted as synonyms of others, but he is not likely to
fail to perceive semantic connections.  Since the date of
the *Century* there have been various improvements in
the study of synonymy, and we can hardly reproach the
*Century* for representing the state of the art in its own
time.  By 1927, however, *The New Century Dictionary*
was able to include a highly valuable appendix.  *Synonyms,
Antonyms, and Discriminations* by the scholars
A. C. Baugh and P. C. Kitchen, which reflected later
developments and improvements in the field.

One feature of the *Century* that has been one of its
most attractive achievements is its etymologies.  And
even though many changes have occurred in the study
of etymology in the time since the appearance of the
dictionary in both editions, it still has much to tell us
about the etymology of thousands of words that is
essentially valid today.  The etymologies are somewhat
fuller than those provided in the *Imperial* (which were
often very good), since the latter emphasized conciseness
of presentation, in order better to serve the needs
of the &ldquo;average reader,&rdquo; whereas an extended treatment
would allegedly be appreciated only by those especially
well-versed in &ldquo;philology.&rdquo;  It could be argued that
readers without etymological sophistication can have
trouble grasping a brief etymology as well as a long one.
Yet vast numbers of educated people do have a lively
interest in etymological matters.  In many countries people
who are far from specialists make valuable and
satisfying use of etymological dictionaries (even dictionaries
that are primarily etymological), Kluge's in Germany,
for example.  The *Century*'s solution is to give
enough information to make the articles worthwhile for
those with some linguistic knowledge and yet not to
overwhelm other readers.

The etymologies unobtrusively reflect the state of
comparative and historical linguistic scholarship of the
time, both European and American, and, in some
respects, they are superior to those found in various
later dictionaries.  There is avoidance of previous pitfalls
and correction of old blunders.  At times they are more
complete than those in the *Oxford English Dictionary*.
That would be expected if the *OED* had adhered to its
policy as stated in the General Explanation (xxxi):
&ldquo;words originally native [*sic*] are traced to their earliest
Teutonic [= &ldquo;Germanic&rdquo;] form, authenticated and illustrated
by the cognate words in other Teutonic languages
and dialects.&rdquo;  That sounds as if the intent were not to
seek extra-Germanic cognates.  But the statement is
ambiguous, and a glance at words like *acre, after, ask,
bake, beaver, brother, cold, corn, daughter, day, eat,
eight, fire, fish, gold, heart, herd, lime, me, milk, mind,
night, one, red, salt, star, tooth, tree, way, weave,
wheel, whole, wind, woe*, and many others reveals that
the *OED* etymologies often go far beyond &ldquo;Teutonic,&rdquo;
while not often surpassing in skill those of the *Century*.

The principle followed in the *Century* was to trace
each &ldquo;important&rdquo; word to its remotest known origin.
The etymologies obviously cannot profit from cognates
in languages like Hittite and Tocharian, which were not
known at the time the *Century* was written.  (Nor have
those languages, while overwhelming in some of their
implications for comparative linguistics, been extensively
exploited by most modern etymological dictionaries
of English.)  Furthermore, the *Century* is not a
substitute for an etymological dictionary, although there
really is no completely satisfactory one for English
comparable to the best ones for some other languages.
Whitney acknowledged that the etymology writers of
the *Century* derived help from the work of others,
including W. W. Skeat, also the *OED*.  But since much of
the *OED* did not appear until the *Century* was finished,
there was a limit to the indebtedness to it.  I suspect that
the debt was more than repaid, for the *OED* made use of
the *Century* itself.  We know that *OED* editor James A.
H. Murray worked standing at a high desk which held
four dictionaries always open for reference, and one of
them was the *Century*.  (The others were those of Johnson,
Littr&eacute;, and Webster.  Cf. K.M. Elisabeth Murray,
*Caught in the Web of Words*.  New Haven and London,
1977, p. 298.)

*Pronunciation*

The *Century* made use of a system for indicating
pronunciation similar to that of the Imperial, although
not identical to it.  It represented an improvement on the
practice of many predecessors, yet it left something to
be desired.  One or two signs are unfortunately chosen,
for they represent quite different sorts of sounds in other
languages that many readers may know (&ouml;, e.g., to
represent the vowel sound in *shoe, do*).  Others are not
too felicitously applied to represent the sounds they are
meant to.  The unaccented vowels are accorded more
variety than exists, save for certain stage pronunciations,
perhaps.  Of course, the variety of pronunciation found
in American English makes it difficult for any system to
represent the sounds satisfactorily.  Following a scheme
of respelling words, rather than compelling the reader to
learn some form of phonetic representation (but partially
requiring that too!  and introducing certain diacritics),
the *Century* device works for a large portion of the
vocabulary and accidentally achieves quasi-phonemic
representation in some cases (not that that helps convey
the pronunciation better, but it does render the spelling
valid for a larger area than might otherwise have been
the case).  Whitney reports that it was necessary to
choose two or more pronunciations for some words.  He
does not elucidate the principle of selection of such
words, but it can sometimes be surmised from the
examples.  A glance at words like *greasy, falcon, marry,
merry, father* affords insight into the practice followed.
There is some tacit, not explicit, recognition of regional
variants.  There is no hint that any speakers pronounce
an [1] in *palm* and *calm*.  The order in which two (rarely
more) respellings are printed seems to betray slight
prejudice in favor of the Northeast.  One peculiar exception
is that of writing [hw-] for words starting with
orthographic *wh*-, with no suggestion that [w-] prevails
in eastern areas, probably in the *Century's* own
bailiwick.

During Whitney's long career there was often
wavering on the part of linguists and lexicographers
alike between prescriptive and descriptive approaches
to English.  Whitney was capable of saying in one place
that the main purpose and duty of lexicography was to
record actual usage, but he also seemed to believe that
there was a clearly discernible difference between
&ldquo;good&rdquo; and &ldquo;bad&rdquo; English (as there no doubt is).  By
&ldquo;good English&rdquo; he meant the vocabulary and syntax of
the &ldquo;best speakers&rdquo; or those who had the &ldquo;best education.&rdquo;
He went so far as to say, &ldquo;Everything which such
people do not use, or use in another way, is bad
English.  Thus bad English is simply that which is not
approved and accepted by good and careful speakers.&rdquo;

(*Essentials of English Grammar* [1877], p. 3).  Rather
surprising, in view of such expressed notions of good
and bad, is Whitney's disclaimer of any normative or
prescriptive role for the grammarian, who, he asserts, is
a recorder and arranger of the usages of language and by
no means a lawgiver, &ldquo;hardly even an arbiter or critic&rdquo;
(*Essentials*, p. v.).  He does say, however, that grammar
reports the facts of &ldquo;good&rdquo; language, which betokens a
point of view not precisely divorced from the normative.
Yet he elsewhere espouses the principle that language
is constantly changing, and he sees nothing deplorable
in that incontrovertible fact (*Life and Growth of Language*
[1875], p. 33).  In his preface to the first edition of
the *Century* he recognizes that there can be no attempt
to show all varieties even of the pronunciation of the
&ldquo;educated,&rdquo; and readers are hard put to find a criterion
for selection.  They are told that &ldquo;circumstances&rdquo; determine
each case, which helps but little.  When one
pronunciation only is given, we cannot escape the
impression that it is at least countenanced by the dictionary
makers, even if not imposed.  For even objective
description of what is considered good amounts to
prescription.  The mystery resides in that word &ldquo;considered.&rdquo;
Quotations are not utilized to arrive at pronunciations
in most instances, the way they are to determine,
refine, and support definitions or meanings, and they
could hardly be expected to do so unless collected by
means of some acoustical recording device.  Written
evidence can, it is true, serve to some extent to give
indication of pronunciation, especially for bygone ages:
rhymes or accent placement in verse; orthographical
vagaries or lapses; ridicule of the speech habits of others
(for which there is even Latin and Sanskrit precedent);
and so on.  But the impression conveyed in the *Century*
is that a few members of the staff provided the pronunciation
themselves, either on the basis of their own
speech or on that of people deemed to be &ldquo;good&rdquo;
speakers, hardly from conducting any survey or holding
interviews, or listening, like Martin Luther, to the children
on the street, the mother in the home, or the
people in the marketplace.

It should be mentioned, perhaps, that the main
dictionaries of many languages do not include information
on pronunciation, since a rational orthography,
brought up to date from time to time in many lands,
makes such aids superfluous.  At most, they put an
accent mark on a syllable that would not normally be
expected to have the stress, etc.  The dictionary of the
Grimm brothers has no indication of how words are
pronounced, nor do the great Italian and Spanish ones,
nor does the comprehensive Welsh dictionary,
*Geiriadur Prifysgol Cymru*, Cardiff, 1950- ).  This
Welsh dictionary, which is partly modeled on the
*OED*—even typographically—and is being printed by
the Oxford University Press, does not give pronunciation,
since Welsh orthography, while strange to the
uninitiated, is largely unambiguous.  Hence, such dictionaries
make no effort to prescribe pronunciation,
under the assumption that readers know how to pronounce
the words already.  Recent attempts in the
United States to justify our peculiar English orthography
and to find a logical connection between spelling and
pronunciation perplex me.  These efforts seem to have a
special relevance to the level of &ldquo;deep structure,&rdquo; which
can hardly be of use to practical lexicography, though
perhaps to lexicology.  The ingenious reasoning behind
this defense of English spelling appears to rest, in part,
upon the long recognized truism that when words are
first recorded in a language, presumably by people who
are not idiots, there is some sense to the spelling
selected.  If our present spelling is so antiquated that it
often fails to take into account the developments of a
thousand years or more, we may well be able to discover
the reason for that spelling in past ages, but we
should hardly be lulled into a complacency that continues
to tolerate the inconsistency and inconvenience of
an antiquated orthography.  Whitney himself was an
ardent advocate of spelling reform.  At the end of the
*Century Dictionary* he appended the lengthy list of
&ldquo;Amended Spellings&rdquo; which had been jointly proposed,
in an amazing example of transatlantic collaboration, by
the Philological Society of London and The American
Philological Association.  It may strike the American
reader as especially amazing, for a large part of the
alterations may be called concessions in the direction of
American usage, for instance: -*or* for -*our* in words like
*arbor, harbor, labor; -ize* for *-ise* (even in *advize*); -*er* for
-*re* in *center, theater; draft for draught*, plus the innovations
*tuf, laf, laft, cof* (for *tough, laugh, laughed,
cough*); also *plow* for *plough; e* for *ea* in words like
*head, leather, stead*; dropping of final -*e* when no sound
is present: *giv, hav, luv, ooz* (for *give, have, love, ooze*),
but also in *ampl, circl, nativ, pedl, padl*, though not in
*fase* (*phase*), *plezure, cloze* (*close*), *spunge* (*sponge*); *f*
for *ph* in words mainly of Greek origin: *fonetic, flegm*
(with strange retention of the *g*), *foenix/fenix*; note also
the *u* in *culor* (*color*), *cumfort, luv, muscl, sum* (*some*),
*suthern, yung*, but also in *pul* (*pull*) and *pusht* (*pushed*);
the *b* of final *mb* (and some nonfinal cases) is dropped:
*lam, lim, num* (*lamb, limb, numb*); parallel to this,
double final consonants were usually simplified to conform
to phonetic reality: *ad, dol, dul, fil, hel, il, shal,
staf, spel* (for *add, doll, dull, fill, hell, ill, shall, staff,
spell*), etc.

Whitney called attention to the fact that many of the
proposed spellings actually restored what had once
been the customary ones (*shal, wil, kist*, and the like)
and that some were still familiar in the usage of contemporary
poets.  Lowell, for example, had forms like *leapt,
mist, tost* (for *leaped, missed, tossed*).  Some of the
proposed spellings, Whitney stated, were used by
&ldquo;respected&rdquo; newspapers and other periodicals, also by
educated persons.  They could therefore hardly be
ignored in a dictionary &ldquo;which records without wincing
the varying orthography of times just past, and of earlier
generations.  The reformed orthography of the present is
more worthy of notice than the oftentimes capricious
and ignorant orthography of the past.&rdquo;  He finds it a mark
of prejudice on the part of those opponents of change
who use &ldquo;etymological&rdquo; arguments, and he maintains
that all English etymologists favor improved orthography.
Acknowledging that the proposed changes are only
partial and tentative, he confidently predicts that &ldquo;future
dictionaries will recognize in full the right of the vocabulary
to be rightly spelled.&rdquo;

A number of the principles adopted by the two
bodies mentioned were reprinted along with the proposed
list.  Whitney must have noted himself that not all
were too perfectly adhered to in the words listed, for
example, the principle that every sign should match one
sound only.  Another principle adumbrates the phonemic
theory at an early date, stating that an alphabet for use
by a vast community had no reason to indicate every
ultimate fine distinction in articulation but could allow
for unavoidable differences of individual and local
pronunciation.

Between the time of the first edition of the *Century*
and that of the 1914 edition, the Simplified Spelling
Board of the United States was organized (1906) and the
Simplified Spelling Society of Great Britain soon followed
(1908).  The Board published in March, 1909, a
list of spelling recommendations, consisting of the total
of three successive lists published between 1906 and 1.     That list amounted to 3,300 words, of which some
2,200 were inflected verb forms replacing earlier -*ed*
with -*t* (*dropt*) or -*d* (*raind, aimd*).  The list agreed to a
great extent with the one published in the first edition
of the *Century*.  The second edition printed a list based
on it but numbering approximately 1,630 words, omitting
most such forms in -*t* and -*d* to save space, but
retaining a few to stand as models for all others of the
same sort.

The new edition makes the statement of principle
that a dictionary must, as a rule, record &ldquo;the usage of the
majority,&rdquo; which is a more democratic stand than that
proclaimed by Whitney in the first edition.  A dictionary
was not to force upon the majority the spelling of a
minority (experience had no doubt demonstrated this),
even when the latter was &ldquo;reasonably and theoretically
accurate.&rdquo;  The expectation of Professor Whitney that
later dictionaries would, in turn, gradually adopt more
and more of the suggested forms is re-echoed, with
approbation and with the optimistic view that the written
language will finally properly correspond to the
spoken.  This has happened in many written languages
throughout history, it is said.  And the process is
repeated in some languages, so that later forms have an
orthography corresponding fairly well to what is spoken.
The art of printing is given the blame for a large share
in petrifying forms no longer relevant.  It is, to be sure,
not made clear how, in a country like the United States,
the authority is to be wielded that will result in the
ideal state of affairs anticipated.  We might not like the
kind of government that could effect the change in one
fell swoop.  The dictionary will probably follow the
changes, rather than precipitating them, despite the lists
mentioned.  (Some few periodicals have made a few
faltering gestures in the direction of change, but these
have been piecemeal and numerically insignificant.)

Like some of its predecessors, the *Century* includes
foreign words commonly found in English works.  Here
a twofold pronunciation is often found, one &ldquo;Anglicized,&rdquo;
the other being an attempt to reproduce the
original.  Subsequent works have often repeated this
process.  One category of words is stated to be given
with no indication of pronunciation in the *Century*: the
obsolete words.  The reasoning seems to be that there is
no need or use for providing pronunciation for a period
about which we can have no exact knowledge.  But does
that mean that we can never utter those words in
conversation?  Must we be content to read them to
ourselves (imagining some sort of pronunciation), or
possibly only to write them?  Can we not talk about the
*witenagemot*, for instance?  For all such words, as well
as for much of the current vocabulary, the reader may
avidly seek authoritative statements on pronunciation,
as well as spelling.  And even for obsolete words our
knowledge is usually something more than a blank.  It is
therefore interesting to note, despite the Preface's statement
to the contrary, that many such words are in fact
provided with pronunciation aids, including
*witenagemot*!

As has been indicated above, the use of illustrations
reached new heights, even artistically in many
instances, in the *Century Dictionary*.  They are not one
hundred per cent new, for the best ones of the Imperial
are often retained.  There seems to be a tendency to
reproduce the illustrations of the latter dictionary for
flora, heraldry, and mathematics (some of them being
from still earlier sources).  But for fauna and aves the art
staff of the *Century* and the artists on whom it called
went their independent way.  Some sketches and drawings
must have been masterpieces in their full-scale
form; some are virtually that in the reduced form in
which they are printed.  Many drawings have the initials
of the artists.  Some bear the signature of Ernest Thompson
Seton (originally Ernest Seton Thompson,
1860-1946), a world-renowned writer and illustrator.

*Remoter Connections*

It is probably impossible to name a dictionary,
however unique its characteristics or however original
its compiler(s), that stands completely apart from the
wider historical connections of predecessors.  Perhaps no
European or American dictionary of the nineteenth
century lacked ties, some close, to the lexicographical
activity of many countries.  The *Century* is linked by
lines of descent, not only to those dictionaries from
which it admittedly stems, the *Imperial* and *Webster*,
but also to earlier ones in both the English and the
continental tradition.  It is not easy to determine how far
back that tradition reaches.  J. J. Gelb, in his admirable
article &ldquo;Lexicography, Lexicology, and the Akkadian
Dictionary&rdquo; (*Miscel&aacute;nea homenaje a Andr&eacute; Martinet, II.
Estructuralismo e Historia*.  Canarias, 1958, 63-75), has
pointed to a line of descent of &ldquo;normative&rdquo; dictionaries,
beginning with the renowned *Vocabolario degli
Accademici della Crusca* (1591-1612) and leading, via
*Dictionnaire de l'Acad&eacute;mie Fran&ccedil;aise* (1694), to Samuel
Johnson's dictionary.  He discerns another ancestry (p.
1)  for his *Chicago Akkadian Dictionary* (since then
renamed the &ldquo;Assyrian&rdquo;), which is shown to follow a
path of evolution proceeding from the *Deutsches
W&ouml;rterbuch* of the Grimms (1854-1961), to the *Thesaurus
Linguae Latinae* (1900- ), and the *W&ouml;rterbuch der
&auml;gyptischen Sprache* (Berlin, 1891).  This line of dictionaries
is classified by Gelb as &ldquo;documentary&rdquo; (= descriptive),
but also as pursuing the &ldquo;philological approach&rdquo;
with the theoretical aim of collecting and documenting
all the words of a language; this contrasted with the aim
of *La Crusca* to preserve the beauty of a language
through offering a prescriptive model.

One feature of the philological type of dictionary
was that of arranging definitions in an orderly sequence,
usually historical.  Both types of dictionary, however, are
compiled from written sources (practically exclusively).
The works referred to in Gelb's two paths of evolution
are only a few outstanding landmarks along the way (the
biggest ones, granted), and many intervening ones could
be named.  A dictionary like the *Century* may, in seeming
paradox, belong to both chains of development, for it
shares features of each.  Thus, the reliance on the vocabulary
and pronunciation of &ldquo;educated people&rdquo; verges on
the normative view of *La Crusca*, while the effort to
record the whole vocabulary of the language resembles
that of the Grimms' dictionary, for instance.  That this
latter aim can never be completely realized is, of course,
a truism.  If &ldquo;unabridged&rdquo; has come to have a meaning
approaching infinity, that is the fault of advertising
strategy, together with &ldquo;customer&rdquo; gullibility.  Completeness,
while never really possible, is more nearly
achieved in the vastness of the materials collected than
in the resultant dictionary, however huge.

One type of work that might easily be overlooked in
considering the lexicographical relationships of unilingual
dictionaries is the multilingual dictionary (usually
bilingual or trilingual).  Before there were unilingual
English dictionaries there were Latin-English and English-Latin
ones, also Greek-English and English-Greek,
etc.  These were not used solely in the study of the
classical languages but also served at times as dictionaries
of English.  The lexical tradition of other countries
was similarly often dependent on bilingual dictionaries
before a unilingual dictionary was produced.  There is a
bilingual tradition for France, for Germany (and German
Switzerland), etc., long before the first unilingual
French or German dictionary was produced.  When
Jacob Grimm said (*W&ouml;rterbuch*, vol. 1, p. xxi) that Josua
Maaler's dictionary was the first real German dictionary,
he was referring to a work in which the definitions were
in Latin.  That dictionary, via the Grimms, has links with
the *OED*.  Despite scarcity of publicity on the point, the
great English dictionary owed much to the Grimms.  The
latter were both members of the English Philological
Society, which launched the project of the *OED*, and
their dictionary was often mentioned during the organization
meeting.  Many of its practices were followed or
imitated by the *OED*.  On this subject, see Prof. James
Sledd's magisterial review in *Language* 32 (1956),
358-63 of *Dictionaries British and American* by James
R. Hulbert (especially p. 362).  It is hard to overrate the
debt of lexicographers to the Grimms, although the
*OED* people managed to underrate it.

There is a connection between British lexicography
and the French tradition going back to Robert Estienne
(Robertus Stephanus), whose *Dictionarium latinogallicum*
(1539) was used by Thomas Cooper as the chief
source for his *Thesaurus Linguae Romanae et Britannicae*
(1565), which, in turn, was liberally exploited by
Thomas Thomas in his *Dictionarium Linguae Latinae et
Anglicanae* (ca. 1588).  Thomas led the way for Robert
Cawdrey's *Table Alphabeticall... of hard usuall English
words* (1604), and the French connection was carried
on by later writers of English dictionaries, some
less distinguished than others.

This account does not begin to exhaust the relationships
between English and continental dictionary writing—nor
was the path of connection a one-way street.  In
Britain, Latin-English and English-Latin dictionaries
(and, to a lesser extent, Greek-English and English-Greek)
were themselves dependent on predecessors in
Spain, France, Italy, Germany, Holland, etc.  There was
also some reliance of the British bilingual dictionaries
on continental unilingual works, which is essentially
another topic.

It would be easy to overlook the fact that foreign
dictionaries existed on British soil itself.  There were
Scots Gaelic and Welsh dictionaries which were made
use of even by dictionary makers innocent of Celtic.  It is
very likely that the earliest dictionaries in Britain to use
quotations from literature were Welsh ones.  The
renowned Latin-Welsh and Welsh-Latin dictionary of
Dr. John Davies (1632) was acknowledged by Thomas
Blount (*Clossographia*, 1656) as an important source.
Davies made a huge collection of quotations from Welsh
authors of all preceding centuries and employed a staff
of scribes to assist him.  Only a portion of the quotations
could be included in his dictionary, but the practice was
established by him and followed by later writers, English
and Welsh alike.  It is obviously very difficult to
track down the first real occurrence of any such practice,
but a good case can be made for Davies's dictionary as
the model for later ones giving copious citations from
authors to help establish definitions.

There are points of disagreement among dictionary
makers regarding the role of grammar in a dictionary.
Some see the two as mutually exclusive; the grammar is
one phenomenon, the lexicon another.  But for others
there is an inescapable connection between the two.
The *Century* seems not worried by such distinctions but
includes a reasonable amount of grammatical information
that seems to be in order in a dictionary: tenses of
irregular verbs, noun plurals, even pronouns.  A glance
the article on the pronoun *it* will reveal this.  But the
knowledge dispensed is hardly disturbing, and much of
it is enlightening.  (Some languages have almost inextricable
connection of lexicon and grammar.  The dictionaries
of many American Indian languages reveal how the
grammar (often morphology and syntax together) pervades
the entire lexicon and therefore the dictionary.)

I suppose the writers of the *Century*, like those of
*Webster* and the *Imperial*, never contemplated any
order other than the alphabetical.  And, although we
often encounter people who seem not to have a firm
grasp of the alphabet and may need to repeat a sizable
segment of it to know where *k* is in relation to *n*, for
example, that system is, on the whole, a great benefit to
the actual user.  It is not, however, the only conceivable
order.  In some languages it is not even a possible one, if
the traditional system of writing is adhered to.  Without
transcription, Chinese material, e.g., cannot be alphabetized,
although it can obviously be arranged on different
principles intimately related to the properties of its
orthography.  The Sanskrit syllabary, which was not too
remote from alphabetical writing, was arranged according
to phonetic principles, based on the place of articulation
of sounds (back preceding front, thus *k* before *t*
and *t* before *p*, etc.) Some etymological dictionaries (like
Walde-Pokorny's for Indo-European) used the Sanskrit
order, to the utter confusion of many users.  Pokorny's
more recent dictionary (Julius Pokorny, *Indogermanisches
Wuorterbuch*, 2 vols., Berne, 1959, 1969), which
replaced the earlier Walde-Pokorny and amounted to a
new work, abandoned the Sanskrit order and adopted
the Latin order of the alphabet, to the relief of very
many users.

Quite apart from all these considerations, there are
times when dictionaries can be improved for some
purposes if the alphabetical order is replaced by the
&ldquo;conceptual&rdquo; principle, which groups words together
according to meanings and concepts, regardless of the
alphabetic sequence of their initial letters.  Ironically
enough, the dictionaries of the Indian lexicographers
(all written in verse) were not arranged according to the
order of the Sanskrit syllabary but under headings
representing &ldquo;general concepts&rdquo; (heaven, God, demons,
fire, speed, quantity, eternity) and under secondary
headings (seas, earth, plants, animals, towns, etc.).

Franz Dornseiff has provided, for the German
vocabulary, *Der deutsche Wortschatz nach Sachgruppen*,
Berlin, 1933, fourth printing 1954.  And Carl Darling
Buck did a similar thing in A *Dictionary of Selected
Synonyms in the Principal Indo-European Languages*,
Chicago, 1949.  Close to 1,500 concepts are grouped
together with equivalents in more than thirty languages,
ancient and modern.  The possibilities of such works
have perhaps not yet been completely realized (in
etymology, semantics, statistical analyses of various
kinds, etc.).  J. J. Gelb in the article mentioned above
(&ldquo;Lexicology, Lexicography, and the Chicago Akkadian
Dictionary,&rdquo; p. 69) makes the interesting observation
that the oldest dictionaries we have, those made in
Mesopotamia two to five thousand years ago, and the
most recent lexical works, like Walther von Wartburg's
French etymological dictionary, are arranged conceptually.
Roget's famous *Thesaurus*, first written in 1805
but not published until 1852 and revised a great number
of times since then, has been a familiar work to generations
of users in Britain and the United States—and
elsewhere.  The notion of a list of words classified
according to the ideas they express rather than in
alphabetical order may have occurred to Dr. Peter Mark
Roget independently, for he seems to have been unaware
of predecessors.  Six &ldquo;classes&rdquo; of categories
(abstract relations, space, matter, intellect, volition,
affections) yield 1,000 headings.  It goes without saying
that an alphabetical index at the end rescues many a
reader.

Whitney occasionally mentioned the scattering of
closely related topics as a disadvantage of the alphabetical
order.  He believed that cross-references would help
to some extent.  But he recognized, in principle, the
handicaps of fragmentation.  He no doubt realized, too,
that the vocabulary of a language or an individual is
something more than a list of thousands of separate
words and that there are close relationships of certain
words in subsystems of the larger system that is the
lexicon itself.  Had Whitney lived, he might have collected
the dispersed vocabulary in some realms by
providing special, lengthy articles on some topics or
themes, but there is no reason to believe that he would
have deserted the alphabetical order in the main.

No small part of the attractiveness and appeal of the
*Century Dictionary* may be attributed to the prevailing
mood of optimism and positiveness conveyed by the
work as a whole.  In an age when our activities are
hampered by the stifling restraints of one-way streets,
exact fare, retrenchment and space-counting in publishing
ventures, it is a refreshing change to learn that when
the scope and extent of the articles far exceeded the
original plan, the makers of the dictionary were allowed
to proceed beyond the limits initially estimated, and
with the publisher's approval.  In this respect, the writers
of the *Century* were far more fortunate than those of
the *OED*, whose editor, James A. H. Murray, was
constantly bemoaning the penuriousness of the &ldquo;Delegates&rdquo;
(of the Oxford University Press) and often wondered
whether the gigantic project would ever be
completed.  He also worried excessively and needlessly
about the competitive commercial threat of the *Century*.

A prevailing mood of optimism is sensed in the
*Century*, as if in that lexicon, as in Bulwer-Lytton's
&ldquo;lexicon of youth,&rdquo; there was no such word as &ldquo;fail.&rdquo;  A
feeling that the people who produced the dictionary
enjoyed their task seems to be imparted, at least to us
latterday readers.  The frustrations and annoying obstacles
that beset the path of most dictionary makers are
perhaps impossible to avoid, but some projects seem to
overcome those hardships with greater dispatch and less
paranoia than others.  Like Joseph Wright's famous *English
Dialect Dictionary*, the *Century* appears to have
proceeded at a satisfactory pace on a triumphant course,
and its makers evince a sense of savoring the triumph.

No other lexical work has ever replaced the *Century*,
and it is still recognized as a valuable reference
work (cf., e.g., J.R. Hulbert, *Dictionaries, British and
American*, London, 1968, especially p. 33).  Comparisons
are bound to be invidious, but since some people have
been inclined to view the *Century Dictionary* as a poor
relation of the *OED*, if indeed a relation at all, it may be
in order to point out that the *Century* holds up very well
in any such comparison.  The typology and the illustrations
have been mentioned as inviting and appealing
features, whereas the general aspect of the *OED* is
forbidding and dreary.  The latter aims at giving all the
forms of a word ever found—at least for certain time
intervals—and may really hide the forest with its unending
trees and underbrush, whereas the *Century* uses its
citations—copious enough—to serve to illustrate the
meaning of words and to clarify syntactic developments,
etc.  The *OED*, despite its comprehensiveness, lacks the
encyclopedic character (possibly intentionally rejecting
it) and consequently the readability of the *Century*,
which is, in this respect, more closely akin to the great
Larousse tradition of France.

Although the abundant materials presented by the
*OED* may well satisfy the needs of many a scholar, those
offered by the *Century* are more rewarding for the lay
reader, while not to be scorned by the learned either.
The technical vocabulary of the *Century*, while now
partly pass&eacute;, surpasses, qualitatively and quantitatively,
that of the *OED*, although it must be said in fairness to
the latter that it contains far more technical vocabulary
and information than may be generally acknowledged or
realized.  In its treatment of pronunciation, the *OED* is
no doubt superior to that of the *Century*, but, even in
this respect, it is largely a learned audience that is
addressed and a debatable standard that is invoked.
There is certainly no reason to belittle the magnificent
achievements of the *Oxford English Dictionary*, which
is in many respects an incomparable and monumental
work.  But the *Century Dictionary*, in all those features
which it is valid to compare in the two dictionaries,
decidedly holds its own.  It is truly a boon that it is
available once again.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Stacked Noun: &ldquo;Airport Long Term Car Park Courtesy
Vehicle Pickup Point.&rdquo; [Seen at London's Gatwick
Airport by Norman A. Heap, Trenton, New Jersey.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The model AD-6 dryer which you have does have
an asbestos insulator.  However, we tested it and found
no significant level of exposure to consumers of asbestos
fibers.&rdquo;  [From the *Appliance Division* of *The Gillette
Company* to Richard Joyce, Tucson, Arizona, in
response to a query.  *Not many of those consumers
around much any more.*]

## Paring Pairs No. 5

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z);
the answers are given in numbered items which must
be matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some
cases, a numbered word may be used more than once,
but after all matchings have been completed, one numbered
word will remain, and that is the correct answer.
Our answer is the only correct one.  The solution will be
published in the next* VERBATIM *along with the names
of the winners*.

(a). Buffalo dentists use this in flight of computer fancy.  
(b). Cockney slattern's gone wiggy over salmon roe.  
(c). Repository of former glory.  
(d). Boss Tweed couldn't have been cleaner than this.  
(e). Slothful, intoxicating Islamic spirit fizzes out.  
(f). Seasonal release from Prison.  
(g). U.S.: trailer; *Brit.*: caravan.  
(h). Cares for cephalalgia.  
(i). Conventionalist from California in London.  
(j). Stock of British sneakers is kept at sea level.  
(k). Polite, murderous conflict?                            
(l). British B-girl?                        
(m). Sweet monster at resort.  
(n). Help yourself to 50 per cent of the total.  
(o). Mermaid's home?  
(p). Must have formal wedding—fruit and all!  
(q). Validity through haruspicy?  
(r). Madeline's friend, now grown, is near Frankfurt/Main.  
(s). Henry, Jane, and Peter owe us affectionate goodby.  
(t). Pub sign of the hour.  
(u). He made it, but it sounds like a fraud.  
(v). Tiller sounds like this when boring.  
(w). part for Artur Rubinstein to eat?  
(x). Free use of spirit may cause wobbly walk.  
(y). Equipment for creating chaos at meals.  
(z). Increased price when you buy on time in England.  

1\. Time.  
2\. Moving.  
3\. War.  
4\. Oar.  
5\. Adieu.  
6\. It.  
7\. Hoe.  
8\. Brighton.  
9\. Square.  
10\. Tooth.  
11\. Wing.  
12\. Piano.  
13\. Bow.  
14\. Bad.  
15\. Halve.  
16\. Lady.  
17\. Nurse.  
18\. Plimsoll.   
19\. Djinn.  
20\. Offal.  
21\. Loose.  
22\. Cant.  
23\. Cave.  
24\. Berkeley.  
25\. Head.  
26\. Fingal's.  
27\. Line.  
28\. Locks.  
29\. Has.  
30\. Gentlemen.  
31\. Roll.  
32\. Mess.  
33\. Sum.  
34\. Bin.  
35\. Kit.  
36\. Higher.  
37\. Time.  
38\. Tea.  
39\. Hound's.  
40\. Byte.  
41\. Purchase.  
42\. Fake.  
43\. Roc.  
44\. Civil.  
45\. Slow.  
46\. Foot.  
47\. Homburg.  
48\. Spring.  
49\. Fond.  
50\. Hum.  
51\. Truth.  
52\. Elope.  
53\. House.  

Winners will receive a copy of the Collector's Edition
of *Light Refractions*, by Thomas H. Middleton (retail
value $30.00 or &pound;15.00), a copy of *English English*,
by Norman W. Schur (retail value $24.95 or &pound;12.50),
three copies (one for you, two for gifts) of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value $29.85 or
&pound;14.85), twelve copies (one for you, eleven for gifts) of
*Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value
$35.40 or &pound;18.00), or a credit of $20.00 or &pound;10.00 towards
the purchase of any other title offered in the VERBATIM
Book Club Catalogue.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send
their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market Square, Aylesbury,
Bucks., England.  All others should send them to
VERBATIM, Box 668, Essex, CT 06426-0668, U.S.A.

To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either
office, we shall arrange to collect all correct answers for
21 days, starting with the day the first correct answer is
received, and to draw one winner at each office.  Please
indicate your choice of prize with your answer.

## Paring Pairs No. 4

(a). Deficit may result in early winter.  (8,21) Short Fall.  
(b). Let the shilling remain as auxiliary support. (20,29) Bob Stay.  
(c). Dresser has pullout feature.  (38,35) With Drawer.  
(d). Bloody offspring is no plum!  (10,17) Dam Son.  
(e). Potential energy from down east water.  (50,7) Main Spring.  
(f). Source of smelly col' cream?  (46,27) Ol' Factory.  
(g). Where bishops buy their hats.  (6,11) Mitre Joint.  
(h). Lay on one of these and you still have nothing (16,3) Goose Egg.  
(i). Descend into the warehouse.  (48,33) Go Down.  
(j). Bury soprano up to her waist.  (36,19) Inter Mezzo.  
(k). Able to mimic an hors d'oeuvre.  (26,1) Can Ape.  
(l). Australian stinger.  (44,37) Digger Wasp.  
(m). Used-car salesman's hint.  (2,15) Auto Suggestion.  
(n). DOS Passos quartet?  (28,31) Manhattan Transfer.  
(o). Nana, the flunky.  (4,5) Dog's Body.  
(p). Fleet Street Coiffure?  (18,43) Lunatic Fringe.  
(q). Trouble in Mexico.  (14,23) Agua Caliente.  
(r). P.M. or notorious TV star?  (34,41) That Cher.  
(s). Hitchhikers pay this.  (32,9) Thumb Tacks.  
(t). Pussy's moan for a jewel.  (52,45) Cat Sigh.  
(u). Insane purpose will get you there.  (32,25) Loco Motive.  
(v). Regatta on the Isis of fourth down.  (40,49) Punt Formation.  
(w). Such a vessel would surely sink.  (42,13) Stone Cutter.  
(x). Viceregent subsiding.  (30,39) Sin King.  
(y). Heavily pressing need.  (24,51) Sad Iron.  
(z). Dramatis personae absent.  Marooned?  (12,47) Cast Away.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Hyperactivity—or, to use the term now preferred,
attention deficit disorder—can continue into adolescence
and adulthood.&rdquo;  [From a column by Dr. Neil
Solomon in the *Press-Herald* (Portland, Maine), n.d.
submitted by Josephine Bell Trask, Damariscotta,
Maine.]

### MISSQURINTS
*From a bifocled Compositor, actually, Egdon H.  Margo, Reseda, California.*

Judge not lest ye be jugged.

Who says a newspaper has to be bull?

Parking is such sweet sorrow.

We have met the enemy and they are curs.

An oily child is a lonely child.

Please don't walk about me when I'm gone.

Love me, lave my dog.

Where there's a will there's a wad.

Rome wasn't built in a bay.

A stag danced and I was born.

Faster than a speeding pullet.

They call her frivolous Hal, a peculiar sort of a gal.

I think I'm failing in love.

Make it one for my Baby and one for the toad.

Anyone who mates dogs and babies can't be all bad.

In Xanadu did Kubia Khan a stately pleasure dame decree.

Sumer is iceman in.

Whaddya Know, Joe?

The name Joe, incidentally, is a moniker of some
importance in North Beach, owing not entirely to the
eminence of Joltin' Joe DiMaggio.  One of the more
popular restaurants is called &ldquo;New Joe,&rdquo; which became
so widely known that it soon inspired an imitator who
called himself &ldquo;Original Joe,&rdquo; and that, in turn,
spawned a branch known as &ldquo;Original Joe No. 2,&rdquo; a neat
trick and they did it.  Thus we find that &ldquo;Original Joe&rdquo; is
newer than, and not as original as, &ldquo;new Joe.&rdquo;  The
confusion became complete recently when what should
open across the street from &ldquo;New Joe's&rdquo; but a restaurant
that calls itself &ldquo;Original Junior.&rdquo;  ... Such is life in
North Beach, where There's No Business Like Joe
Business, [from *Baghdad by the Bay*, by Herb Caen,
Permabooks, 1953, pp. 152-3; submitted by Jack Calvert,
San Francisco.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Sounds as if sheer confidence results in a cushy job. (6)  
4\. Heady punch to blow one away. (8)  
10\. Stupid point of view spreading geometrically. (6, 5)  
11\. Jaundiced connoisseur of the grape. (3)  
12\. Radio stint garbles cultural heritage. (10)  
13\. A noticeable gap in one's attention. (4)  
15\. Mass public expression of private thoughts. (7, 4)  
19\. Almighty lack. (11)  
22\. Fun with a bird. (4)  
23\. Believer in the fall of man. (10)  
26\. You'll see he can do a foolish thing. (3)  
27\. The insecure at the top resort to harassment. (11)  
28\. Construction of a castle in Spain. (8)  
29\. Visual effect of white mule? (6)  

**Down**

1\. Classified item: Choice chance to start a new relationship. (8)  
2\. Gay lover of a less ambiguous day. (8)  
3\. Doubts about gifts that crack up a young lady. (10)  
4\. Savage horse upset the old man on top. (5)  
6\. Always dream being back in Paris? (4)  
7\. Garment can cover awkward fat. (6)  
8\. Alarms sounded for deadly poisons. (6)  
9\. To a diner: Food is limited, being in short supply.  
14\. Dwelling just a stone's throw from anybody. (5, 5)  
16\. Manipulated by a round of red tape. (8)  
17\. Fork that saddle for the top rodeo performance. (8)  
18\. Sergeant, don't fraternize! (8)   
20\. The old man is some kind of nut. (6)  
21\. Its dry around the stern even though it's windy. (6)  
24\. Main artery.  (5)  
25\. Horse power accelerator. (4)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Mistresses.
6\. Abut (a butt).
10\. Took second place.
11\. Rom-ANC-e.
12\. Brand-Y.
14\. SHOAT.
16\. S-cen-A-r-Ios.
18\. Errand boy.
21\. Eater.
22\. Fat pig.
24\. Natural.
27\. Buried treasures.
28\. Stew(ardess).
29\. Odds bettor.

**Down**

1\. Mattresses.
2\. Storm door.
3\. R-o-Sl-n.
4\. S-a-CHETs.
5\. Ennoble.
7\. Braid.
8\. Toes.
9\. A-p-PAN-age.
13\. A SORELOSER (a role + roses).
15\. Tone poem.
17\. INTER-pret.
19\. B-I-GOT-ed.
20\. Yank-ees.
23\. Agree.
25\. Taste.
26\. ABCs (is without BASICS).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I am concerned that the BMA should state categorically
that it deprecates the activities of unscrupulous
members of our profession who are out for a quick kill,
at the expense of the reputation of the rest of us.&rdquo;  [From
a letter by R. Moshy, Honorary Secretary, British Medical
Association, Manchester, published in *The British
Medical Journal*, 23 May 1981.  Submitted by Dr. D.B.
Jack, The Medical School, University of Birmingham.]


[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v8n2_Autumn_1981)