--- 
title: "VOL VIII, No 3 [Autumn, 1981]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Meretricious Words, or The Quean's English
*Bryan Garner, Austin, Texas*

>*Meretrix, specioso nomine rem odiosam denotante*.
>
>—Plato (*Plut. et Athen*.)

In the English Renaissance, Fortune was commonly
personified as a fickle strumpet, as in the scene from *Hamlet*
where the protagonist banters bawdily with Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern: **The Riverside Shakespeare*, ed. G. Blakemore Evans (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1974).  Hereinafter cited in text.

>HAM: Good lads, how do you both?  
ROS: As the indifferent children of the earth.  
GUIL: Happy, in that we are not over-happy, on  
Fortune's cap we are not the very button  
HAM: Nor the soles of her shoe?  
ROS: Neither, my lord.  
HAM: Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favors?  
GUIL: Faith, her privates we.  
HAM: In the secret parts of Fortune?  O, most true; she is a strumpet.
>
>(2.2.225—36)

The metaphor suggested itself because Fortune, with her
unsteady Wheel, is fickle and inconstant, as strumpets were
commonly thought to be.  But if strumpets themselves have
been inconstant in the popular mind, then it is certainly apt
that the fortunes of their distinctive epithets have been equally
inconstant, for, historically, speakers of English have licentiously
jumped from term to whorish term to describe practitioners
of the oldest, most venerable of human occupations.

We have therefore inherited scores of synonyms for *prostitute*
that seemingly cover—or, rather, uncover—every possible
nuance of the scortatory hierarchy, from the tinselly, grand
*courtesan* to the abject, base *slut*.  In fact, the synonyms for
*prostitute* probably outnumber those of any other comparably
specific meaning.  Why is this?  Perhaps it is because those in
the underworld, who are most deeply involved with prostitution,
have the raciest argot (almost invariably ephemeral) and
wield words more boldly, loosely, and inventively than other
speakers.  Or perhaps it results from a popular fixation with the
less pleasant, seedier aspects of human existence.  Then again, it
may demonstrate that we are perennially witness to more vice
than virtue.

However that may be, and whether we find prostitution a
barbarous, abhorrent practice or a desirable societal peccadillo,
it is of interest to word-lovers to see how the copious English
appellations for prostitutes have developed and changed
through the centuries.  Many of these terms exemplify the witty
and ironic creativeness of English speakers; my own favorite in
this regard is *laced mutton*, a British slang phrase current in
the 16th—18th centuries, in which the ambiguity of *laced* is
quite effective.  It might mean 'bedizened with lace,' 'corseted,'
'tenderized,' 'slightly squiffed' (i.e., 'flavored with alcohol'), or
'savory and zestful'—perhaps all of these.  Forthwith the rest of
the list, with some cursory notes and explanations made in
consultation with the *OED*; with Partridge's *Dictionary of
Slang and Unconventional English, Dictionary of the Underworld,
Slang Today and Yesterday*, and *Name Into Word*; with
Wentworth and Flexner's *Dictionary of American Slang*; with
*Webster's Third New International Dictionary (W3)*; and with
Brewer's *Dictionary of Phrase and Fable*.

*abbess* ironic slang for 'brothel-keeper,' ca. 17th—19th
centuries; *obs*.

*abandoned woman* *abandoned* in the sense of 'self-abandoned,'
'given over to vice'; *euphemism*.

*adventuress* also has a slightly broader meaning, 'a woman
who lives by questionable means.'

*bar-girl* see *B-girl*.

*bawd* [Middle English *bawde*, perh. fr. Middle French
*baude* 'bold, merry'] 'a procuress'; formerly used of either
sex.

*bawd-strot* [fr. Old French *baudetrot*?  *OED* remarks that
*strot* suggests Teutonic *strutt*, and *bawd* Middle French
*baud* 'bold'] variant of *bawd*; *obs*.

*B-girl* [fr. *bar-girl*] 'a prostitute who meets her prospective
clients in bars'; often a B-girl may be employed by a bar
to entertain men and induce them to buy a lot of drinks.

*bit* cf. *piece*.

*broad* U.S. slang fr. ca. 1910; also means 'woman';
*obsolescent*.

*bunter* [origin unknown] 'a low harlot and thief'; British,
18th—19th centuries, *obs*.

*burick* [origin unknown] 'prostitute' ante 1851; during the
19th century, it was increasingly used to mean 'wife'
among Cockneys; *obs*.

*cab-moll* 'a harlot professionally partial to cabs or trains,'
ca. 1840—1900.

*callet* [perhaps, as *W3* suggests, fr. Middle French *caillette*
'frivolous person,' after *Caillette*, a French court fool of
ca. 1500] *obs*. exc. as Scottish and dialectal English.

*call-girl* 'a prostitute who arranges her rendezvous over the
telephone'; originally, however, 'a prostitute who works in
a call-house' (i.e., a brothel).

*camp follower* 'a harlot who follows a military unit'; cf.
*V-girl*.

*cocodette* [alteration of French *cocod&egrave;te*, fem. of *cocod&egrave;s*
'fop, dandy'] 'a high-society French prostitute.'

*cocotte* [according to *W3*, fr. French (baby-talk) *cocotte*
'hen'] a &ldquo;forbidden word,&rdquo; wrote Mencken in *The
American Language*.

*conciliatrix* 'a bawd or procuress'; *obs*.

*concubine* [Latin, literally 'one who lies with (another)'] 'a
kept woman; a mistress; sometimes misapplied for
*courtesan*.

*corinthian* [fr. *Corinth*, a region of ancient Greece] 'a
profligate addicted to salacity and dissipation'—used of
both sexes in English (but cf. *korinthiazesthai* 'to be a
prostitute').

*courtesan, courtezan* [French 'woman courtier'] 'a
prostitute with an aristocratic or upper-class clientele.'

*cruiser* 'a peripatetic whore'; 'any person who cruises';
*slang*.

*Cyprian* [fr. Latin *Cyprius* 'native of Cyprus' (reputed
birthplace of Aphrodite)] *archaic*.

*daughter of joy* translation of French *fille de joie.*

*debauchee* 'one given to sensual excess'; used of either sex
in English; a euphemism when used for 'whore.'

*demimondaine* [French 'inhabitant of the half-world'] 'a
courtesan who serves the upper class and strives to
maintain the appearance of respectability'; *OED* says that
this meaning is improper and recommends 'a prostitute on
the outskirts of society.'

*demirep* 'a woman with only half a reputation'; *slang* fr.
18th century.

*doll* [ = *Doll* = *Dorothy*] traditional name for a wanton;
20th-century *slang* for paramour.'

*doxy, doxie* [origin unknown] fr. 16th century; dialectal as
'girl friend, sweetheart.'

*drab* [akin to Irish *drabog* and Gaelic *drabag* 'dirty
female'] 'a filthy slut.'

*erring sister* a typical Victorian *euphemism*.

*fallen woman* a typical Victorian *euphemism*.

*fancy girl* self-evident.

*fancy lady* self-evident.

*fancy woman* self-evident.

*floozy, floosy, floosey,* etc. [Partridge suggests rel. to *flusey*
'female pudend'; he also conjectures (in *Origins*) that
*floozy* = *Flossie* = *Flora*, the goddess] legitimately, 'a
becoming loose woman,' but also, *slang*, 'a slovenly
harlot.'

*fornicatress* a euphemism when applied to prostitutes;
*fornication* 'coitus other than between a man and his wife
or his concubine.'

*fornicatrix* same as preceding entry.

*frail sister* *euphemism*.

*garrison-hack* 'a soldiers' harlot'; 19th-century British *slang*.

*gin* [fr. *gin* 'female Australian aborigine'] 'a black
prostitute,' U.S. *slang*, ca. 1920; *obs*.

*gold-digger* 'an avaricious woman who exploits her
femininity to extract gifts and money from men'; U.S.
*slang*, ca. 1915.

*gun moll* 'the mistress of a gangster or crook,' U.S.
*underworld slang*, ca. 1931; *moll* here primarily in the
sense of 'thief'; *obs*.

*harlot* [fr. Old French *herlot* 'rogue'] as suggested by the
etymon, this word formerly referred more commonly to
knavish men (fr. 13th century) than to whorish women
(fr. 15th century); Mencken labels it a &ldquo;forbidden word.&rdquo;

*harridan* [perh. fr. French *haridelle* 'old jade horse'] 'a
worn-out old harlot'; Dr. Johnson: &ldquo;a decayed strumpet&rdquo;;
ca. 1700-1864; now refers vituperatively to termagants
and shrews.

*hetaera, hetaira* [Greek for 'companion'] 'one of the highly
cultivated courtesans of ancient Greece.'

*hooker* 'one who hooks or entraps, often in a happy
manner'; 20th century.

*hostess* see *madam.*

*house girl* 'a prostitute who works in a bagnio'—as
contrasted to a *call-girl* (in the modern sense) or
*streetwalker*.

*hussy, huzzy* [fr. Middle English *huswif*, whence also
*housewife*] a pejorative term since the 18th century;
denotes a 'loose, brazen woman or a prostitute.'

*hustler U.S.* *slang* fr. ca. 1900.

*joy girl* perh. a translation of French *fille de joie*; slang
(cf. *joy house* 'brothel.')

*kept mistress* a common term that may be redundant,
since *mistress* usu. means 'kept woman.'

*kept woman* see preceding and following entries.

*keptie* like the preceding two entries, 'a woman nicely
supported by a man in return for sexual favors.'

*lady of assignation* in this entry and in the following five,
*lady* is employed ironically; cf. *fancy lady.*

*lady of leisure* see preceding entry.

*lady of pleasure* see *lady of assignation.*

*lady of the evening* see *lady of assignation.*

*lady of the lake* 'mistress'; see *lady of assignation.*

*lady of the night* see *lady of assignation.*

*lewd woman* a term of contempt in polite society, hence a
pejorative euphemism.

*limmer* [origin unknown] generally Scottish and dialectal
English; *The Scottish National Dictionary* traces the
meaning 'prostitute' from ca. 1728, but the *OED* dates
this meaning fr. the early 16th century; refers also to
scoundrelly men.

*loose woman* a genteelism.

*lost woman* a genteelism.

*mab* [fr. 17th-century form of *mop*; perh. also a short form
of *Mabel*] *slang* fr. 17th century, now Standard (British)
English.

*madam, madame* *obs*. as 'prostitute'; now 'the head of a
brothel'; according to Mencken, the word is &ldquo;forbidden&rdquo;
in this sense.

*malkin* [ = *Mall* = *Mary* (Partridge); according to the
*OED*, a diminutive of *Matilda, Maud*] 'slattern'; Scottish
fr. ca. 1540, *obs*. in British English exc. as dialectal; also
denoted the female pudend (perh. fr. its association with
*cat*, hence *pussy*).

*market-dame* 'a harlot of the marketplace'; colloquial fr.
18th century; increasingly Standard English.

*meretrix* [fr. Latin *merere* 'to earn, gain'] the suffix
humorously suggests the service paid for, and the entire
word *Mary Tricks*.

*minion* [fr. French *mignon, mignonne* 'favorite or darling']
'paramour, mistress'; now *literary*.

*miss* [short for *mistress*] 'prostitute' was one of this word's
earliest meanings, though it is now archaic.

*moll* [= *Moll* = *Mary*] 'a common whore,' fr. ca. 1600; in
U.S. 20th-century *slang*, &ldquo;any woman regardless of
condition,&rdquo; according to Partridge.

*mopsy* [origin unknown] 'a disreputable and slovenly
woman,' though earlier a term of endearment; *obs*. exc. as
dialectal British English.

*mort* [origin unknown; euphemistic Latinism for the
Elizabethan *die* 'to have orgasm'?] also denote merely
'girl' or 'woman'; fr. 16th century, now *archaic*.

*naughty pack* 'a lubricious woman of questionable
reputation,' though it can refer to either sex; *obs*.

*nightwalker* 'any person who roves about at night.'

*nun* ironic for 'harlot' fr. ca. 1770, though *nunnery*
'brothel' fr. late 16th century—hence the ambiguity of
Hamlet's cry to Ophelia, &ldquo;Get thee to a nunn'ry!&rdquo;
(3.1.120); *obs*.

*nymph* aside fr. mythological association, 'a woman of
loose morals'; euphemistic in reference to whores.

*nymph of the darkness* elegant variation of *lady of the
night*.

*nymph of the pavement* translation of French *nymphe du
pav&eacute;.*

*odalisque* [fr. French *odalique*, fr. Turkish *&omacr;dahliq*.
'chambermaid'] 'a female slave in the harem of a Turkish
sultan.'

*one of the frail sisterhood* a Victorian euphemism.

*pack* 'a man or woman of low character,' hence often
applied to whores as well as to others regarded as dregs;
*archaic*.

*painted woman* self-evident.

*Paphian* 'a devotee of the Paphian Venus; a prostitute'
(*OED*).  Paphos was a Cyprian city sacred to Aphrodite or
Venus and hence became associated with sexual
indulgence.

*paramour* [fr. Old French *par amour* 'through or by way
of love'] 'one who loves illicitly'—usu. used of women,
and sometimes euphemistically of prostitutes; the word is
virtually synonymous with *mistress.*

*party doll* same as following entry.

*party girl* 'a young woman employed to entertain men at
parties.'

*perfect lady* British slang for 'anything but a perfect lady'
(Partridge); derives either from the claims of prostitutes or
from the irony of whoremongers and other men.

*pickup* humorously suggestive of 'pick-me-up.'

*pom-pom girl* during World War II, U.S. servicemen used
*pom-pom* to mean 'sexual intercourse.'

*pro* [short for *professional*, not *prostitute* (Wentworth and
Flexner)].

*pross* [short for *prostitute*] low British slang fr. ca. 1880.

*prossy* [same as preceding] 20th-century U.S. *slang*.

*punch* [akin to the vb. *punch* 'deflower'] late 17th to mid-19th
century; cf. *punch-house* 'bagnio.'

*punk* [origin unknown] *obsolescent slang* not to be
confused with *punk-rocker.*

*pure* 'a kept woman, wanton,' British, 17th-19th centuries;
*obs*.

*purest pure* 'a courtesan of high fashion,' fr. ca. 1690 to
ca. 1830; *obs*.

*quean* [fr. Old English *cwene*, akin to the etymon of
*queen*].

*rig* [Middle English *riggen*, of uncertain derivation]
dialectal English; cf. *riggish* 'sluttish,' as in Shakespeare's
*Antony and Cleopatra*, where Enobarbus speaks thus of
Cleopatra:

Other women cloy  
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry  
Where most she satisfies; for vilest things  
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests  
Bless her when she is riggish.  (2.2.235-39)

*saleslady* U.S. *slang* fr. ca. 1920.

*Saturday-to-Monday* 'a weekend mistress'; British *slang* fr.
ca. 1900, perh. having arisen as a variation of the earlier
weekender, q.v.; *obs*.

*scarlet woman* also—ironically—when capitalized, 'The
Roman Catholic Church.'

*shady lady* self-evident.

*skit* [of obscure origin] 'a wanton,' now *obs*. in this
dialectal sense; cf. skittish 'capricious, fickle' (and formerly
suggestive of 'whorish,' as in Shakespeare's phrase &ldquo;skittish
Fortune's hall,&rdquo; *Troilus and Cressida* 3.3.134).

*slattern* [akin to slut] 'a slovenly prostitute.'

*slut* [Middle English *slutte*] a word with strong
connotations of opprobrium—suggests uncleanness.

*sporting girl* cf. *sporting house* 'brothel.'

*street girl* self-evident.

*streetwalker* self-evident.

*strumpet* [Middle English *strompet*, of obscure origin].

*sultana* [fr. fem. form of Italian *sultano*, fr. Arabic *sult&amacr;n*]
'a mistress or paramour of a royal personage, esp. of a
sultan.'

*tart* [Middle English *tarte*, fr. Middle French] originally a
term of endearment, this &ldquo;forbidden word&rdquo; (Mencken) for
comparatively young prostitutes pejorated ca. 1900.

*tom* 'an old prostitute' or 'a mannish prostitute'; current fr.
mid-19th to early 20th century.

*tommy low* *slang* of the 20th century.

*tottie, totty* [prob. fr. *Dot* = *Dorothy*] British for 'a high-class,
well-dressed harlot,' fr. ca. 1880.

*tramp* contemporary; also used of men in the sense of 'a
begging or thieving vagrant.'

*trapes* (usu. British), traipse (usu. U.S.) 'slattern,' 17th—18th
centuries, now *archaic*.

*trollop* [akin to *trull*] a &ldquo;forbidden word&rdquo; (Mencken).

*trull* [fr. *obs*. German *Trulle* 'prostitute'] *contemptuous*.

*unfortunate* used of outcasts generally, whether prostitutes,
prisoners, or other pariahs.

*unfortunate female* like the preceding entry, a genteelism.

*unfortunate woman* like the preceding entry, a genteelism.

*V-girl* [for 'victory girl'] 'a wartime amateur camp follower
or pickup.'

*vice girl* self-evident.

*wanton* [fr. Middle English *wantowen* '(one) deficient in
discipline'] used of the dissipated of either sex, and
commonly of whores.

*weekender* same as *Saturday-to-Monday;* British, ca. 1885;
*obs*.

*wench* [shortened and pejorated fr. Old English and
Middle English *wenchel* 'a child or common woman']
formerly 'a young girl,' the word pejorated during the
14th century; by the late 19th and early 20th centuries it
had become a &ldquo;forbidden word&rdquo; and is now used only
disparagingly or jocosely to suggest looseness or
whorishness.

*white slave* 'a white woman or girl held under duress for
the purposes of commercial prostitution,' as in Bartley
Campbell's play *The White Slave* (1857).

*whore* [fr. Old English *h&omacr;re*] even more taboo than other
&ldquo;forbidden words,&rdquo; this term and *slut* are probably the
most universal denigrating terms for 'prostitute.'

*woman of easy morals* like the following seven entries, a
euphemism.

*woman of easy virtue* an ironic phrase, for &ldquo;easy virtue&rdquo; is
patently a vice.

*woman of ill fame* self-evident.

*woman of ill repute* self-evident.

*woman of loose character* self-evident.

*woman of the street(s)* self-evident; cf. nymphe du pav&eacute;,
trottoise.

*woman of the town* euphemism.

*working girl* euphemism.

*young woman of pleasure* a loan-translation of French *fille
de joie.*
Synecdochic and metonymic terms:

*bag* a metaphor for the female pudend or womb?

*baggage* fr. 16th century, *obs*. by 1800; Shakespeare used
this word several times in this sense, e.g.:

>BAWD.  The stuff [i.e., whores] we have, a  
strong wind will blow it to pieces  
[a pun?], they are so pitifully  
sodden [i.e., they have been  
oversoaked in sweat-tubs as  
treatment for the pox].  
>
>PANDAR.  Thou sayest true; they're too  
unwholesome, o' conscience.  The  
poor Transylvanian is dead, that lay  
with the little baggage.  (*Pericles*  
4.2.18—23)

*barber's chair* an allusion to the phrase, &ldquo;as common as a
barber's chair&rdquo; 'fit for common use' (Partridge); British,
17th—19th centuries; *obs*.

*bat* 'a prostitute who works at night'; British, 17th—19th
centuries; U.S. *slang*, ca. 1920; *obs*.

*bit of fluff* 20th-century *slang*.

*bit of muslin* *slang* of ca. 1873; *obs*.

*bit of mutton* 19th—20th-century *slang*.

*bitch* 'a lewd or immoral woman; slut,' fr. ante 1400.

*blue gown* British, ca. 1913; *obs*.

*canary* 'mistress,' 18th—19th centuries; as cant, &ldquo;harlot&rdquo;;
*obs*.

*cat* 16th—19th centuries; *obs*.

*chippy, chippie* 'a bold, sexually promiscuous woman,' fr.
the primary meaning, &ldquo;the chipping sparrow&rdquo;; U.S. *slang*
fr. ca. 1890, and a &ldquo;forbidden word&rdquo; according to
Mencken.

*fox* *obs*. in the sense of 'prostitute'; now refers to any
eyesome female.

*fruit* 'readily picked' (like so much fruit), hence 'an easily
obliging girl or woman,' since ca. 1910.

*glue neck* 'a filthy harlot,' U.S. *slang* fr. ca. 1920; cf. *glued*
'affected with venereal disease.'

*goods* 'a white slave.'

*hay-bag* 'something to lie upon,' but perhaps also
suggestive of an old whore's appearance; fr. 1850, now
mainly U.S. *slang*.

*heifer* U.S. *slang* fr. ca. 1920 (cf. *heifer den* 'brothel').

*hot beef* 19th-century *slang*.

*hot meat* 19th-century *slang*.

*hot mutton* 19th-century *slang*.

*jade* fr. the primary meaning, 'a worn-out horse.'

*light skirt* 'a loose woman,' late 19th through early 20th
century.

*loose fish* current in 19th century; *obs*.

*nag* same as *jade.*

*piece* 'girl' fr. 14th century; 'harlot' fr. ca. 1580 to ca.
1830.

*piece of goods* same as preceding.

*piece of muslin* British, ca. 1875—1910.

*piece of mutton* 17th century to early 19th century.

*piece of trade* self-evident.

*pig* 'a slovenly whore'; 20th-century U.S. *slang*.

*rainbow* perhaps fr. the colorful dress of prostitutes; British
*slang* fr. ca. 1820 to ca. 1870.

*rip* 'a worn-out worthless horse'; cf. *jade* and *nag.*

*skirt* 'woman,' but also 'harlot,' since *to skirt* means 'to be
a harlot,' as does *to flutter a skirt* (Partridge); 19th—20th
centuries.

*sloop of war* 19th-century British *slang*; *obs*.

*soiled dove* 20th-century Southern U.S. *slang*.

*stew* 'a whore,' but more commonly 'a bordello.'

*twist* 'a light woman,' U.S. *slang* fr. ca. 1890; *obs*.

*wagtail* fr. the species of bird—the term is suited to
prostitutes in describing a come-hither walk; British *slang*
of 17th—18th centuries.

Eponyms:

*Aspasia* consort of Pericles; though she was not actually a
hetaera, &ldquo;dour biographers call her an adventuress&rdquo;
(Partridge); hence the common conception.

*Delilah* perfidious and treacherous mistress of Samson.

*Doll Tearsheet* an apparently luetic harlot in Shakespeare's
*2 Henry IV*; Falstaff says to her: &ldquo;If the cook help to
make the gluttony, you help to make the diseases, Doll.
We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you.&rdquo;  (2.4.44—46).

*Jane Shore* ca. 1445—1527; mistress of King Edward IV, of
William, Baron Hastings (beheaded by Richard III), and
of Thomas Grey, 1st Marquis of Dorset.

*Jezebel* fr. Queen Jezebel, wife of Ahab—&ldquo;used figuratively
for a bold-faced, evil prostitute or bedizened woman of
not invincible virtue&rdquo; (Partridge).

*Kate* proverbial name for prostitutes; current ca. 1860, and
later used especially for popular harlots.

*Kate Keepdown* a pregnant prostitute referred to by
Mistress Overdone in Shakespeare's *Measure for Measure*
(3.2.199—201).

*La&iuml;s* several famous hetaerae of ancient Greece had this
name—one was regarded as the most beautiful woman of
her age; &ldquo;La&iuml;s&rdquo; was used proverbially as a name for a
woman of great pulchritude.

*Messalina* the dissolute wife of the Emperor Claudius of
Rome; &ldquo;her name has become a byword for
lasciviousness.&rdquo;  (Brewer).

*Mistress Dorothy* Pistol's alternative name for Doll
Tearsheet in *2 Henry IV*:

>PISTOL.  Then to you, Mistress Dorothy, I
will charge you.
>
>DOLL.  Charge me?  I scorn you, scurvy
companion.  What, you poor, base,
rascally, cheating, lack-linen mate!
Away, you mouldy rogue, away!  I
am meat for your master.  (2.4.121—26)

*Mistress Overdone* another of Shakespeare's suggestively
named bawds; this procuress is introduced in Act I, scene
ii of *Measure for Measure*.

*Mistress Quickly* fr. Shakespeare's *1 Henry IV, 2 Henry
IV*, and *The Merry Wives of Windsor* (she is Hostess
Quickly in the last-mentioned play); the name is perhaps
a pun on &ldquo;quick lay&rdquo;; her malapropisms in *The Merry
Wives* include *fartuous* for *virtuous* (2.2.94), *infection* for
*affection* (2.2.111), *erection* for *direction* (3.5.39), and
*speciously* for *especially* (4.5.108).

*Moll Flanders* known primarily as a pickpocket, she is also
a character of loose sexuality who is sometimes
misconceived as a harlot, though she never solicits; fr.
Defoe's novel of that name (1722).

*Mrs. Warren* in Shaw's *Mrs. Warren's Profession* (1898), the
eponymous prostitute plies her trade to support her
unwitting daughter.

*Phryne* a Greek hetaera who &ldquo;acquired so much wealth
that she offered to rebuild the walls of Thebes if she
might put on them this inscription: 'Alexander destroyed
them, but Phryne the hetaera rebuilt them.' &rdquo;  (Brewer).

*Sadie Thompson* fr. the character in *Rain*, Somerset
Maugham's play (itself based on his short story &ldquo;Miss
Thompson&rdquo;) in which a South Seas missionary first
proselytizes the harlot Sadie Thompson, and then
prostitutes her; he kills himself in anguish and remorse.

*Tha&iuml;s* an Athenian hetaera of the 4th century B.C. who
accompanied Alexander the Great to Persia, later
becoming the concubine of Ptolemy I, King of Egypt;
another courtesan of this name lived in Alexandria in the
1st century B.C. and became a nun—she resisted being
seduced by her converter (perhaps thereby averting for
this man the fate of Sadie Thompson's pious lover).

*Theodora* a Byzantine empress who, according to the
*Secret History of Procopius*, which some historians
consider a dubious source, was an actress and prostitute
before her marriage to Justinian I; originally a Cyprian,
she represents the reformed harlot who becomes
eminently successful.

Foreignisms not fully naturalized:

*bona-roba* [Italian] 'good stuff.'

*ch&egrave;re amie* [French] a euphemism.

*dame de compagnie* [French] 'a lady of companionship,'
i.e., one who is paid for it.

*fille de joie* [French] cf. daughter of joy, pleasure girl, etc.

*grisette* [fr. French *grisette* 'cheap gray woolen cloth often
used in dresses'] 'a working-class girl who combines
prostitution with another job.'

*lorette* [fr. *Notre Dame de Lorette*, a section of Paris] 'one
of the select class of Parisian courtesans during the
Second Empire'; because of this term and the ironic
ambiguity of *nun*, the respectable *Loretto Nun* may invite
literary double entendres.

*mui-tsai* [fr. Chinese for 'younger sister'] analogous to
*white slave.*

*nymphe du pav&eacute;* [French] 'a streetwalker'; cf. nymph of
the pavement, its calque.

*petite dame* [French] literally, 'small woman'; akin to
*mignonne*.

*poule* [French] literally, 'a chicken, hen.'

*trottoise* [French] same as *nymphe du pav&eacute;.*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Jonathan David Dictionary of Popular Slang*](https://www.amazon.com/Jonathan-David-Dictionary-Popular-Slang/dp/0824602463)
Anita Pearl, (Jonathan David Publishers, Inc., 1980), viii + 191 pp.

There seems to be a curious dissociation between the
Introduction to this dictionary, signed by the author, and the
dictionary's actual contents.  The Introduction is devoted
entirely to a description of American slang, while the book's
title and contents are clearly not so restricted.  Most of the
entries transcend regional use and those that are British are
labeled so, for example, *bloke, blob, yob*, and *rozzer*.

Nor does the dissociation end there.  The Introduction
defines slang as &ldquo;informal, non-standard language typically
composed of colorful, exaggerated metaphors, newly coined
words, or words and phrases that have taken on new meaning.&rdquo;
Yet a very large number of the entries simply do not conform
to this definition.  Terms like *aboveboard, Afro, all-out war,
anchorman, baker's dozen, dovetail, downstage, elder statesman,
hotbed, master of ceremonies, mugger, megadeaths, Middle
America, machine politics, word processing unit, photo
finish* and *typing pool* can scarcely be described as &ldquo;informal&rdquo;
or &ldquo;non-standard.&rdquo;  They may be picturesque and etymologically
interesting, but they hardly qualify as slang.  They can't
even qualify as jargon or argot.  They are as much a part of
modern standard English as the words that make up this
sentence.

Again, according to the Introduction, the author has
chosen to include only &ldquo;the most popular slang words and
expressions of today,&rdquo; whence we get the title *Dictionary of
Popular Slang*.  Yet how popular are many of the entries in this
dictionary?  I have misgivings about the popularity, to say
nothing of the currency, of such terms as *Adam's ale, Turner*
(defined as 'a German'), *Zelda* ('a stupid, boring woman'),
*banzai* ('a cry of determination and challenge'), and hundreds
of others.

According to the jacket blurb (whose author seems to have
been better acquainted with the book's contents than the
writer of the Introduction), &ldquo;the more than 10,000 entries
selected for inclusion have been gathered from all areas of
current interest—from surfing and education, from the post
office and drug culture, from the worlds of crime and entertainment,
from the trucking industry, from politics, from auto
racing, and so on.&rdquo;  If, then, by &ldquo;popular&rdquo; the author meant
usage in many areas of current interest (&ldquo;all areas&rdquo; seems to be
slight exaggeration), a list of her source material would not only
have justified her selections but would have served as very
useful data for lexicographers and other researchers.  Did she
get her material from books and periodicals in specialized
fields?  Or did she get it from interviews with actual informants,
from truckers, gamblers, junkies, criminals, etc.?  We are not
vouchsafed this information.

An examination of the entries themselves reveals much
ignorance and confusion, apparently because of inexperience.
A few examples should suffice.  Pronunciation is never indicated,
even when an entry like &ldquo;*Ca, n.* [HOSPITAL JARGON]
Cancer&rdquo; cries out for it.  Subject and language labels are often
used where they are totally unnecessary or inapplicable: &ldquo;*You
bet*, an expression of affirmation&rdquo; is labeled [GAMBLING],
*kowtow* and *yen* are labeled [CHINESE], *caper*, defined as 'a
criminal activity,' is labeled [CRIME].  Etymologies are given at
random and arbitrarily: *88* gets one but not *86, John Bull* gets
one but not *Jeeves*.  Abbreviations such as *MC, MCP*, and *BO*
are defined as &ldquo;acronyms&rdquo; while *commie* is defined as &ldquo;abbreviation
for Communist.&rdquo;  And so on.

To the book's credit, it does include some of the newer
slangisms from the drug and CB radio world, such as *get off
my case, have one's ears on*, and *Smokey-the-bear*.  Nevertheless
it is an amateur's compilation.  The author's background is in
theater arts and French and she is a co-author of *Completely
Cheese: The Cheeselover's Companion*.  But she loves words, has
collected them lovingly, and has done her level best with them.
God knows she could have done worse.

*[Sol Steinmetz, Barnhart Books, Bronxville, N.Y.]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Words in Everyday Life*](https://www.amazon.ca/Words-Everyday-Life-G-L-Brook/dp/0333352769)
G.L. Brook, (Barnes &amp; Noble, 1981), 207pp.

I have two problems with this book.  The first is the
outrageous price of the American edition, for the 5&frac14;&rdquo; &times; 8&frac12;&rdquo;
book cannot contain above 70,000 words (the last 35 pages are
notes, bibliography, and index—and a rather scanty index, at
that).  The other is that the author, though writing about
English, has chosen to all but ignore any American sources.  Oh,
yes, there are Leo Rosten *(Joys of Yiddish)*, Greenough and
Kittredge, and a handful of others (more honored in the
bibliography than in the text or notes), but the preponderance
of authors and scholars cited are British, as if the Americans
had made little or no contribution.  Not even a single American
dictionary (unless you count *Joys of Yiddish*, which is certainly
not in the same class as *Webster, Worcester, Random House,
American Heritage, World* and other works) is so much as
mentioned in the text.  My reaction is prompted less by
chauvinism than by the feeling that a modern work that cites
among American sources nothing later than Mencken's *American
Language* is not only insular but stuffily old-fashioned.  No
book about English can, I believe, ignore the contributions
made by American English, yet Brooks, Professor Emeritus of
English Language and Medieval English Literature at the
University of Manchester, has done just that.  And the resulting
work is quite lopsided.

There is nothing here that cannot easily be found elsewhere
in the dozens of books published in the last two decades
about the language and, indeed, in a decent etymological
dictionary.  The approach is sober and unutterably dull and dry.
Perhaps more words are treated than in Simeon Potter's *Our
Language*, but that and Potter's other books sparkled with
good, interesting writing.  Brooks gives the impression that he is
frequently boring himself.  His arid, matter-of-fact style can be
seen in the following, mercifully brief passage, typical of the
book and selected more or less at random:

>Elevation of meaning is less common than degeneration.
We sometimes find divergent changes, with two words
of similar meaning developing in opposite directions.
*Childish* and *juvenile* have sunk; *child-like, boyish* and
*youthful* have risen.  *Service* is something that we are
proud to render, but *servility* is a quality that we do
not want to possess.

Readers who do not expect more than this—the essential
facts of language and exemplary etymologies merely written
out at length instead of being presented in the telegraphic form
of a reference book—will not be disappointed.  As for this
reviewer, I can see nothing wrong in presenting the same old
material, but I insist that a new work should reflect something
new and should, at least, be interestingly written.  Alas,
Brooks's book may do more to destroy a budding interest in
language than to nurture it.

*—Laurence Urdang*

## Philip Howard on English English: *Halcyon*
*Philip Howard*

I stirred up fuss and feathers the other day in *The Times*
with a piece about halcyons.  Those goddamned birds are
everywhere on this side of the Atlantic.  *Halcyon* is the hottest
vogue word for journalists and politicians who want to be with
it: it is as contagious as foul pest.  In a few months we shall
grow bored with it and move on to something else.  But for the
moment, everything is halcyon.

As often with words that suddenly become fashionable, it
is changing its meaning slightly as it is popularized.  People like
the look of the shiny new word, pick it up, and start using it
without making sure exactly what it means, so vexing pedants
and providing amusement and copy for those of us who
observe and record the changing language.  It is evident that
many of those now using *halcyon* to add a touch of class to
their writing or speaking take the word to mean something like
'in the good old days.'  I was finally moved to write the original
piece about halcyons by a letter in *The Times* that spoke of
1879 as a *halcyon* year.  I looked it up in my dictionary of
dates, and I found that it was the year the War of the Pacific
began, when Chilean forces occupied the Bolivian coast;
British breech-loading rifles wiped out the Zulu nation; and
Mary Baker Eddy chartered the Church of Christ Scientist at
Boston.  And apart from all that, it was a terrible summer.

I said that I doubted whether 1879 could be classified as a
halcyon year in the extreme acceptance of the word, without
some risk of terminological inexactitude.  Apart from vexing our
native Christian Scientists, the article provoked some instructive
correspondence.  I had a charming letter from a Mrs.
Halcyon McLaren, which we published with the headline
&ldquo;Shall I call thee bird?&rdquo;  I suppose the answer to that question
is that Mrs. McLaren was a Wren in the war.  Somebody sent
me the advertising pamphlet for a brand of Citizens' Band
radio, which is just starting to wash over the United Kingdom,
interfering with police and medical communications and
infecting the language with its curious jargon.  The pamphlet
says: &ldquo;For CB'ers who want something a little more advanced,
the HALCYON CONDOR is on its way&rdquo;: a flying oxymoron, if
ever I saw one.

Somebody sent me an interesting classical variant on the
original myth of Halcyon or Alcyone.  I had sketched the
version in which Alcyone grieves so deeply over her husband,
who has been drowned at sea, that the gods take pity and turn
them both into kingfishers, or halcyons.  These were said to nest
on the sea for seven days every winter, during which time the
waters remain calm: the halcyon days of sailors.  My correspondent
reminded me of the other version of the myth in Ovid, in
which Halcyon is so much in love with her husband that she
commits an act of hubris by calling herself Hera and him Zeus.
This naturally vexes the Olympian Zeus, who sends a thunderstorm
to drown Ceyx, the husband.  Alcyone, or Halcyon, is so
upset that she jumps into the sea and drowns herself.  Some
pitying god turns them both into kingfishers, or, according to a
variant, Alcyone into a kingfisher and Ceyx into a seagull.  The
gods still make the seas calm for them to nest at the winter
solstice—hence your halcyon days.

The story is, of course, partly guano.  The legend of the
kingfisher's floating nest has no foundation in natural history.
The halcyon builds no kind of nest at all, but lays its eggs in
holes by the waterside.  However, myth is not nonsense.  It
expresses ritual and religious truth.  The Halcyon myth refers to
the birth of the new sacred king at the winter solstice—after
the queen, who represents his mother, the Moon Goddess, has
conveyed the old king's corpse to a sepulchral island.  Or so
says Robert Graves, and I potently and powerfully believe him.

This may seem a bit esoteric in light of the modern vogue
use of *halcyon* to mean 'in the good old days, when I was
young and you could buy a four-course dinner with wine for
half a crown.'  But it is interesting as an example of a word in
the process of changing its meaning.  It shows what we have
lost now that the classics and classical mythology are no longer
generally taught in British schools.  It is impossible to get the
most out of Western literature and art without knowing about
birds like *Halcyon*.  I dug out references and allusions to her in
poets from Milton to T.S. Eliot.  But, in the meantime, things
are pretty *halcyon* on this side of the kingfisher pond.


#### EPISTOLA {Otto Jansen}

On the side panel of a package of Kellogg's Raisins, Rice
&amp; Rye—amazingly, not &ldquo;Rice 'n' Rye&rdquo;—we are told about
&ldquo;Great recipes you can *bake up* with Kellogg's Raisins, Rice &
Rye.&rdquo;  After a few words about the fantastic ingredients
(&ldquo;crispy rice&rdquo; and &ldquo;hearty rye&rdquo;), we are told that if we follow
the directions on the back panel, we can *bake up* two delicious
recipes.  Why do we have to put up with this latest pleonastic
atrocity?  Where will it end?  *fry up?  grill up?  roast up?*

*[Otto Jansen, Hopewell, New Jersey]*

[*We already have* fry up: *Ebenezer, Ah'm gonna* frah up *a mess
o' chitlins fo' yo' dinna!  In keeping with the current trend to
folk rock, country music, etc., I suppose those wunnerful folks
at Kellogg's jes' decided to use that ol' down-to-earth approach
that meks Grandmaw set down her corncob an' start chompin'
away on the flakes.—Editor*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Perry C. Hill}

Relative to your interest in uses and misuses of *alleged*,
the following is from the recently revised edition (February
1980) of *The Milwaukee Journal and Milwaukee Sentinel
Stylebook:*

>ALLEGE The word must be used with great care.  Some
guidelines:
>
>Avoid any suggestion that the writer is making an
allegation.  Specify the source of the allegation.  In a
criminal case, it should be an arrest record, an
indictment or the statement of a public official
connected with the case.
>
>Use *alleged bribe* or similar phrase when necessary to
make it clear that an unproved action is not to be
treated as fact.  Be sure that the source of the charge
is specified elsewhere in the story.
>
>Avoid redundant uses of *alleged*.  It is proper to say:
&ldquo;The district attorney alleged that she took a bribe.&rdquo;
Or: &ldquo;The district attorney accused her of taking a
bribe.&rdquo;  But not: &ldquo;The district attorney accused her of
allegedly taking a bribe.&rdquo;
>
>Do not use *alleged* before an event that is known to
have occurred when the dispute is over who
participated in it.  Do not say: &ldquo;He attended the
alleged meeting&rdquo; when what you mean is: &ldquo;He
allegedly attended the meeting.&rdquo;
>
>Do not use *alleged* as a routine qualifier.  Instead, use a
word such as *apparent, ostensible or reputed*.

*[Perry C. Hill, Tucson, Arizona]*


#### EPISTOLA {Milton Schorr}

Thank you, Michael Gorman, for exposing us to the
Fonseca English phrase-book.  I haven't laughed that heartily at
printed matter since Leo Rosten's *The Education of
H*Y*M*A*N K*A*P*L*A*N* rendered me a limp, howling
mess many years ago.  I read the Fonseca piece on the subway
between West 4th St. and 42nd St. in Manhattan, and I
guffawed so uncontrollably that I was certain that one or more
of my fellow passengers had wired ahead to have me picked up
at the next station and delivered forthwith to a proper mental
health facility.

Rosten's H*Y*M*A*N K*A*P*L*A*N had much in common
with Fonseca.  Both were sublimely assured that they had
mastered the English language conversationally, lexicographically,
and syntactically.  H*Y*M*A*N K*A*P*L*A*N, the
immigrant night school student, bristled at the frequent suggestions
that he might be in error (particularly when the suggestor
was his ever-correct classmate, Miss Mitnick).  Fonseca's confidence
in his imagined mastery was so supreme that he set out
to enlighten the non-English-speaking world with his publication.
I for one am thankful that nobody ever corrected Mr.
Fonseca (or that, if they did, he chose to ignore them), for
then the world would have been denied his delicious
&ldquo;fracturepiece.&rdquo;

The excerpts from the Fonseca work also brought to mind
the English instructions generally enclosed with a foreign-made
appliance.  As a professional magician who buys many tricks
and gadgets made in Japan, West Germany, and South
America, I often find it necessary to decipher the accompanying
instructions.  These are obviously written with the aid of
nothing more than a dictionary.  As a result, one frequently
finds inappropriately used synonyms for the proper word.  The
resulting statements are far more humorous than offensive.
Some examples:

>The box is made quintet, that is fivefolded.
>
>Use an impalpable paste of a liquid to polish silver.
>
>All this will be achieved taking more or less to the
vertical the tricky saltcellar.
>
>Be sure that this final is of an incredible success.
>
>Put the bill into the tube (to say the truth, into the
gimmick).
>
>Say, &ldquo;All this effect is worthwhile a handshake.&rdquo;
>
>Practice this by yourself seeing in a mirror.
>
>It's totally hermetic.  Therefore it's damp-proof.
>
>The magic tube, an unprecedented and newest magic.
>
>I must be off now to track down a copy of &ldquo;English as she
is spoke.&rdquo;  I am determined to succeed.

*[Milton Schorr, Syosset, New York]*

## Antipodean English: *More Colorful Language*
*George W. Turner*  

Some Australians might take the term &ldquo;colorful language&rdquo;
to promise a discussion of the *Great Australian Adjective*,
the word *bloody*, which Australians are popularly
supposed to work into every sentence and even, though it
might seem imbloodypossible, into the middle of words.  But
what I have in mind is a further exploration, with relation
to Australian English, of the kind of semantic associations of
color terms that were discussed by Sterling Eisiminger in
VERBATIM [VI, 1].

The positive connotations of *white* recur with exaggerated
force in Australia and New Zealand where, at least
in older usage, *a (real) white man* was the highest commendation.
The New Zealand poet R.A.K. Mason catches
the idiom in his satirical poem *Judas Iscariot*, where Judas is
described as &ldquo;the veriest prince of good fellows and the
whitest and merriest.&rdquo;  Cheap labour from the Pacific
Islands and Asia was a threat to the living standards of
Australian workers in the nineteenth century, and so a
policy, called the *White Australia* policy, of excluding
immigrants not of European race was widely adopted,
though it is now generally disowned.  A more sinister
association of *white* comes from the destructive termites,
*white ants*.  These insects can quickly eat out timber, leaving
a paper-thin outer shell.  Politicians have sometimes seized
on a metaphor (powerful especially to property owners) *to
white-ant* institutions or a way of life 'to subvert them
secretly from within.'  (Such 'black villains' are usually
'reds.')  Color names not infrequently turn up in the names
of drinks: *white lady* is methylated spirits, pure or mixed
with something else.  In sport *to whitewash* 'to defeat utterly'
is shared with the U.S., and *the man in white* is the
referee.  For flora and fauna, the pretty little *white-eye* (also
called *silver-eye, blight-bird*, etc.) may stand for many
more items.

*Black* retains in Australia the negative associations it
had in Europe.  Days of devastating bushfire are remembered
as *Black Saturday* (in New South Wales), *Black
Thursday* (in Victoria), etc.  The simile *as black as a burnt
log* and perhaps *black stump* 'mythical marker of extreme
distance' in the phrase *beyond the black stump* recall fire-scarred
landscape.  Racial associations of *black* with the
Aboriginal population are respectful enough in *black
tracker* but shameful in *black velvet* (Aboriginal women
considered as sex objects).  Associations are neutral or pleasant
in *blackjack* 'treacle,' *blackball* 'a black and white
striped peppermint sweet,' though perhaps faintly pejorative
in *black taxi* 'a Commonwealth Government car providing
free transport for politicians and public servants' and *black
hat*, now obsolete, 'a newly arrived immigrant inexperienced
in the ways of the colony' (and still wearing city
clothes).  Flora and fauna again provide a large number of
examples of new formations; for *black*, the index to the
*Australian Encyclopaedia* (1966) has two and a half columns
listing phrases alone, and there are many compounds
as well.  Among the more interesting of these are *blackboy*,
also called *grass-tree*, a black-boled liliaceous tree with a
spearlike flowerstalk and reedlike leaves resembling fuzzy
hair or a grass skirt (but in New Zealand the same word
refers to a type of peach), and *black swan*, a descriptive
term.  The presence of black swans in Australia indirectly
explains the name *White Swan Reservoir* in Ballarat.  A type
of ant is the *blackhead* (other types being *greenheads,
blueheads, redheads*, and *green-tree ants*), and a type of
cicada, the *black prince* (other types being the *greengrocer,
yellow Monday* and *yellow Tuesday*; there is also a *green
Monday*, the origin of these names being, apparently, by
folk etymology, a name of an Aboriginal, mentioned by
Captain Watkin Tench in 1791 as *Yel-lo-mun-dee*, later applied,
as *Yellow Monday*, to a creek near Parramatta).

In Australia as elsewhere, *blue* has proved rich in associations.
A *blue* or *bluey* may be a 'summons, especially for
a traffic offence' (from the color of the paper) or a *blue* may
be a 'quarrel or mistake' *(made a bit of a blue)* or just a
'nickname for a red-headed person.'  The *Blues* are a N.S.W.
Rugby League team, the *Bluebags* another.  A *bluey* is a
'blanket,' *to hump bluey* 'to carry a swag, take to the track.'
The connotation of *blue* sometimes seems to be derogatory;
a *blue duck* is 'something that fails to meet expectations, a
dud,' and a *blue bird*, the 'police paddy-wagon.'  The *blue
devil*, however, is merely a 'thistlelike plant' and the tone is
neutral in *bluetongue*, a 'lizard with a bright blue tongue,'
also, perhaps from confusion with the *sleepy lizard*, 'a shed-hand
on a sheep-station,' and in *blue flyer* 'the female of the
red kangaroo' and *blue heeler* 'a cattle dog,' if not *blue
pointer*, 'a large shark'.  There is the *bluebottle*, a local
name for the 'Portuguese man-of-war,' *blue-eye* (a fish) and
*bluefish, bluebush*, and, of course, the *bluegum.  Bluestone*
is a 'building-stone,' not necessarily blue, in fact more often
brown in South Australia, and in early New Zealand the
*blueshirts* were a politically radical group, more like the
'reds' than the 'blues' of today.

Apart from flora and fauna (*redbill, red bream, red
cedar, red cod, red gum*, etc.), *red* has not formed many
new associations in Australia.  Perhaps most notable is the
*Red Centre*, describing the red-clay interior of Australia.
There is a note of danger in the name of the *redback* spider,
though it is also descriptive: it is the *katipo* of New Zealand,
related to the American black widow.  Danger again motivates
the names *red steer* or *red bull* for a bushfire.  There is
political connotation in the *red-feds* 'members of the Red
Federation in New Zealand early this century,' but not in
the *red page* the 'literary page of the *Bulletin*,' actually
colored red or pink, in the period of nationalist consciousness
late last century.  A fish called *nannygai* was renamed
*redfish*, and this name has proved popular enough to
improve its sales, but a *green tiger prawn* was renamed
*grooved tiger prawn* because *green* suggested an uncooked
prawn.

*Yellow* has racial associations in *yeller feller*, a probably
obsolete name for a male half-caste, but is otherwise
confined to flora and fauna (*yellow-tail, yellow-belly*, both
fishes, and *yellow-jacket*, naming various eucalypts.)

*Green* gives rise to *green bans*, which are *black bans*
imposed by unions for environmentalist reasons.  Those who
support such actions are *greenies* (a name also applied to
various Australian birds).  The *green cart* is the 'van supposed
to take people to the mental asylum.'  *Greenfeed* is
forage fed fresh to livestock.  The *green-leek* is a parrot and
the *Galloping Greens* a football team.

*Purple* undergoes no changes here, except that *purple
patch* is sometimes used to refer to a run of success or good
form.  Neither are there new associations for *orange* except
in names for flora and fauna, such as *orange chat* or
*orange-bark* (from the color of its inner bark).

*Grey* enters into *greybark*, a 'large beetle attacking
sugar-cane,' *grey box* (various trees), and *grey nurse* a 'nasty
shark.'  The *Hexham greys* are mosquitoes of exceptional
size, associated with a place in New South Wales.  A *grey
meanie* (in Victoria) or a *grey ghost* (in New South Wales) is
a 'parking policeman': the name is from the color of the
uniform; earlier, the Sydney traffic warden was dressed in
brown and known as a *brown bomber*.

Brown and grey are among the more &ldquo;developed&rdquo; colors
appearing at a later stage of technical advance.  In New
Guinea Pidgin, *brown* is likely to be referred to as *arakain
ret* 'another kind of red' and *grey hair* is *waitpela gras*,
etymologically 'white grass.'  In Australian English, *brown*
appears in the dangerous *brown snake, brownie* a 'bush
cake with currants and brown sugar,' the obsolete *brown* a
'penny,' and *browntop* a 'pasture grass.'

*Pink*, apart from some nineteen flora and fauna words
listed in the *Australian Encyclopaedia*, gives *pinkie* 'cheap
wine' or 'drink containing methylated spirits.'

Fancier words such as *crimson, scarlet, rose, tawny,
golden, pale yellow, bronze* (even *nankeen* 'buff-colored,'
appearing in the name of the *nankeen night heron*) enter into
new words for flora and fauna, but even in these special
vocabularies there are color words (e.g., *chartreuse, indigo*)
which have no new life in Australia.

No very surprising result emerges from a study of color
words in Australian English.  More perhaps than we think,
we are imprisoned in a set of associations formed in Europe
and especially Britain, though possibly there has been some
shifting of connotations of approval towards the red end of
the spectrum as the language has been brought from &ldquo;England's
green and pleasant land&rdquo; to the &ldquo;wide brown land&rdquo; of
Australia.

## The Head of Coty's Wife
*Murry Harris, White Plains, New York*

It began years ago, at the dinner table.  My sister,
Florence, aged ten, had just returned from a summer at
camp.  She started an anecdote with, &ldquo;One Sunday, *a
girl in my bunk's mother* came up and...&rdquo;

Florence couldn't finish the story until I had teased
her about her bunk's mother.  Although it became a
family joke, we forgot about it eventually.  That is, until
some sort of genes took over; the trait resurfaced after a
couple of decades.  We were driving to the beach with
Florence's daughter, now aged ten herself.  As we
crossed the bridge to Atlantic Beach, she looked out at
the unfamiliar neighborhood and said, &ldquo;I wonder
where's *the kids who live around here's school*.&rdquo;

Soon after that, I was calling for a friend, en route to
dinner.  As I helped her on with her coat, she began
describing her day at the office.  &ldquo;I'm working on an
interview with Lily Dach&eacute;,&rdquo; she said.  &ldquo;Did you know
that she's *the head of Coty's wife?*&rdquo;

My recollection of grammatical designations was a
bit hazy.  I vaguely remembered my English teacher's
reference to past imperfect and future subjunctive.  The
only term I could come up with for this trait was
*retarded possessive*.

Soon, the usage came naturally.  I was describing
holiday weekends in a wooded area of Eastern Massachusetts.
&ldquo;We used to go into the general store in
Buzzard's Bay on Labor Day,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;to buy *the day
before's New York Times*.&rdquo;

Apparently, I was not the only collector of the late,
late apostrophe.  H. Allen Smith, always one to savor
language quirks, reached 'way back to the network radio
era.  Colonel Stoopnagle and Budd, he wrote, had also
fancied the construction and devised this for one of their
broadcasts: &ldquo;That man over there is *the woman whose
penthouse we went up to the other night's brother-in-law*.&rdquo;

Now, what I'd really like to learn is the people who
usually get to read this quarterly's reactions.


#### EPISTOLA {David L. Gold}

I agree with Charles Bremer [IV, 2] that &ldquo;unfortunately,
our language in its present state is far from an
ideal system of symbols, growing as it has from an array
of northern European and Romance languages with a
sprinkling of American Indian, Yiddish, and a few dozen
other languages&rdquo; and that &ldquo;therefore, steps must be
taken now to purify and distill our language...&rdquo;  As a
first step, I propose the removal of such foreignisms as
*American, international, language, eventual, means,
people, exchange, idea, mutual, unfortunate, present,
state, ideal, system, symbol, array, European, Romance,
Indian, dozen, mixture, tend, develop, extensive, lexicon,
complicate, degree, endanger, use, purify, distill,
accurate, country, effort, communication, interest, support,
Charles, city*, and *Oregon* (all taken from his letter).

*[David L. Gold, University of Haifa]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Bible Almanac*](https://www.biblio.com/the-bible-almanac-by-packer-j-i-tenney-merrill/work/259565)
J.I. Packer, M.C. Tenney, Wm. White, Jr., eds., (Thomas Nelson, 1980), 765 pp. incl. index.

The editors of this volume state that its purpose, as
understood by both the eleven major and the thirty-five
supplemental contributors (plus four editorial consultants
and two project coordinators) is &ldquo;to present in
plain terms the information that is most helpful in
interpreting the Bible accurately&rdquo; (p. 13).  That &ldquo;accurately&rdquo;
means &ldquo;conservatively&rdquo; is made clear from the
beginning editorial introductions right through to the
end of the final article.  The effort to defend such a
viewpoint in light of both intra- and extra-Biblical evidence
occupies many lines of text.  The bulk of the
*Almanac* consists of forty-six topical articles: &ldquo;The
Ancient World,&rdquo; &ldquo;Plants and Herbs,&rdquo; &ldquo;Money and Economics,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Family Relationships,&rdquo; &ldquo;Food and Eating
Habits,&rdquo; &ldquo;Music,&rdquo; and the like.  The articles are supplemented
by many interesting maps, charts, and pictures.
Some of the color plates are stunning.  Authors of individual
articles are not identified, and footnotes referring
to other published works are rare, those to major scholarly
resources virtually absent.  Protestant in orientation,
the authors use the King James translation as normative
and give little attention to the *Apocrypha*, regarded as
canonical by Roman Catholics.

The forty-six articles are of rather uneven quality.
Some of them are well done.  &ldquo;Language and Writing&rdquo; is
well and carefully written, and &ldquo;Archaeology&rdquo; is also
one of the better treatments.  &ldquo;The Egyptians&rdquo; gives
judicious treatment to its subject matter, and, given the
limitations imposed by a conservative-fundamentalist
outlook, the section &ldquo;The Literature of the Bible&rdquo; is
useful.

Other sections are less valuable.  &ldquo;The Geography of
Palestine&rdquo; has too many errors (e.g., p. 197, 7 to 15 cm is
said to equal 36 to 60 inches, 26 km&sup2; to equal 68 square
miles; p. 196, referring to *Hosea* 6:4: &ldquo;Yet the dew
evaporates quickly, and it became proverbial to compare
Israel's faithfulness to dew&rdquo;—clearly &ldquo;faithlessness&rdquo; is
meant; p. 201, referring to *2 Kings* 6:1-7: &ldquo;Elisha made
an iron axe handle float on the river&rdquo;—it was an axe
*head;* p. 205, in reference to *Acts* 8:1-6: &ldquo;When the
early church was persecuted in Jerusalem and all the
apostles scattered&rdquo;—a close look at *Acts* 8:1 shows all
fled &ldquo;*except* the apostles&rdquo;).  Such errors are unfortunately
far too prevalent in this *Almanac;* one could fill a
review of this length simply by identifying them.

Another section, &ldquo;The Poetry of the Bible,&rdquo; contains
disturbing contradictions (p. 371, paragraph 5: &ldquo;The
*Book of Psalms* stands apart from any other poetic
literature of the ancient Near East&rdquo;; same page, paragraph
2: &ldquo;The artistic style of Biblical poetry closely
resembles Ugaritic and Babylonian poetry&rdquo;; p. 372:
&ldquo;The language of the Psalms resembles the poetry of
the ancient city of Ugarit&rdquo;; or again, p. 362, paragraph 1:
&ldquo;Paul's epistles (as the rest of the New Testament
epistles) are unique literary productions.  They differ
from all letter forms found in extra-Biblical literature&rdquo;;
same page, paragraphs 2 and 3 describe the &ldquo;literary
form&rdquo; of &ldquo;extra-Biblical letters&rdquo;; same page, paragraph
4: &ldquo;Paul's letters follow this general structure&rdquo;).  Such
contradictions are also unfortunately far too prevalent in
this volume; one could fill *another* review of this length
simply by identifying them.

The section on &ldquo;Forms of Government&rdquo; is simplistic
and limited in view.  There is nothing in it on the
form of theocratic covenant on which Israel based its
life as a nation and on which Hittite archaeology has
thrown a flood of light.  The section on &ldquo;Marriage and
Divorce&rdquo; would have profited from a survey of contemporary
extra-Biblical customs, especially in light of *Mark*
10:12, where a woman divorcing her husband was in
total contradiction to the law of Moses (cf. p. 438).  These
and other sections are little more than a catalog of
pertinent Biblical materials, with no references to other
contemporary cultural practices.

It is the many annoying errors and contradictions,
however, that make the *Almanac* less valuable than it
otherwise might have been.  Some errors are probably
owing to careless editing (e.g., p. 232, the Greek word
for 'dove,' *peristera*, is wrongly given as *periatera*; p.
356, *cosmogony* 'the story of the birth of the cosmos' is
defined as though it were *theogony* 'a biography of the
gods'; p. 587, Chapter 5 is simply omitted from the
outline of Paul's epistle to the Romans).  Others are more
serious, particularly in a volume that takes the Bible
seriously as history.  For example, there are historical
errors.  On p. 173, we read that the Maccabean revolt
began when &ldquo;only a few men escaped into the hills
under Judas Maccabeus.&rdquo;  In fact, the revolt began
under his father, Mattathias Hashmon; Judas was the
third of his five sons.  The facts are correctly given
elsewhere (pp. 177, 409), but how is the nonexpert to
know which account is true?  Again, referring to Herod's
Temple (begun in 20 B.C.), we learn: &ldquo;In fact, some
scholars feel the new temple had not been completed at
the time Jerusalem fell to the Roman general Pompey in
A.D. 63&rdquo; (p. 409).  In fact, Pompey took Jerusalem in 63
B.C.  It was Titus who took Jerusalem in A.D. 70, the
event to which the author apparently wanted to refer.

Along with historical, there are Biblical errors.  For
example, we are told (p. 521): &ldquo;Christ ascended into
heaven (*John* 24:49-53)&rdquo;.  *John* has only 21 chapters;
apparently the reference was intended to be *Luke*
24:49-53.  That ought to have been caught in editing, as
also the incorrect *Luke* 4:30-39, cited on p. 515 (right
column, near the bottom).  The correct reference is *Luke*
5:33-39.  More serious are the errors that arise from an
apparent ignorance of the content of the Bible, where
speculation is substituted for what the Bible actually
says.  For example (p. 219): &ldquo;This explains why Jesus'
disciples rebuked the woman who broke an alabaster
vessel of perfume and poured the perfume upon Jesus'
head (*Mark* 14:3).  The disciples felt she was wasting a
precious scent that could have been enjoyed for years.&rdquo;
Yet *Mark* says specifically (14:4-5) that the disciples
rebuked her because the perfume could have been sold
(for 300 denarii) and given to the poor.  In some
instances, one wonders if the author has even bothered
to read Scripture.  For example (p. 506): &ldquo;Jesus' teachings
about a person's diet (*Mark* 7:1-9), respect for
elders (*Mark* 7:10-13) and Sabbath keeping (*Matt*.
12:24-32) agreed with the teachings of the Pharisees.&rdquo;
In each instance cited, Jesus is *attacking*, explicitly, the
view of the Pharisees on those matters.  Such errors,
which occur with alarming frequency, are hard to understand
on the part of authors who claim to take Scripture
with utmost seriousness.

In sum, a good idea, a Biblical almanac, is badly
flawed by too many errors, contradictions, wrong references,
speculations stated as fact (e.g., &ldquo;John the Baptist
was a Nazarite,&rdquo; p. 513; &ldquo;Matthew 23:23 mentions
certain spices as antacids,&rdquo; p. 464), and poor editing that
ought to have caught many of these errors.  When accurate
material is interspersed with the inaccurate, how is
the layperson, for whom this almanac was written, to
distinguish between the two?  For an &ldquo;accurate interpretation&rdquo;
of Scripture, this particular almanac, despite its
lovely color plates, will be of less help than one would
have hoped.

*[Paul J. Achtemeier, Jackson Professor of Biblical Interpretation Union Theological Seminary in Richmond]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Room's Dictionary of Distinguishables*](https://www.abebooks.com/first-edition/Rooms-Dictionary-Distinguishables-Room-Adrian-Routledge/22630856875/bd)
Adrian Room, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1981), 132 pp.

English has the richest word hoard of any language,
yet it possesses few exact synonyms.  *Gorse, furze,* and
*whin* are usually cited as true synonyms, being three
different names for the plant *Ulex europaeus*.  However,
the perceptive British listener can detect which part of
the country a man (or woman) comes from, and perhaps
also which social class he belongs to, by which of the
three words he uses.  And *whin* is also used to describe
other thorny plants with yellow flowers.  I am not sure
that the British English *pavement* is an exact synonym
for the American *sidewalk*.  With such a huge lexicon of
delicately shaded near-synonyms to choose from, the
best writers and speakers will take pains to select
exactly the right word for the job they have in mind.  As
the Duchess said to Alice: &ldquo;Take care of the sense, and
the sounds will take care of themselves.&rdquo;

This new sort of dictionary is intended to help us in
the selection of the right word from the vast choice
available.  Two years ago Adrian Room published his
*Dictionary of Confusibles* (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul,
&pound;4.95), distinguishing between pairs or larger groups of
words that look alike, sound alike, are sometimes spelt
alike, and, by golly, have a common semantic link:
words like *baroque* and *rococo*, or *twerp* and *twat*.  The
book did well; so here is its successor, dealing with
*distinguishables*.  Distinguishables do not sound alike or
look alike, but their meanings overlap, for example,
*midge, gnat*, and *mosquito*, or *divan* and *couch*.  Moreover,
a confusible can be any part of speech, whereas
Mr. Room's distinguishables are all nouns.

The best place to find the exact meaning of a word
of which one is in doubt is in a big dictionary, with
citations and examples.  With distinguishables one will
need to look up both words and compare the meanings
carefully, which will take time.  And anyway not all of us
have by our desks an adequate array of big dictionaries
and encyclopedias for all the changes and chances of the
intolerable wrestle with words and meanings.  This dictionary
distinguishes more than 1,300 nouns with overlapping
meanings, and, where it helps, gives a little line
drawing, for instance to distinguish between *domes* and
*cupolas*.  Sydney Smith said that &ldquo;the dome of St. Paul's
has come down to Brighton and pupped&rdquo; (viz. the
cupolas on Brighton Pavilion).  The headwords range
from the simple to the abstruse.  Surely every schoolboy
knows the difference between *billiards* and *pool*, even
if obdurate townees are not sure about the difference
between a *partridge* and a *pheasant*.  But can you
discriminate between a *type I error* and a *type II error*
in statistics?  For the shaky among us, a *type I error* is 'a
rejection of the null hypothesis in statistical testing
when it is true,' and a *type II error* is 'an acceptance of
the null hypothesis in statistical testing when it is false.'
I daresay that the distinction will come in useful one
day for something or other.

But there are some very pretty, witty, and fine
distinctions between words that are likely to prove more
useful, for example, the exact difference between a *Nosy
Parker, Paul Pry, Peeping Tom,* and the female *Rosa
Dartle*.  Words that are simple British English
equivalents for American English *(lift/elevator)* are not
included.  I am not sure that Mr. Room is as sound on his
American English as his British.  American readers will
know better than I whether *ass* is really used in the
United States to mean 'sexual intercourse.'  And having
dived into *Webster*, I see that the meaning is given
there, &ldquo;usually considered vulgar.&rdquo;  Well, well, I knew
that you used it to mean *bum*, and *arse*, and that part of
the body generally, but I had not realized it could mean
the dirty deed itself.  The distinction between producers
and directors varies widely between cinema and stage
over here, and I suspect that Mr. Room's British distinctions
may well be scrambled on your side of the word-pond.
His distinction between *morning* and *evening
dress* does not work for the States, and it is obsolescent
for Britain.  I regret to tell you that chaps here are
wearing *pullovers* of many colours *(jerseys?  sweaters?
jumpers?)* with their evening dress, and sponge bag
trousers, as worn by Pop (the self-electing society of
prefects at Eton), have become very fashionable with
that absurd rig, *morning dress*.

One can grumble about omissions.  Wot, no distinction
between *meiosis* and *litotes,* or *iambus* and *spondee?*
Such grumbles reflect the personal needs and
interests of the grumbler.  One can find errors: the
difference between *tart* and *pie* is not simply that a *tart*
has no top crust.  In the north of England and Scotland,
tarts, if they contain something sweet or fruit, have top
crusts.  *Pies*, as in *mutton pie*, are reserved for pastry
casings enclosing something savoury—and very greasy
they are too.  If we are going to discriminate between
*balcony* and *verandah*, ought we not also to consider
*loggias, porches*, and *porticoes?*

Enough churlish grumbling and whinging.  It is a
useful little book, generally sound and agreeably written.
Those without the big lexicographical guns may
keep it on their desks to bolster their vocabularies.
Others can keep it by the bed or lavatory for brief
entertainment and education.  I am extremely chuffed at
last to know the difference between *appoggiatura* and
*acciaccatura*.  I have been wondering about that for
years.

—*Philip Howard*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Stacked Noun: &ldquo;Airport Long Term Car Park Courtesy
Vehicle Pickup Point.&rdquo;  [Seen at London's Gatwick Airport by
Norman A. Heap, Trenton, New Jersey.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;DEATH NOTICES—Man 62, has nicely balanced
personality, disposition &amp; looks Seeks a Wife.&rdquo;  [From
the *Sunday Star*, January 25, 1981.  Submitted by
I. Taubenfligel, Chicago, who comments, *This marriage is
certainly going to be made in heaven... we hope!*]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Word*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780671421854/Word-Charlton-Laird-0671421859/plp)
Charlton Laird, (Simon and Schuster, 1981), xv + 332 pp.

Charlton Laird has had a long and successful career
as a writer about language.  The author of half a dozen
popular books on the subject, including *The Miracle of
Language* (1953) and *Language in America* (1970), Laird
has now, at the age of eighty, produced what may be his
best book yet, *The Word*.  (If the title sounds somewhat
familiar, it is because it happens also to be the title of a
novel by Irving Wallace published in 1972.  But there
the coincidence ends.  Wallace's book is about the Christian
gospels, the word made flesh; Laird's is, of course,
about real words in the more usual sense.)

Subtitled &ldquo;A Look at the Vocabulary of English,&rdquo;
the book aims to bring together the most important
observations that have been made about the English
word stock.  Such a book has been long overdue.  For
more than a century, phonology and grammar, which
gave linguistics its name as a science, have dominated
the field, while lexicology has been relegated to the
status of a stepchild.  Yet to continue to ignore the study
of words and meanings is to insure that its still hidden
&ldquo;laws&rdquo; and &ldquo;deep structures&rdquo; will never be revealed.  In this respect, the naive speaker, who views language as
essentially a sequence of words with meanings, seems
to know intuitively what the language specialist has yet
to discover.

*The Word* tackles its subject with vigor and often
brilliance.  Laird, Professor Emeritus at the University of
Nevada, is a born teacher, with a passion for explanation
and illustration.  He is also a natural on the subject of
words, being the compiler of *Laird's Promptory* (1948),
the precursor of a generation of thesauruses that
replaced the various versions of Roget's pioneer work.
The name of this synonym dictionary exemplifies
Laird's intense preoccupation with words.  Dissatisfied
with the stilted term *thesaurus,* he cast about for the
*mot juste* and happily came up with *promptory* (derived
from a Medieval Latin word meaning 'storehouse, repository')
as a better name for a book constructed for
*prompt* reference and to *prompt* those who search for
the right word.  Although *promptory* has not yet found
its way into *Webster's Third* (*promptuary,* a poorer-sounding
variant suggestive of a mortuary, has), it is a
worthy and useful addition to the language; for example,
good use of it was made in a recent VERBATIM book
review [VII, 3, 12].

The eleven chapters of *The Word* cover the spectrum
of lexical lore, from the word as sign and symbol to
its centrality in semantic field theory and exponential
analysis.  Lest we forget that names were primordial
words, an entire chapter is devoted to the formation of
names.  We learn the patterns of naming, along with
explanations of countless names (*Thames, York,* the
-*ham* in *Birmingham, Nottingham,* etc.).  In subsequent
chapters, we trace the development of the English
vocabulary back to Proto-Indo-European, discover the
ways and means of lexical borrowing, explore the world
of semantic change, and learn about the shaping of
words, the morphology and grammar of words, fashions
in words, and the way various linguistic theories deal
with words and meanings.  An appendix includes a &ldquo;tool
kit&rdquo; for studying English words and a concise discussion
of phonemic symbols.  There is also a general index, an
index of terms, and a list of dictionaries, usage books,
and vocabulary studies for reading and reference.

As a popularizer, Laird skillfully blends old and
new knowledge about words.  He easily makes the leap
from Sir William Jones's founding of comparative linguistics
to the latest archaeological findings about the
Kurgan ancestors of the Indo-Europeans.  An attempt to
define *language* and *word* touches off a discussion of
current experiments with chimpanzees using sign language.
There are a few regrettable omissions.  In discussing
American dialects and the *Linguistic Atlas of
New England*, the opportunity to describe the very
important, almost completed *Dictionary of American
Regional English (DARE)* project is missed.  Similarly,
references are made to sociolinguistics and psycholin-guistics,
but generative grammar, which deals with the
lexicon in a special way, is not mentioned.

But these are minor faults in a book that gives the
reader a well-rounded picture of the role of the word in
language.  Interest in the English vocabulary, both here
and abroad, is perhaps at its summit.  The appearance in
recent years of several books of new words such as *The
Barnhart Dictionary of New English since 1963
(BDNE), The Second Barnhart Dictionary of New English,*
and Merriam-Webster's *6,000 Words* attests to the
current explosion of the English vocabulary.  Professor
Laird makes use of a sampling of entries in the *BDNE* to
gauge the relative frequencies of various types of word
formation in present-day English (pp. 228-229).  While
he finds the *BDNE* sampling generally representative,
he deplores what he considers to be an inadequate
representation of phrasal sequences such as *go public*
and *let it all hang out*, and goes on to reprimand the
*BDNE* for not being &ldquo;hospitable to phrasal sequences.&rdquo;
As one of the editors of the *BDNE,* I must disagree with
his conclusion.  According to my count, 63 entries in the
*BDNE*, or somewhat over one percent of its approximately
5,000 entries, are verbal phrases such as *tell it
like it is, come up roses, wind down*, and *cop out*.  This
seems to be a pretty respectable number.  But perhaps
more important, in the absence of comparative data for
the decades before 1963, we cannot in all fairness judge
whether a particular lexical type is adequately represented
in a corpus limited to the decade 1963-73.

Charlton Laird has set out in *The Word* to write a
book that is both serious and engaging.  For this reader,
he has succeeded admirably.

*[Sol Steinmetz, Bronxville, New York]*


### OBITER DICTA: *A Punctuation Parable*
*Lawrence Casler, 65 Woodland Road Pittsford, New York 14534*

When I give a talk on behalf of SAGE (the Society
for the Advancement of Good English), I frequently
begin with the story of a man who was asked to speak at
a public gathering and who decided to prepare his own
introduction.  He wrote the following, with the request
that the master of ceremonies use it without making any
changes: &ldquo;Ladies and Gentlemen, I bring you a man
among men.  He is out of place when among cheaters
and scoundrels.  He feels quite at home when surrounded
by persons of integrity.  He is uncomfortable
when not helping others.  He is perfectly satisfied when
his fellow human beings are happy.  He tries to make
changes in order for this country to be a better place.  He
should leave us this evening with feelings of disgust at
ineptitude and a desire to do better.  I present to you Mr.
John Smith.&rdquo;

Unfortunately, Mr. Smith or his secretary made a
number of errors in punctuation, so that the master of
ceremonies found himself reading the following:
&ldquo;Ladies and Gentlemen, I bring you a man.  Among
men, he is out of place.  When among cheaters and
scoundrels, he feels quite at home.  When surrounded by
persons of integrity, he is uncomfortable.  When not
helping others, he is perfectly satisfied.  When his fellow
human beings are happy, he tries to make changes.  In
order for this country to be a better place, he should
leave us this evening.  With feelings of disgust at ineptitude
and a desire to do better, I present to you Mr. John
Smith.&rdquo;

This story, which so vividly illustrates the importance
of proper punctuation, is not my creation.  It is a
reconstruction of something I read or heard as a high
school student, several decades ago.  I would appreciate
information from readers of *Verbatim* concerning the
identity of the story's originator, so that I can duly credit
him or her when the occasion next arises.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Hyperactivity—or, to use the term now preferred, attention
deficit disorder—can continue into adolescence and adulthood.&rdquo;
[From a column by Dr. Neil Solomon in the Press-Herald
(Portland, Maine), n.d.  Submitted by Josephine Bell
Trask, Damariscotta, Maine.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I am concerned that the BMA should state categorically
that it deprecates the activities of unscrupulous members of
our profession who are out for a quick kill, at the expense of
the reputation of the rest of us.&rdquo;  [From a letter by R. Moshy,
Honorary Secretary, British Medical Association, Manchester,
published in The British Medical Journal, 23 May 1981.
Submitted by Dr. D.B. Jack, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;DO NOT DRINK THE BEER HERE!&rdquo;  [Sign in a delicatessen
on Broadway near 106th Street, New York City—
one that offers a wide selection of imported beers.
Submitted by Robert I. Goler, New York City.]

## A Rose Could Be a Ruse or a Rouse
*Jay Ames, Toronto, Canada*

Nicknames in the British Armed Forces are perhaps a
shade odder than most, since many attach themselves to
specific surnames.  Thus *Smiths* are always &ldquo;Sudger&rdquo;, *Blacks*
can be &ldquo;Darkie&rdquo; or &ldquo;Nigger&rdquo; without any racial slurs
intended—or taken.  *Browns* are either &ldquo;Bomber,&rdquo; &ldquo;Topper,&rdquo; or
&ldquo;Nigger&rdquo;; a few are given the soubriquet &ldquo;Chocko&rdquo; ('chocolate').
*Greys* and *Grays* are named &ldquo;Dolly&rdquo; from the wartime
song of that name, circa 1900.  *Greens,* for some reason I was
never able to uncover, begat &ldquo;Dodger.&rdquo;  Was Fagin's artful one
a green one or surnamed Green?  *Whites* could be &ldquo;Chalky,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Blanco,&rdquo; &ldquo;Snowie,&rdquo; &ldquo;Snowball,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Flarry&rdquo; ('floury').  I heard
(and worked with) the odd &ldquo;Inky&rdquo; *Pink.*

*Millers* were &ldquo;Dusty&rdquo; as a general rule, as were some
*Lanes* and *Rhodes*, though more *Lanes* were &ldquo;Sandy&rdquo; and the
odd *Rhode* a &ldquo;Stoney&rdquo; one.  *Balls* were &ldquo;Knacker&rdquo; (a slang
word for 'ballocks' or 'testicle') or &ldquo;Ghoolie&rdquo; (an East Indian
word for 'ball') Some *Wood/Woods* were &ldquo;Timber,&rdquo; others
were &ldquo;Lackry,&rdquo; a word, again, from India—not to be confused
with *louri* or *lowry*—a word meaning 'lingam, penis.'  We had a
Harry *Lowry* whose name suggested &ldquo;hairy louri&rdquo; and a *Larry*
(redubbed &ldquo;Louri&rdquo;) O'Dowd, so named for his amatory
exploits.

*Clark, Clarke,* and *Clerk* were always and forever &ldquo;Nobby&rdquo;
or &ldquo;Nobbo,&rdquo; more often the former.  *Martins* in the Navy were
&ldquo;Pincher&rdquo; and all *Westons* were known as &ldquo;Aggie,&rdquo; however
manly they were.  The *Martins* were named for an admiral, and
the *Westons* for Dame Agnes Weston, a well-known philanthropist
and &ldquo;hero&rdquo; of the British Navy.  *Murphys* are &ldquo;Spud,&rdquo; as
*Mulligans* and *Milligans* are &ldquo;Spike&rdquo; to all and sundry.  *Warners*
are often as not &ldquo;Plum,&rdquo; for Sir Pelham W—whose first name is
pronounced as &ldquo;P'lam&rdquo;; Welsh *Davises* and *Davieses* are
&ldquo;Dai,&rdquo; though *Lloyds, Thomases, Williamses, Morganses,* and
*Evanses* seem to be &ldquo;Taffy&rdquo; or &ldquo;Taff&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;Dai&rdquo; ('dye'),
both Welsh forms for *David* (Dewi).  Most &ldquo;Jocks&rdquo; and &ldquo;Scotties&rdquo;
were and are last-named *Mac* something or other, as
&ldquo;Paddy&rdquo; seems to be a generic for all the Irish *O'* names,
regardless of proper baptismals.

&ldquo;Lank&rdquo; is a nickname for a Lancastrian, but &ldquo;Lanky&rdquo; is
someone 'tall, long legged, spindly'; a &ldquo;Yorkie&rdquo; comes from
Yorkshire; a &ldquo;Geordie&rdquo; is a Tynesider.  &ldquo;Brum&rdquo; or &ldquo;Brummie&rdquo; is
from Brummagem—modern spelling is Birmingham—in Warwickshire,
which we foreigners always managed to mispronounce
as &ldquo;Warwick&rdquo; rather than the proper &ldquo;warrik-shire.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Shino&rdquo; is a generic for bald heads or &ldquo;skinheads,&rdquo; as we
now call them; more recently I met and worked with a
&ldquo;Chrome-Dome *Brome*&rdquo; whose moniker was very aptly fitting.
Among Army Signalmen, &ldquo;Helio-head&rdquo; was not uncommon for
a &ldquo;baldy,&rdquo; whether he was also a Smith, Jones, Robinson, or
Brown.  &ldquo;Wingy&rdquo; is the one-armed gent, as &ldquo;Gimpy&rdquo; is one-legged
or lame—but both outside the Services.

My own nicknames overseas were many and varied,
including such oddities as &ldquo;Copperknob,&rdquo; &ldquo;Bloodnut,&rdquo; &ldquo;Rustynut,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Flame'ead,&rdquo; &ldquo;Fire'ead,&rdquo; &ldquo;Ginge,&rdquo; &ldquo;Ginger,&rdquo; &ldquo;Fuchsi,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Roti,&rdquo; &ldquo;Krasny,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Rubio.&rdquo;  One co-worker dubbed me
&ldquo;Pincus,&rdquo; though neither he nor I was a Jew.  My height (or
lack of it) got me tagged &ldquo;Kleiner,&rdquo; &ldquo;Malenky,&rdquo; &ldquo;Chota,&rdquo; &ldquo;P'tit
Jean,&rdquo; &ldquo;Titch&rdquo; ('frequent'), &ldquo;Kish,&rdquo; &ldquo;Dinky,&rdquo; &ldquo;Chico,&rdquo; and the
like.  The first name *Jay* was a stumbling block for many and
impossible to equate with any name generally in use.  So it was
changed quite often to &ldquo;Jason,&rdquo; &ldquo;Jake,&rdquo; &ldquo;John,&rdquo; &ldquo;Joe,&rdquo; or their
linguistic equivalents—&ldquo;Yan,&rdquo; &ldquo;Yanni,&rdquo; &ldquo;Yanke,&rdquo; &ldquo;Yanko,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Pepi,&rdquo; &ldquo;Pepino,&rdquo; &ldquo;Yosli,&rdquo; &ldquo;Yischko,&rdquo; or, in Wales, &ldquo;Yanto,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Yanto-bach,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Shunni-bach&rdquo; ('John-boy').  Scots and Irish
tended to opt for &ldquo;Jaimie,&rdquo; &ldquo;Jemmy,&rdquo; &ldquo;Jummie,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Jimbo,&rdquo;
though some gave me the fuller &ldquo;Seamus,&rdquo; (*Shay* and *Jay* being
pet forms of Seamus).

*Ames* was butchered into &ldquo;Ah-mess,&rdquo; &ldquo;Ah-miss,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Ahmos,&rdquo; &ldquo;Aymos,&rdquo; &ldquo;Aymess,&rdquo; and the like, seldom &ldquo;Aymz&rdquo;;
the closest was the English pet form &ldquo;Aimsie&rdquo;—on a par with
&ldquo;Hobbsie&rdquo; for *Hobbs*, &ldquo;Webbsie&rdquo; for *Webb*, and &ldquo;Smittie&rdquo; for
*Smith.*

For some reason I've never fully understood, long names
are reduced to a minimum; short names are lengthened in the
pet form or nicknaming process.  *Jay* also gave rise to &ldquo;Jay-jay,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Blue-jay,&rdquo; and plain &ldquo;Blue.&rdquo;  Torontonian mothers today call
their boys &ldquo;Jay&rdquo; when they're actually baptised *Jason, James,*
and even *Jonathan,* I've discovered.

Oddest, to my mind, was the &ldquo;Stuka&rdquo; nickname my POW
dogtags (#88) earned me in German hospital during WW II.
One nickname I loathed (though it is no longer applicable) was
&ldquo;Beachball,&rdquo; at a time when I was too short for my weight.  It
may well have helped get me back to normal.

## Japanese English
*David Galef, Hyogo, Japan*

There is a strange type of English practiced in Japan,
following an orthography stranger than that of pidgin
English: it is a weird amalgam of uncannily accurate phrases
and secondary meanings copied from second-rate dictionaries.
The phenomenon of Japanese English is likely to strike the eye
of the tourist and expatriate alike, although those who stay
longer in Japan have a far greater chance to view the linguistic
catastrophe in its entirety.  Where else but in Japan would one
see a girl on a subway, wearing a T-shirt with the saying:

>CARROT—Do you think Rabbit lives in the moon  
Why Rabbit's ear is long  
Why Rabbit's eye is red.

Or a schoolbook bag emblazoned with the following:

>cat is one of popular animal in world  
some people like cat same as dog which do  
you prefer cat or dog?

The problem, which is widespread, is enough to make the most
hardened English teacher flinch.

At first glance, one may come to the conclusion that the
misspellings and errors in construction are the work of a few
high-placed idiots, unfortunately in charge of a clothing company.
As one moves through downtown Osaka, however, the
proliferation of signs, labels, and logos in Japanese English
makes one pull up short.  Some are easy to catch, their
meanings simply distorted by a lack of articles and a warped
grammar:

>Matey Bunny and Mole  
You are annoying to me hear.  But in your absence  
I should miss you.  Mole has a big nose and a little  
body.  Matey Bunny is proud of long ears.

Sometimes, the *l* and *r* confusion is transferred into print:

>FOR ELITE—JIMY AND EMIRY—  
SILHOUETTE OF TWO PEOPLE IN LOVE

Sometimes, what looks like a fair imitation is destroyed by the
last line:

>Lovely field—If stars dropped out of heaven  
and if flowers took their place,  
The sky would still look very fair  
and fair earth's face.

The Japanese like to dream ambitiously, especially in English:

>'if' What a good Sound and possibility the word  
has!  Even if it is assumptve....  
By patronizing 'if' your fantasy never be impossible  
to become true some day in the  
near future.

This last credo appeared on a plasticized shopping bag, a very
popular item for pedestrians in Japan—and a very popular
place for designers to print their Japanese English.

Japanese English can be seen on many signs, such as those
of restaurants which advertise &ldquo;PIZZAP.AIE&rdquo; or &ldquo;Cook &amp; Tea.'
It also appears on bags, T-shirts, sweatshirts, students' pencil
cases, and decals of all descriptions.

>CAUTION: SPECIAL HAND MADE CAKE
>
>The Sea's  
It all starts here!  
Jack and Betty.  The young is free as the wind  
no one will catch them forever.

After glimpsing enough of these messages, one may grasp at
theories to explain the phenomenon.  It *is* puzzling.  The
outsider may be surprised to learn, for instance, that the
average Japanese learns English for six years; if the student
goes on to college, he or she emerges with a total of ten years
of English language classes.  Most students may not speak
English well, since most examinations emphasize reading and
writing primarily, but the English test for the college entrance
examination is quite rigorous.  Indeed, many people in America
might have a hard time passing it.  Such a regimen produces the
odd situation of students who know the difference between *its*
and *it's* or *shall* and *will*, but who cannot properly ask where
the bathroom is.  Years after the students have graduated from
school, their writing ability falls to the level of their speaking
ability; they have, after all, little chance to keep in practice.

Japanese English is therefore dimly remembered English
rules of grammar combined with Japanese word order and lack
of articles.  There are no real articles in Japanese: *hon* means
'book,' 'the book,' 'a book,' or 'many books,' the specific
meaning to be determined by the context.  Then again, some
sentences are extremely hard to explain, though the usual
problem seems to be simple laziness.  The manufacturers, if
they consult a dictionary at all, run into the same mistake an
elementary student gets snagged on: using a word the way its
synonym should be used.  &ldquo;Patronizing 'if&rdquo;' instead of &ldquo;using
'if' &rdquo; is one such example.  Or this sweatshirt legend, quite
popular with adolescents:

>Do sports!  
Challenge Baseball.

In both cases, the verb that fits is *try,* a near relative of *do* and
*challenge*.  Even veteran users of *Roget's Thesaurus* occasionally
run into this problem.  &ldquo;Crispy Gal&rdquo; and &ldquo;Nobility of Ideas,&rdquo;
both emblems on bags, are further examples.

Other examples may be ascribed to an attempt at &ldquo;Japanizing&rdquo;
English sentence structure or, more accurately, an
attempt at creating their own sentence structure.  For example,
there is an ornamental tray with the phrase &ldquo;Happy life in
good, Tiger!&rdquo;  The back of a panel truck weaving through traffic
advertises, &ldquo;Pet is good friend.&rdquo;  Young students ride the train
to school every morning wearing shirts that say:

>We is classmates  
Walk together, talk together, ect.  
I'm lack of exercise, be tired out.  
cigh cigh.  
TAKE HAVE A WALK  
TENNIS  
Try single hand and how to changhands.

Misspellings also contribute their share to the confusion:
&ldquo;Mamy's Beauty Saloon,&rdquo; &ldquo;Discotique,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Autnmn Sale&rdquo;
(someone put the *u* upside down).

Finally, some messages are almost inscrutable:

>Again—impressions at childhood are still fresh now
and if it can be met...  
Chatterbox.  Happiness is visiting little world.  
What do you think as pleasure now  
How do you think as happiness now  
How do you think as freshness now.  
I cannot anything  
Love is a traffic signal.  
Hair &amp; Room

A colleague who teaches business English to the employees
of several large companies went so far as to suggest that it
was a conspiracy to sabotage the influx of foreign words into
the language, somewhat like l'Acad&eacute;mie Francaise, with its
eyes shut and its brain addled.  As a matter of fact, the
Japanese are quite receptive to adopting American words and
phrases.  *Romaji*, or romanization of the Japanese *kanji* and
syllabary, is quite common.  There is always, however, a subtle
Japanese flavor.  One goes to the supermarket to buy *miriku,
bataa*, and *hamu*.  (The Japanese syllabary contains no consonants
without vowels and has no *l*'s, so this transformation is
undergone by milk, butter, and ham.)

At any rate, the spread of Japanese English is unstoppable,
and for many foreigners, myself included, it is a source of fun,
the way many Americans jot down errata in newsprint.  Not all
the examples in Japan are worth taking down; there are simply
too many of them.  Here is a sampling of the bags on the
subway:

>NICEST FELLOWS  
JUST MET  
Men's Shop McLord's  
FASHION IN LOVING  
Nice Rythmn Good Sound and Just NOW  
We Are Absorbed in Sexi Rock'n Roll and  
Motorcycle  
Let's Sports Violent All Day Long  
A partner with your adornment  
Report with fidelity  
Yours truly  
a likely story  
The word keeps  
pupping through my mind.  
Japanese All-Professional Amatueur Boxing (JAPAB)  
Sports!  Be in it!  
Jim and Bill.  Paper bag.  Now we are together.  
Hurry up or the Church Will Be Closed and It Will Be  
Unable for Us to Be Married  
The exciting couple of animals

Many of the shirts and bags have to do with the fulfillment of
adolescent sexual fantasies, and the last example is a double-entendre
if there ever was one.

It is, of course, impossible to pin down the culprit, except
to blame the school system or the English-teaching associations,
of which I am a member.  Frankly, though I am not an English
language reactionary like Edwin Newman or John Simon, I do
feel a responsibility to teach a &ldquo;correct&rdquo; way of saying things.
And, of course, the main problem is simply the ignorance that
any problem exists.  I knew I would get nowhere crusading
when, on my first day of teaching, I was handed a bag in
which to put my teaching materials.  The bag had a picture of a
moose, under which was written:

>ACTIVITY  
Artistic Buauty  
Excellent  
Enjoy Youthbul Days With Glee and Brave!  
Youre Only Young One Do Everything You Wont.  
With glee and brave, I enter the subway every morning  
and go to teach.

### MISSQURINTS
*From a bifocled Compositor, actually, Egdon H. Margo, Reseda, California.*

Joshua fit the battle of Geritol.

Happily even after.

Workers arise!  You have nothing to lose but your chairs!

To each his owl.

Remember the fable of the asshopper and the grant.

Dime is money.

Look stranger—there ain't enough room in this gown for the
two of us.

Lightning never strikes mice.

If a man bites a dog, that is booze.

How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to shave a
thankless child.

Behind every good moan—there's a woman.

Cast thy bread upon the waiters.

You only get what you pray for.

We're looking for people who like to writhe

A fool and his monkey are soon parted.

The frog comes in on little cat feet.

Little Miss Muffet spat on her tuffet.

Prosperity is just around the coroner.

Gold helps those who help themselves.

I'd rather bet right than be President.

Breading maketh a full man.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;You don't cut off your nose to spoil your face.&rdquo;  [Quoted
in The New York Times, Business Section, September 6, 1981.
Submitted by Paul M. Lloyd, Secane, Pennsylvania.  Indeed,
why bother otherwise?]

## Freud and the Gentiles
*John Edwards, St. Francis Xavier University*

In the Spring 1981 number of VERBATIM, Professor W.C.
Hendley presented an entertaining essay on student errors and
solecisms gleaned from his marking of their papers.  The
professor is quite correct when he notes that some members of
the academic brotherhood share his hobby.  I, for one, have
been collecting gems from students' papers for some years.  The
special piquancy here is that many of these are psychologically
revealing.  Indeed, all of my finds derive from psychology
papers; most are from a course I have taught for several years
on personality theories, while others come from introductory
and social psychology courses.  The least entertaining are mere
mistakes.  The real gems shine because they demonstrate
interesting, one might sometimes say Freudian, slips and
transpositions.

For example, in a comment that is either an unfavorable
slur on behaviorism or an accurate description of its shortcomings,
depending upon your point of view, one student recently
wrote that &ldquo;personality is learned through the parings of
stimulus and response.&rdquo;  Another remark, in an essay on altered
modes of consciousness, was that &ldquo;hypnosis is an awkward
state of awareness&rdquo;—a comment that will surely be understood
by stage magicians and others, and which would have been
applauded by Freud himself.  The first psychoanalyst, early in
his career, rejected hypnosis as a &ldquo;coarsely interfering
method&rdquo;; perhaps the student here was being more perspicacious
than he knew.

On the Freudian theme itself, several good finds have
come from students' attempts to explain the notion of
psychosexual stages.  Simple confusion is shown in the following:
&ldquo;The next stage is the oral stage; the child is now
beginning to notice its genitals.  However, this doesn't mean a
child can be aroused by exotic stimulation.&rdquo;  Apart from the
&ldquo;exotic&rdquo; for &ldquo;erotic,&rdquo; which is possibly an improvement on the
original, we have here only an unfortunate amalgamation of the
first and third psychosexual stages.  But the next comment is, I
feel, a true Freudian gem: &ldquo;The phallic stage is the stage where
we become interested in our gentiles.  We find we receive
pleasure from simple manipulation of the gentiles.  We don't
realize at this age that this is known as masturbation.&rdquo;  If we
did, I suppose we wouldn't do it, for fear of going blind.
However, the slip here surely has Freudian overtones.  Could it
be that &ldquo;manipulation of the gentiles&rdquo; is a subjective reaction
to Freud's entire theory?  Is it a thinly veiled anti-Semitic slur?
On the other hand, is it an equally veiled mark of approbation
for Freud, whose acceptance was made no easier by his
Viennese Jewishness?  As with all classic Freudian slips, the true
message is maddeningly elusive.  But the speaker has, unwittingly
or not, suggested a rich lode to be mined by students of
Freud and his sociocultural context.

Freud's notions of homosexuality are reflected, albeit
inaccurately, in the following two statements: &ldquo;Homosexuality
is practically the same as heterosexuality&rdquo; and &ldquo;There are no
real causes to homosexuality.&rdquo;  What a wealth of meaning is
carried in the one word &ldquo;practically.&rdquo;  While in line with some
modern sentiments, these statements would surely give Freud
pause.  On the same theme, another student scores an
undoubted hit with the note that &ldquo;in bigger cities, homosexuality
is greater than in smaller places.&rdquo;  Just how, though, are we
to understand &ldquo;greater&rdquo; in this context?

Two final comments on Freudian insight are worth mentioning
here.  The first is that &ldquo;Freud believed that the way in
which the child was toilet-trained depended upon his personality
in later years.&rdquo;  A simple error, or an affirmation of the
metaphysical circularity of life?  If the latter, is the student
mistaking Freud for Jung?  The last comment here is essentially
unanalyzable, but surely provocative: &ldquo;Freud looked upon
females as he did castrated males.&rdquo;  It is only unfortunate that
the records do not tell us precisely how many castrated males
were examined by the great man.

Jung comes in for some attention too.  One student
astutely remarks that &ldquo;with his analytic school of psychology,
Jung went off on a different fork.&rdquo;  And how far did this take
him, we might ask?  Or is this a reference to differences in the
use of cutlery among the elite of personality theorizing?  Again,
there are fascinating possibilities here for the student of
Jungian ephemera.  We also appreciate the remark that &ldquo;Jung's
archetypes were different than his phototypes,&rdquo; thereby learning
of Jung's interest in photography.  To catch a fleeting
glimpse of the collective unconscious, perhaps, or to encapsulate
something of the racial memory on slides?

Introductory psychology always provides interesting examples
of slips and sprawls, but, because beginners are involved, it
is not fair to repeat everything that could be held against the
students.  Here I shall present just a few examples in which the
error is more intriguing than first it seems.  For example.  &ldquo;IQ
tests are culture pacific&rdquo; could be a mere mistake or a profound
analysis of the whole cross-cultural standardized-testing movement.
Or consider the following: &ldquo;Social roles are found in
everyday living.  As Shakespeare said, every man is a stage.&rdquo;
Perhaps, in the light of modern social theorizing, this is a wise
expansion of the bard's observation.  While an individual struts
about the world, he is also a world unto himself.  Consider this
penetrating comment on group initiation and religion:

>...this may explain why games requiring skill, such as
hockey, baseball, golf and skydiving, are more popular
with many people than is church.  If a difficult initiation
test was added to baptism, more people would feel
church worthwhile.

Or, this slightly warped view of what makes a good test:

>One of the major characteristics would be that the
questions asked or the problems posed would be stated
so that they do not influence the recipient's answers.

Another student might, unfortunately, have been cleverer than
he knew when he wrote that &ldquo;when a person becomes psychic
they cut out a certain part of his brain.&rdquo;  On the same subject,
another student wrote of lobotomy that &ldquo;the operation is called
*libido* because part of the limbs are removed from the brain.&rdquo;
And again, &ldquo;lobotomy is an operation that removes figments of
your brain.&rdquo; *Figments* for *segments* (which would not have
been correct itself, incidentally) is a slip that conjures up more
than it removes in error.

Lastly here, to show no prejudice, are some instances of
social psychological analysis.  The first is a broadside against an
interfering neighbor.  &ldquo;Sociopath: deals with sociology and the
path it takes in one's life.&rdquo;  We all know that sociologists are the
unrigorous relations of psychologists, but to think that things
have gone this far!  Writing of comparative studies of aggression,
a student easily disposed of one of the leaders in the field:
&ldquo;Berkowitz is quick to comment, and his thoughts on aggression
in the animal kingdom are unapproachable.&rdquo;  This same
Berkowitz believes, apparently, that &ldquo;ethologists have a tendency
to put all their eggs in one basket.&rdquo;  What a charmingly
appropriate way to criticize the students of animal behavior.
Finally, on the beauty-is-skin-deep notion, a student provides
the last word: &ldquo;Attractive people are sometimes attracted to
each other on the basis of their attractiveness alone.&rdquo;

As I hope to have shown, student errors are sometimes
more than egregious mistakes.  They often, in fact, make the
reader think harder than he would have if confronted with a
more correct response.  Therefore, to add to Professor Hendley's
comments, the fringe benefits go beyond mere entertainment.
They may include psychological insights that are not the
less compelling simply because neither questioner nor student
respondent is aware of them.  These, as Freud would have said,
are often the best kind.


#### EPISTOLA {W.M. Woods}

Dr. Harold J. Ellner's article, &ldquo;Pleonasties&rdquo; [VII, 4], struck
a sympathetic chord.  As he might have said, pleonasms are
ubiquitously omnipresent everywhere, as well as redundant.
Many of his examples might be termed technical, or specialist
pleonasms.

There is a type of technical pleonasm that occurs when
the media attempt to explain something technical to the
layman.  The examples that follow illustrate this class:

>radioactive plutonium.  *To distinguish it from the
nonradioactive kind?*
>
>explosive methane gas.  *Doubly pleonastic: not only is
all methane explosive (under the right conditions), but
the unqualified mention of methane implies a gas*.
>
>highly toxic hydrogen cyanide.  *That's the worst kind*.
>
>nonflammable helium.
>
>corrosive hydrochloric acid.

It requires some technical knowledge to recognize some of
these as pleonasms.  It is not pleonastic to speak of radioactive
iodine because I(127), the naturally occurring isotope, is not
radioactive; the term therefore refers to any of the other 23
isotopes known at present, all of which are radioactive.  Potassium
presents a subtle problem.  The ordinary, naturally occurring
form of potassium is mildly radioactive.  It contains 0.0118
atom-% of *K*(40), which has a half-life of about a billion years.  But
the remainder of natural potassium, consisting of the isotopes
*K*(39) and *K*(41), are stable and nonradioactive.

Is it then pleonastic to speak of &ldquo;radioactive potassium&rdquo;?
Strictly, it is, if natural potassium is referred to; in principle,
however, it would be possible to remove the *K*(40) from natural
potassium, making it nonradioactive.  Thus, it would not be
pleonastic to speak of radioactive potassium if such a distinction
were being made.

When the journalist, writing for popular consumption,
writes &ldquo;radioactive plutonium,&rdquo; the expression may be construed
as shorthand for &ldquo;plutonium, which happens to be
radioactive.&rdquo; It is likewise with my other examples.  Would the
purist insist on the more wordy form in order to avoid using
more words than necessary?

Journalists commit enough &ldquo;real&rdquo; pleonasms without our
quibbling about technical pleonasms.  Here are a few typical
examples that we all see frequently:

>The vehicle was traveling at a fast rate of speed.  *Speed
is a rate, and &ldquo;rate of speed&rdquo; is redundant*.
>
>precipitate out.  *As distinguished from precipitating in?*
reinforced concrete internally buttressed with steel rods.
>
>*By definition, reinforced concrete is so buttressed*.
>
>a round-crowned derby hat.
>
>the New Testament of the Christian Bible.

*[W.M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee]*

[*In the Police Blotter reports in our local newspapers—those
nasty little items that inform everyone in town about who got a
parking ticket or went through a red light—there often appears
the information that so-and-so was stopped for &ldquo;speeding too
fast for conditions,&rdquo; another example of the same kind.  In my
opinion, a few extra words for the sake of clarity and style
never did a writer (or a reader) any harm.  Too often, phrases
like &ldquo;the United States' commitment to Israel&rdquo; becomes &ldquo;the
United States commitment to Israel,&rdquo; making an attributive
noun out of what was formerly the normal (modifying) adjectival
form of the noun—its possessive.  This practice has led in
the last few decades to a general shifting of nominal function,
and today one sees nouns used constantly in attributive
position.  Nonetheless, I think it better style to write and say,
&ldquo;the commitment of the United States to Israel,&rdquo; but that is a
personal crotchet.  On the other hand, elsewhere in this issue
appears an article, &ldquo;The Head of Coty's Wife,&rdquo; which deals
with a slightly different aspect of the same sort of attributive
laziness.  One reflex of this practice can be seen in constructions
that require a gerund in attributive position but end up with
the participial form of the same word: &ldquo;I am not confident of
his doing the job&rdquo; becomes &ldquo;I am not confident of him doing
the job.&rdquo;  The distinction between those two may be indiscernible
to many, but not to me: the first is a reflection on the
person's ability; the second on the person himself, while he
happens to be doing the job.  Similarly, note the difference
between &ldquo;She doesn't like my coming home late&rdquo; and &ldquo;She
doesn't like me coming home late.&rdquo;  The emphasis is entirely
different, yet few people are capable of understanding the
difference, and even fewer observe the need to make the
distinction*.

*The last comments are not very much to the point of
pleonasms, but they are related.  Why is everyone in such a
hurry?  A more careful, deliberate adherence to a form of usage
and syntax would reduce ambiguity, increase clarity, and result
in both better information and better understanding.—Editor*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Ed Haas}

&ldquo;English as she is spoke,&rdquo; by Michael Gorman [VII, 4],
brought to my mind a printed souvenir I picked up at a hotel
in Estepona, Spain, in 1974:

>Thanks, you choiced our hotel to spend your holidays in it.
>
>The direction and the staff are always at your disposition.
In this hotel you will find a homely ambient, we
hope you like it.  To make our services more efficient, we
ask you to write down on the back-side all kinds of
avery or suggestions you would communicate us.  Thank
you.

*[Ed Haas, Funk &amp; Wagnalls]*


#### EPISTOLA {Col. Robert Joseph Powers, USAF (ret.)}

I am mildly surprised that *attitude adjustment hour struck*
you as a novel euphemism for 'communal boozing' [VII, 4],
although I'll admit that Winter Haven's seven hours does set a
record of sorts.  To the best of my knowledge, this term
surfaced in the military about fifteen years ago, during one of
the service's periodic attacks of image-conscious morality:
booze became bad, officially, and the Happy Hour was to be
downplayed.  Some zealot interpreted this as prohibiting use of
the more traditional name for after-hours lubrication.  The
troops, in their infinite wisdom, created Attitude Adjustment
Hour as a subtle substitute.  The same ineffable humor prevailed
during the time when Robert McNamara was Secretary
of Defense.  That controversial gentleman promoted a controversial
airplane, the swing-wing F-111.  What else could we call
it but the &ldquo;Switchblade Edsel&rdquo;?

*[Col. Robert Joseph Powers, USAF (ret.), Shreveport, Louisiana]*

## Paring Pairs No. 6

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-qq); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered word may be used more than once (and some clues
require more than two answer items), but after all the matching
have been completed, one numbered item will remain
unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer is the
only correct one.  The solution will be published in the next*
VERBATIM.

(a). Chastening influence.  
(b). Disappointment.  
(c). Coerce.  
(e). Met pieman.  
(f). Saint.  
(g). Electronic layout.  
(h). Where Trevi et al. might be kept.  
(i). Source.  
(j). Jazz tune.  
(k). Pre-ballpoint essential.  
(l). Eat.  
(m). Row of trees.  
(n). Carminate.  
(o). CB interruption.  
(p). 007's optic.  
(q). Infantile customers.  
(r). Toxophilist.  
(s). Meerschaum.  
(t). Modern caravanserai.  
(u). Turn of the century.  
(v). Expert surfer.  
(w). Tarkington creation.  
(x). For writing swinish prose.  
(y). Carroll's elderly acrobat.  
(z). End of the line.  
(aa). Orange king.  
(bb). Haute couture.  
(cc). Crusader.  
(dd). Eventide.  
(ee). Stiff printing medium.  
(ff). Hopalong Cassidy.  
(gg). Makes for rough going.  
(hh). Quality stationery.  
(ii). New World propellant.  
(jj). Professional journal.  
(kk). Assault in the dark.  
(ll). Jacket.  
(mm). Use a watch.  
(nn). Exup&eacute;ry found it in Arras.  
(oo). Self-contained airbreathing apparatus.  
(pp). Celebrity.  
(qq). Chronologer.  

(1). Simon.  
(2). Rode.  
(3). Tiger.  
(4). Brake.  
(5). Bored.  
(6). Pen.  
(7). I.  
(8). Simple.  
(9). Rail.  
(10). Bond's.  
(11). Rag.  
(12). Trade.  
(13). Breaker.  
(14). Wiper.  
(15). Tell.  
(16). Wind.  
(17). Pig.  
(18). Liner.  
(19). Father.  
(20). Templar.  
(21). Mow.  
(22). Carriage.  
(23). Paper.  
(24). Bred.  
(25). Fountain.  
(26). Pipe.  
(27). Hart.  
(28). William.  
(29). Rod.  
(30). Head.  
(31). Man.  
(32). Bundling.  
(33). Time.  
(34). Night.  

Winners will receive either a copy of the Collector's
Edition of Thomas Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail value,
$30 or &pound;15.00), a copy of *English English*, by Norman W.
Schur (retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50), three copies (one for
you, two for gifts) of *Wordsmanship*, by Claur&eacute;ne duGran
(retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85), twelve copies (one for you,
eleven for gifts) of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson
(retail value, $35.40 or &pound;18.00), or a credit of $25.00 or &pound;12.50
towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered in the
VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.  Those living in the U.K.,
Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa should send their
answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market Square, Aylesbury, Bucks,
England.  All others should send them, preferably on a postcard,
to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426-0668, U.S.A.

*Please indicate your choice of prize along with your
answer to save everyone unnecessary correspondence*.

To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems, and to
make it fairer for those residing far from either office, we shall
arrange to collect all correct answers for 21 days, starting with
the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw one
winner from each office.

## Paring Pairs No. 5

Because of the quick succession of issues, we have some
catching up to do in announcing the winners of Paring Pairs
Nos. 3 and 4.  The winner of No. 3 was, in North America,
Doris Fields.  The winner of No. 4 was Wayne Donaldson in
North America; there was no winner in Europe.  Winners of
No. 5 were selected too late for inclusion in this issue.

(a). Buffalo dentists use this in flight of computer fancy. (40, 11) Byte Wing.  
(b). Cockney slattern's gone wiggy over salmon roe.  (4, 28) Oar Locks.  
(c). Repository of former glory.  (29, 34) Has Bin.  
(d). Boss Tweed couldn't have been cleaner than this.  (39, 10) Hound's Tooth.  
(e). Slothful, intoxicating Islamic spirit fizzes out.  (45, 19) Slow Djinn.  
(f). Seasonal release from prison.  (48, 1) Spring Time.  
(g). *U.S.:* trailer; *Brit.:* caravan.  (2, 53) Moving House.  
(h). Cares for cephalalgia.  (25, 17) Head Nurse.  
(i). Conventionalist from California in London.  (24, 9) Berkeley Square.  
(j). Stock of British sneakers is kept at sea level.  (18, 27) Plimsoll Line.  
(k). Polite, murderous conflict?  (44, 3) Civil War.  
(l). British B-girl?  (38, 16) Tea Lady.  
(m). Sweet monster at resort.  (8, 43) Brighton Roc.  
(n). Help yourself to 50 per cent of the total.  (15, 33) Halve Sum.  
(o). Mermaid's home?  (26, 23) Fingal's Cave.  
(p). Must have formal wedding—fruit and all!  (22, 52) Cant Elope.  
(q). Validity through haruspicy?  (20, 51) Offal Truth.  
(r). Madeline's friend, now grown, is near Frankfurt/Main. (14, 47) Bad Homburg.  
(s). Henry, Jane, and Peter owe us affectionate goodby. (49, 5) Fond Adieu.  
(t). Pub sign of the hour.  (37, 30) Time Gentlemen.  
(u). He made it, but it sounds like a fraud.  (42, 6) Fake It.  
(v). Tiller sounds like this when boring.  (7, 50) Hoe Hum.  
(w). Part for Artur Rubinstein to eat?  (12, 31) Piano Roll.  
(x). Free use of spirit may cause wobbly walk.  (46, 21) Foot Loose.  
(y). Equipment for creating chaos at meals.  (32, 35) Mess Kit.  
(z). Increased price when you buy on time in England. (36, 41) Higher Purchase.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;BABE Treat wishes to announce the forthcoming marriage
of her only daughter Patricia Elizabeth to William
Andrew Bowman.  The wedding to be consummated on October
9, 1981 at Salmon Arm, B.C....&rdquo;  [From a classified
advertisement in The Weekender, September 25, 1981, page 13.
Submitted by Lt. Col. N. Sadlier-Brown, Blind Bay, British
Columbia.  R.S.V.P.: Regrets only?]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Almost flat-chested, they flaunt callipygian charms. (7)  
5\. Innocent movie fare. (7)  
9\. Cry when it's quiet and nobody's home. (b)  
10\. Monsters that jet or lay eggs. (9)  
11\. Crew for the Ship of Fools? (6)  
12\. One drink before the mixed congregation and that's all! (8)  
14\. Quack's sin of omission: his hangup is sheer bluff. (2,7)  
16\. In dire need, yet the girl splits. (5)  
17\. Deadly composition in A-flat. (5)  
19\. Hell is in poor taste. Let's beat it! (9)  
22\. Our style of business life is one comic mess. (8)  
23\. Judge with no jury should consider fair sentences. (6)  
26\. Double ploy. (9)  
27\. I am without towering talent but at least true to type. (5)  
28\. Fashion's pen sets the pattern for decency. (7)  
29\. Spacious look of all outdoors. (4, 3)  

**Down**

1\. He plays second for the one who got to first base. (4, 3)  
2\. Spaced-out drunk and coed took it on the lam...(7)  
3\. ...well, it helps, you see, to stay loose. (5)  
4\. Language nobody ever heard. (4)  
5\. Privately, a supporter of Women's Lib. (10)  
6\. Pleading poverty is not a good excuse. (4, 5)  
7\. Carrier of cash flow to the Middle East. (3, 4)  
8\. Japanese theater fashion belies lack of tone. (2, 5)  
13\. Coy MP, Rather bent. covers legal part in collusion. (10)  
15\. They would hold firm, along with old stocks and bonds. (9)  
17\. License paid for only in the breach. (7)  
18\. Pert duo did the show tour. (7)  
20\. It helps make the inaudible and invisible just the opposite. (7)  
21\. Indulgent one to cure sex kink. (7)  
24\. Go back in regret for being such a knave. (5)  
25\. Was Troy the beginner in that war? (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Aplomb (a plum);  
4\. Uppercut;  
10\. Obtuse angle;  
11\. Fox;  
12\. T-radi-TI-o-NS;  
13\. Yawn;   
15\. Opinion poll;  
19\. Godlessness;  
22\. Lark;  
23\. Parachuter;  
26\. dO A Foolish thing;  
27\. P-ersecu-T-i-O-n  
28\. Daydream;  
29\. Redeye.  

**Down**

1\. AD-option;  
2\. Lothario;  
3\. MIS-giving-S;  
4\. PAgan;  
6\.  Ever (reve);  
7\. CA-fta-N;  
8\. Toxins (tocsins);  
9\. RATIONED (anagram TO A DINER);  
14\. Glass house;  
16\. Operated (anagram RED TAPE + O-round);  
17\. Best-ride;  
18\. ESTRANGE (anagram SERGEANT);  
20\. A-l-M-o-N-d;  
21\. DRaft-Y;  
24\. Aorta;  
25\. Spur.  

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v8n3_Winter_1982)