--- 
title: "VOL VIII, No 4 [Autumn, 1981]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## John Le Carr&eacute;'s Spy Jargon: An Introduction and Lexicon
*Victor Lasseter, The California State College, Bakersfield*

John le Carr&eacute;, the British author of such best-selling spy
novels as *The Spy Who Came In from the Cold* and *Tinker,
Tailor, Soldier, Spy,* has invented not only intricate, suspenseful
plots but also a new nomenclature for spies—what the narrator
of *The Honourable Schoolboy* calls &ldquo;their own strange jargon.&rdquo;
Le Carr&eacute;'s new spy jargon is so strikingly appropriate that the
international espionage establishment now uses some of his
fictional expressions.  Thanks to le Carr&eacute;,*mole* has become
standard spy nomenclature for a 'double agent who burrows to
the top of the enemy's secret service.'  The term became
popular after the great success of *Tinker, Tailor* in 1974;
according to Thomas Powers in *The Man Who Kept the
Secrets: Richard Helms and the CIA, mole* now belongs to &ldquo;the
vernacular of counter-intelligence.&rdquo;

This strange jargon clearly delights le Carr&eacute;, who often
introduces a definition with the expression &ldquo;as the jargon
happily puts it.&rdquo;  His jargon thus carries neither the usual
pejorative sense of &ldquo;both ugly and hard to understand&rdquo; nor of
&ldquo;long words, circumlocutions, and other clumsiness&rdquo; (H.W.
Fowler, *A Dictionary of Modern English Usage*).  Rather, le
Carr&eacute;'s coinages have the simplicity, vividness, and lucidity (to
insiders) of such trade jargon as *knowledge box* the 'box
containing oilfield drillers' reports and orders,' *kittens* 'unsanitary
balls of dust in hospitals,' *Robinson Crusoe and Friday*
'two theater seats on the aisle,' *dead man* an 'anchor for the
rigging of a circus tent' (borrowed from nautical language), and
*punch bowl* a 'boxing arena.'

Le Carr&eacute;'s spies use strange jargon like *walk in the park* a
'clandestine rendezvous,' not to deceive the opposition (spies
have cryptography for secrecy) but because the unusual terminology
suits the secretive, dangerous vocation of spying.  Le
Carr&eacute;'s spy jargon is therefore a kind of professional or trade
jargon that, like slang, appropriates words from other contexts
to create an insider's language—unlike slang, however, the new
language communicates precisely.  At the same time, the jargon
is more colorful and concise than such businessese as *maximization
of profit potential* 'making a lot of money'.

The nature of le Carr&eacute;'s spy jargon becomes clearer when
it is compared to other kinds of spy nomenclature in the
nonfiction world of espionage.  CIA jargon, for instance, can
become heavily euphemistic, as in the example *disinformation
activities*—the agency's term for 'propaganda.'  Le Carr&eacute; detests
such dishonesty and parodies it with his expressions *agent
potential* and *exfiltration assignment* 'bringing home a spy.'
Rather, le Carr&eacute; delights in candid jargon like *stolen photograph*
'one taken secretly.'

As a writer of espionage novels, le Carr&eacute; has at hand a
considerable body of espionage nomenclature.  He sometimes
borrows rather dry terms like *fieldman, deskman, preliminary
interrogation, surveillance, case officer, operational subsistence,
courier, and cryptonym*—all of which are literal and transparent
enough for the layman to understand.  Furthermore, he uses
some of the more interesting metaphorical expressions for
existing jargon such as *tradecraft* 'espionage techniques,' *cover*
'disguise,' and *blown* 'having had one's cover exposed.'  To the
writer of fiction, the understatement of a word like *tradecraft*
for the 'techniques of secret radio transmission or silent killing'
appeals more than the flatness of a term like *case officer*.

Still, a writer like le Carr&eacute; prefers to go further and create
his own language.  The CIA uses *deception* for a 'double agent';
le Carr&eacute; invents the now famous *mole*.  A less imaginative
writer refers to a *spy school*; le Carr&eacute; invents the grimly ironic
*Nursery*.

*Nursery* is a good example of a major category of his
jargon—words from domestic life and the childhood of nursery
rhymes.  Appropriated to the new, colder context of espionage,
the words become ironic.  *Nursery* designates the British spy
training school, which le Carr&eacute; sardonically defines as a &ldquo;charm
school for outward bound penetration agents.&rdquo;  Here young
recruits are nurtured and trained by elders like George Smiley,
secluded at Sarratt from a world they are not yet ready to
enter.  Their nurturing includes the arts of interrogation resistance,
sabotage, and silent killing.  It is here, in the climax of
*Tinker, Tailor,* that Jim Prideaux kills the mole Bill Haydon.

Similarly, at London headquarters an 'internal security
officer' is a *housekeeper*; a 'senior secretary' is a *mother*; a
'conference room' is a *rumpus room*; the 'CIA' *cousins* or
*neighbours* (although they are untrustworthy as Moscow); and
'agents in charge of domestic intelligence' are *lamplighters*
(because they spend so much time on the street).  A 'master
spy's bodyguard' is a *baby-sitter.  Sandman* refers to 'Karla,' a
workname for the head of Moscow's counter-espionage; he is
the sandman because those who get too close to him go to
sleep.  *Circus* is highly ambiguous jargon for 'London headquarters';
the word refers to the address at Cambridge Circus, but
the expression *the Circus* also carries negative connotations of
frivolity and confusion.

Other words come from commerce: *competition, customer,
department, one time sale of assets, product, stock*, and *travelling
salesman*, for example.  These words had originally benign
or neutral connotations but take on ironic and sinister implications
when transferred to the terrifying world of espionage.
The life of a spy, especially a le Carr&eacute; spy, is surrounded by
the constant fear of boredom, betrayal, or death.  The spies
recognize the danger, but reject cloak-and-dagger jargon, preferring
instead the subtle shock of understatement.  The ironic
jargon compares to that of other dangerous professions.  Sky
divers, for instance, describe the 'failure of a parachute to
open' as *coming all the way in*.  Steelworkers on skyscrapers
and bridges describe a 'fatal fall' as *going into the hole*.

A second major category consists of words that have
ominous, sinister connotations in themselves.  These include
*gorilla*, a 'Soviet watchdog of Soviet spies'; *hood*, a 'Russian
spy'; *bloodhound*, a 'British watchdog of British spies'; *reptile*
*fund,* 'one for illicit operations'; *leash dog,* a 'surveillance
expert'; and *scalphunter,* a 'specialist in strong-arm tactics like
blackmail and murder.'

This duality of threatening words and innocent words that
become threatening perhaps reflects the paradox of the spy's
life: periods of great danger and activity alternating with
periods of calm and boredom.  Overall, the effect of the jargon
is to reenforce the spiritual chill that permeates le Carr&eacute;'s
world.

To those concerned about language in contemporary society,
*jargon* has understandably become a repulsive term signifying
a cloudy, pretentious insider's language subdivided into
ugly types such as psychobabble, educationese, sociologese, and
bureaucratese.  John le Carr&eacute;, in inventing a spy jargon, has
shown that the language of insiders may be simple, lucid, and
evocative.

The following glossary includes only the jargon not already
defined.  Le Carr&eacute;'s own definitions are shown in quotation
marks.

*alimony* delayed payments to &ldquo;agents working in hostile
countries... who for reasons of cover cannot enjoy their
pay while they are in the field.&rdquo;

*appetizer* a piece of intelligence offered to arouse interest.
audition the meeting at which the source produces the
appetizer.

*bear leader* an instructor at the Nursery.

*body talk* an agent's safety signals, such as an open collar,
used to arrange or cancel a rendezvous, etc.

*burrower* a Circus researcher.

*competition* rival British intelligence groups.

*crash meeting* an emergency, clandestine meeting.

*customer* the government official or department receiving
intelligence reports.

*department* &ldquo;one of Whitehall's many euphemisms for the
Circus.&rdquo;

*duck dive* a quick escape.

*fallback* an alternative plan.

*feed someone smoke* to lie, deceive, confuse.

*gold seam* the route of laundered Soviet payments to their
agents.

*handwriting* a spy's signature or style of tradecraft.

*hard-man* a specialist in strong-arm operations.

*inquisitor* an interrogator.

*janitor* a guard at the circus.

*leave in one's socks* to leave immediately.  *See also* *duck
dive.*

*listener* electronics surveillance expert.  *Syn*.  *sound thief.*
one time sale of assets a single offering of intelligence by
a source.

*product* intelligence.

*sound thief* an expert in electronic surveillance.

*pavement artist* an expert in tailing.

*second bite* when the Circus is not content with a *one
time sale of assets*, it pressures the source for more.

*stock* &ldquo;sale or exchange with another intelligence service: a
commerce in small time defectors handled by the
scalphunters.&rdquo;

*spike* to tap a telephone, open mail, plant a microphone.
talent spotting looking for potential agents or defectors.
test the water to determine if one's own mail is spiked.
tradesmen &ldquo;marked collaborators in certain fields who are
pledged, if called upon any time, to drop everything and,
asking no questions, put their skills at the service's
disposal.&rdquo;

*trail one's coat* to invite a *pass* (approach) from a source
or an enemy agent.  *Syn.*  *trawl.*

*travelling salesman* a spy.

*unpack* to confess, to tell everything.

*watch someone's back* to see if someone is being followed.

*witchhunt* a purge of an intelligence service.

*wrangler* a code breaker.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Parking meters in Norwalk, Connecticut, offer: &ldquo;15
min for each nickel; 30 min for each dime; and for convenience,
one hour for one quarter.&rdquo;  [Submitted by Charles
King, Jr., Wilton, Connecticut.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I can say again that those who teach have done something
without which most people could not do for themselves
whatever it is they do; that the act of teaching is an exemplary
act, of self-fashioning on behalf of knowledge that
teaches others how to fashion the self; that no teacher is due
more respect or affection than he or she has earned, but that
the drive behind the teaching effort is a positive one...
That moment of poise when what is known becomes accessible
and must then become what is to be found, is the act of
teaching, and those acts in sequence are a life, in which, once
we learn how, we are all teachers and students of ourselves.&rdquo;
—From an article by A. Bartlett Giamatti, President of Yale
University, in Harper's, July 1980.  [Submitted by Henry
Morgan, New York City, who confesses, *We didn't know
that Yale offers Teach-Yourself Courses in English!  It's a
pity they aren't available to the staff at a discount.*]

## When Paragons Nod
*Lillian Mermin Feinsilver, Easton, Pennsylvania*

Over thirty years ago, when the *American Mercury* carried
an article of mine which justified occasional disregarding
of grammatical don'ts, a reader insisted that traditional rules of
rhetoric must be followed strictly.  In reply, I had to point out
that a sentence in his letter had broken one of the time-honored
rules.

That interchange comes to mind in connection with John
Simon's *Paradigms Lost,* which somehow never received the
kind of detailed criticism that Simon had given the prose of
others.  Now that the book has appeared in paperback, the
ironic case against it must be stated, for its lapses from literary
grace are both frequent and varied.  To cite a few of many
examples (page numbers apply to both editions):

Tense is imprecise on p. 64: &ldquo;I just returned from a short
journey through France and Italy...where I had ample
opportunity....&rdquo;  The first verb of course should be *I have just
returned*....  As it happens, the author inveighs against such
inaccuracy on p. 183.  Tense is further confused on p. 100:
&ldquo;Even if this was a misprint for *adapting*, it still wouldn't make
sense.&rdquo;  The shift from *was* to *wouldn't* is jarring.  I'd suggest
either *Even if this was*..., it still doesn't... or *Even if this
were* [contrary to fact]..., *it still wouldn't*....  As Simon
himself declaims on pp. 44 and 186-87, the subjunctive is not
yet expendable in careful writing.

Punctuation—to which an entire essay is devoted—in
practice flouts sensible standards, as in a sentence on p. 110:
&ldquo;Vidal's intelligence, *pace* Wolcott, does not 'curdle' on television
and his quick mind—prejudiced in many ways but still
quick and clear—buttressed by a delightfully ironic wit, is just
what the American public needs....&rdquo;  To avoid the impression
of curdling on his quick mind, we need a comma after
*television*; and another is required in place of the second dash,
which should be moved to follow *wit*.  We then have the more
understandable statement:... *does not 'curdle' on television,
and his quick mind—prejudiced in many ways but still quick
and clear, buttressed by a delightfully ironic wit—is just what
the American public needs*....

The difference between *etc.* and *et al.* is surprisingly
ignored by this devotee of Latin (p. 6): &ldquo;...great novelists,
poets, et cetera are too busy....&rdquo;  Ironically, the spelling out of
the former expression spotlights the error.

Someone's *less* is corrected to *fewer* on p. 153; yet six
pages earlier we have been told: &ldquo;Two readers, no less
(Hortense Berman and Thomas A. Long), have sent me....&rdquo;
Since two is not a large number, why use the phrase at all,
especially since *no less* has another meaning, as in &ldquo;The King
and Queen, no less, will be greeting our party&rdquo;?

Simon writes (p. 100): &ldquo;Why, you may ask, is correct
speech and writing important, as long as the meaning is clear?&rdquo;
I would counter in Talmudic fashion with a different question:
Why does Mr. Simon forget that the subject of the sentence—
*correct speech and writing*—is plural and requires a plural verb?
Yes, correct speech and writing *are* important.  He asks again (p.
202): &ldquo;What good is correct speech and writing, you may ask,
in an age in which hardly anyone seems to know and no one
seems to care?&rdquo;  In addition to the same error in subject-verb
agreement, there is vagueness as to what it is that hardly
anyone seems to know.  It might help to insert *why they matter*
or *what they are after know*.

Simon trips himself on *like* as conjunction.  Although he
criticizes such usage in the work of Erica Jong (p. 116), he
himself employs it, as on p. 101: &ldquo;I couldn't disagree more with
the structural linguists and their disciples—and thus with most
dictionaries in current use—when they contend that 'language
is what is spoken by the people' and, as if it followed like the
night the day, that 'language is a living thing, not something
codified by pedantic scholars.' &rdquo;  Surely Simon would agree that
...*as if it followed as the night the day*... would be more
graceful and would incidentally quote Shakespeare more accurately
(&ldquo;And it must follow as the night the day...&rdquo;).
Particularly awkward is his *unlike in* on p. 192: &ldquo;Well, I am
glad to note that in Mr. Owens's book, unlike in Mr. Mehegan's,
*graceless* is still a pejorative.&rdquo;  Possible substitutes might
be *not as in or if not in* or *as opposed to*.

I must add that the book title seems forced—partly
because *paradigm* is often properly pronounced with a short *i*—
and is not original.  Edwin Newman used the same pun in the
singular as the heading for chapter 6 of *A Civil Tongue* in
1976.

Two of the essays in Simon's book appear in another
recent volume which should have shown a more consistently
high level of writing and editing than it does: *The State of the
Language*, Leonard Michaels and Christopher Ricks, editors
(University of California Press).  One gets an inkling on p. xii, in
the prefatory note by Ricks (Professor of English Literature at
Christ's College, Cambridge University) that the prose ahead
may be less than faultless: &ldquo; 'Our language,' said the creative
and critical genius who was American and then English—T.S.
Eliot—'Our language, or any civilized language, is....' &rdquo;  Such
repetition is sometimes useful in lectures, but in print the
sentence seems careless, its deficiency compounded by inexact
punctuation.  (Replacing the first dash with a comma might
help a little.)  A neater arrangement would be: *As the creative
and critical genius who was American and then English—T.S.
Eliot—said, 'Our language*....'  Ricks continues: &ldquo;It is not
only that a language has an astonishing power of renovation.
For when a language creates—as it does—a community within
the present, it does so only by courtesy of a community
between the present and the past.&rdquo;  Why the confusing *For* in
the second sentence?  An additional point is being made, and
the statement might more effectively begin with *When*.

On p. 9, in &ldquo;Sound Barriers and *Gangbangsprache,&rdquo;*
Randolph Quirk (Quain Professor of English Language and
Literature at University College, London) makes a statement in
which subject and verb do not match in number: &ldquo;One of the
things that reduces *1985* from horror to farce is Burgess's
projected linguistic engineering.&rdquo;  Logical choices are *One thing
that reduces*...or *One of the things that reduce*....  Similar
imprecision occurs in novelist-essayist Edmund White's &ldquo;The
Political Vocabulary of Homosexuality&rdquo; (p. 239): &ldquo;*Gay* is,
moreover, one of the few words that does not refer explicitly to
sexual activity.&rdquo;  Since the antecedent of *that is words*, the verb
should be *do*.  The very next sentence is even more awkward:
&ldquo;One of the problems that has beleaguered gays is that....&rdquo;
There one could simplify by changing *that has beleaguered* to
*beleaguering* and by replacing the repetitive *One of the
problems* with *A problem*, producing: *A problem beleaguering
gays is that*....  Because of its long history and current growth,
some observers are inclined to accept the type of non-agreement
under discussion; but there are still many readers (including
John Simon on p. 185 of his aforementioned work) who are
jolted by it.  Indeed, two examples of usage from Professor
Ricks's article (p. 57) reflect the viability of the logical forms:
&ldquo;...one of those eerie films which speed up...&rdquo; and &ldquo;...one
of the few who have delighted in....&rdquo;

Tense in an infinitive is badly expressed by Frances
Ferguson (Associated Professor of English at the University of
California, Berkeley), in &ldquo;The Unfamiliarity of Familiar Letters&rdquo;
(p. 84): &ldquo;If Lee Marvin had only read *Clarissa*, he would
have known better than to have written any letters....&rdquo;  The
needed form is *to write*.

The uses of *who* and *whom* are at times embarrassing.
David Lodge (Professor of Modern English Literature at
Birmingham University) gives us *who* in place of *whom* (p.
508): &ldquo;Later, Kate refuses to tell him who she is meeting for a
lunch date....&rdquo;  (Although *whom* may be dying out faster in
England than it is in the U.S., the *who* seems improper in an
American academic work.)  And Kathryn Hellerstein (poet,
translator and essayist), in &ldquo;Yiddish Voices in American English,&rdquo;
twice writes *whom* for *who.*  On p. 197 we read: &ldquo;When
Edelshtein wanders in the snowstorm, searching for Hannah,
the young girl whom he hopes will be his translator....&rdquo;  Need
it be said that the relative pronoun is the subject of *will be?*  On
p. 198 the thought is restated and the error is repeated: &ldquo;He
begins two letters to Hannah,... who knows Yiddish, whom he
hopes will be his translator....&rdquo;  The same contribution contains
other kinds of error which should have been caught, as on
p. 184: &ldquo;Another letter portrays a father's response to his son's
conventional birthday wish as 'May you live 120 years,' the life-span
of the patriarch Abraham.&rdquo;  That life-span was attributed
to Moses (Deuteronomy 34:7); Abraham was accorded 175
years (Genesis 25:7).

Man-of-letters Kingsley Amis, in &ldquo;Getting It Wrong,&rdquo;
provides a description of current deteriorating usage (pp. 32-33)
which might be applied, at least partially, to the above-quoted
samplings: &ldquo;... growing imprecision...; quite commonly
ambiguity or sheer nonsense; and everywhere awkwardnesses
that force the reader to pause without profit, even if
only for an instant.  This is decline.&rdquo;  If John Simon is sounding
the clarion to combat such decline, I'm afraid his call is
muffled; and the state of the language (in both lower case and
italic initial capitals) is indeed cause for complaint.  Simon is
more than half right when he charges (p. 92): &ldquo;The real culprits
are the editors....&rdquo;  Although editors and their staffs may not
be able to catch every infelicity in the manuscripts they
process, they should certainly know—and care—enough about
exactness of expression to carry out their own proper share of
responsibility for clarity and accuracy.  Writing and publishing,
after all, are like any other services or products in requiring
careful attention to detail by trained persons at every stage.
Such painstaking effort is known as conscientious workmanship
and quality control—which readers, no less than consumers, still
have a right to expect.


#### EPISTOLA {J. Bryan, III}

A few more for Onomastica Nervosa [VIII, 2]:

*Benedict,* a newly married man.  
*Bertha,* a kind of cape or deep collar.  
*Billy,* 1. a he-goat.  [2. a policeman's club. 3. a poster. 4. *Australian.* a pot or tin for boiling water over a campfire.—*Editor*.]  
*Bobby,* an English policeman.  
*Dick,* *Slang*, a penis.  
*Dolly,* a small platform on wheels or rollers.  
*Jack,* 1. *Slang*. money. [2. a he-ass.—*Editor*.]  
*Jehu,* a furious driver.  
*Jemima,* 1. a dove. [2. *Aunt Jemima.* a female Uncle
Tom.—*Editor.*]  
*Jasper,* 1. a hick or rube. [2. a variety of quartz.—*Editor*.]  
*Jock,* 1. a jockstrap. 2. an athlete.  
*Jezebel,* a loose woman.  
*Joey,* 1. a clown. [2. *Australian*. a young kangaroo.—
*Editor.*]  
*Joseph,* a chaste man.  
*Jerry,* a chamberpot.  
*Jenny,* 1. a traveling crane. 2. a she-ass.  
*Charlotte,* a kind of pudding.  
*Charlotte (Russe),* a sweet dessert.  
*Louis,* a French gold coin.  
*Magdalen,* a reformed prostitute.  
*Mary,* *Australian*. an aborigine woman.  
*Nanny,* 1. a she-goat. [2. a children's nurse.—*Editor.*]  
*Reuben, Rube,* a hick or jasper.  
*Teddy,* 1. a one-piece ladies' undergarment consisting of
panties and a chemise. 2. a toy bear.  
*Victor,* a winner.  
*Warren,* an area abounding in rabbits.  
*Xanthippe,* a termagant or shrew.

*[J. Bryan, III, Richmond, Virginia]*

[*A few duplications have been deleted.—Editor*.]


#### EPISTOLA {Eric Hamp}

Addenda to Onomastica Nervosa:

*(Big) Ben,* the clock in the tower of the Houses of
Parliament.  
*(Big) Bertha,* a huge railway gun used by the Germans in
*WWI.*  
*(on the) Fritz,* broken; out of order.  
*George,* a generic, like Joe, Mac.  
*Jerry,* *WWI Slang*. a German or Germans collectively.  
*Judas,* 1. a traitor. 2. *Judas tree.* a kind of tree. 3. *Judas Priest.* euphemism for *Jesus Christ*.  
*Heinie,* *WWI Slang.* a German. 2. the behind; the
buttocks.  
*(Tin) Lizzie,* 1. Model T Ford. 2. a jalopy.  
*(Black) Maria,* police van for transporting captives.  
*Mickey (Finn),* a knockout drop (especially chloral hydrate,
when surreptitiously added to someone's drink).  
*Moll,* a gangster's girl friend.  
*Ned,* euphemism for *hell: to raise Ned*.  Also, Hob (from
Rob).  
*Oscar,* Academy Award trophy.  
*Sally (Lunn),* *Brit.* a sweet teacake.  
*(Doubting) Thomas,* a skeptic.  
*Timothy,* a kind of grass.  
*Toby,* a style of pottery mug or jug.  
*(Uncle) Tom,* a black man who toadies to whites.  
*Tom and Jerry,* 1. a hot buttered rum drink. 2. a cat and
mouse film cartoon team.

*[Eric Hamp, University of Chicago]*

[*And then there's* ERIC (Educational Resources Information
Center *or* Electronic Remote and Independent Control),
HAMP (Hampstead, Hampton National Historic Site, *or* High-Altitude
Measurement Probe).—*Editor*]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Selling America, Puns, Language, and Advertising*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780819120038/Selling-America-Puns-Language-Advertising-0819120030/plp)
Michel Monnot, (University Press of America, 1981), viii + 125pp., 62 photos.

On page 125 of this book appears a photograph of the
author, and one would be hard put to see in that pleasant
visage the sinister character of a thief.  Yet, it must be known
that Professor Monnot has purloined my idea for which I have
been gathering material these many months.  Worse still, the
wretch has made a better job of it than I ever could!  In the
photograph he seems to be perched atop a slate roof, presumably
because he expects the drinks to be on the house.

It is unavoidable, one must assume, to prepare a collection
of puns without explaining the nature of paronomasia.  Unfortunately,
such explanations come off as badly as explaining puns,
an exercise in which the author engages now and then, but
chiefly to elucidate a context that might not be immediately
apparent to the reader.  Monnot has classified puns into five
main categories (Grammatical Ambiguity; Same Spelling, Same
Pronunciation; Different Spelling, Same Pronunciation; Same
Spelling, Different Pronunciation; Different Spelling, Different
Pronunciation) and the inevitable Miscellaneous.

As is to be expected, some (if not most) of the examples
cited are rather corny and crude: it is almost as if the
copywriters who created the lines were told to come up with a
pun at the peril of their jobs.  Examples are

>Arrow shirts [picture of Joe Namath sporting one]:
>
>&ldquo;When Arrow made this shirt, it wasn't for any old
Joe.&rdquo;

But—isn't the *real* point that it *was* for &ldquo;any (old) Joe&rdquo;?
Some backfire:

>Avis Rent-a-Car:
>
>&ldquo;Ride Avis out of town.&rdquo;

I'm sure Hertz would love to.

Some are apt:

>Baldwin pianos:
>
>&ldquo;Rent a Baldwin for a song.&rdquo;
>
>Bank of A. Levy:
>
>&ldquo;Our interest in you is guaranteed.&rdquo;
>
>Some are simply inappropriate:
>
>Burgess batteries:
>
>&ldquo;Burgess batteries turn me on.&rdquo;
>
>Burlington (Textile) Building in New York:
>
>&ldquo;Burlington wants you to go through the Mill.&rdquo;
>
>First National City Bank:
>
>&ldquo;We work like elephants.  For peanuts.&rdquo;

Some are farfetched:

>Cannon towels:
>
>&ldquo;Cannon puts it right on the line.&rdquo;

After some thought—about .001 seconds—I realized that the
line is the clothesline.  Or the firing line?  Any other suggestions?
It is meaningless to me.  And is the following a pun?

>Icelandic Airlines:
>
>&ldquo;A world of difference.&rdquo;

This one relies on familiarity with an expression that is, I think,
rather archaic:

>Mumm Champagne:
>
>&ldquo;It was marzipan, carols, candles, and Mumm was the
word.&rdquo;

Besides, the expression is *Mum's the word* (that is, *is*).
Recently, I have heard this revised to the present tense.  There
are some that are simply in bad taste:

>American Hardware Mutual Insurance [picture of a
wheelchair]:
>
>&ldquo;You could get the chair for reckless driving.&rdquo;

Why not &ldquo;You could get a lower premium for wreckless
driving&rdquo;?

>March of Dimes [picture of Arnold Palmer:
>
>&ldquo;What's your handicap?&rdquo;  (Tag line: &ldquo;Birth defects are
forever.&rdquo;)
>
>Rugby:
>
>&ldquo;It takes leather balls to play rugby.&rdquo;
>
>SPCA:
>
>&ldquo;Don't litter.  Neuter your pets.&rdquo;

The worse the distortion, the more painful the pun.  It
seems that when the consonants of a word are distorted to
force a pun (Supp-hose socks: &ldquo;Sock therapy&rdquo;) the results are
&ldquo;better&rdquo; than when the vowels are mangled (Ventura Luggage:
&ldquo;For gracious leaving&rdquo;; Hill &amp; Hill Liquor: &ldquo;Tell your boss to
go to Hill&rdquo;).

Other distortions almost demand explanations (for me, at least):

>Chris' and Pitt's [sauce]:
>
>&ldquo;California's No. 1 grill friend.&rdquo;
>
>Holiday Inn, Barstow, California:
>
>&ldquo;Try our seafood.  Just for the halibut.&rdquo;

(The last is supposed to be a pun on *Helluvit*, scarcely a good
reason to try restaurant fare, I should think.)

The most atrocious, appalling examples can be found in
the Miscellaneous category, where, apparently, anything goes:

>Noxema [*sic*] Shaving Cream:
>
>&ldquo;Let Noxema [*sic*] cream your face so the razor won't.&rdquo;
>
>Ewe's milk cheese:
>
>&ldquo;It's Ewe-nique.&rdquo;

Clearly, advertisers rely heavily on arch, catchy copy to
draw the attention of readers.  Almost all of the examples
compiled by Monnot are from graphic sources; some that have
been found in print also appear on television, and a few can be
heard on radio.  Considering the much broader impact of
television and its greater audience, it is surprising that promotion
of a paronomastic character hasn't yet penetrated that
medium to any great extent: perhaps advertisers (or their
agencies) feel that the relatively low mental age of viewers, as
set forth by the media statistics firms, precludes the intelligence
required to understand puns.  On the other hand, I have seen
many children's shows and cartoons on television and offer the
impression that a large measure of the humor directed at
children is based on word play.  Maybe children can understand
puns better than their parents.

My own collection of word play is drawn from department-store
advertising in, mainly, *The New York Times*.  Here is
a sampling:

>Gloria Vanderbilt jeans:
>
>&ldquo;New York Magazine says our bottoms are tops.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;New York Magazine we thank you from the bottom of
our jeans.&rdquo;  —*N.Y. Times*, August 26, 1981, p. 34.
>
>&ldquo;put your best fit forward in Gloria's new jeans.&rdquo;
[Macy's advt.] —Ibid., p. 32.
>
>Clinique cosmetics [figures on chessboard]:
>
>&ldquo;Saving face is the name of the game in this city.  It's
your move.&rdquo;  [Macy's advt.] —Ibid., p. 4.
>
>Ralph Lauren:
>
>&ldquo;Ralph Lauren.  He shows, once and for all, how the
East and the West are one.&rdquo;  [Macy's advt.]  —Ibid.,
p. 15.
>
>NYSE shirts:
>
>&ldquo;How fitting.  New York gets in shape: the new fitted
sports shirt by NYSE.&rdquo;  [Macy's advt.] —Ibid., p. 26.
>
>Continental Quilt Shoppe:
>
>&ldquo;So...you think you've got it *made*....  The Continental
Quilt literally *makes your bed!*&rdquo; —Ibid., p. 30.
>
>Bloomingdale's:
>
>&ldquo;The great coverup: 20% to 50% off sleepcovers and
roll up blinds.&rdquo; —Ibid., p. 38.
>
>Saks Fifth Avenue:
>
>&ldquo;Express Yourself... to K.I.D.S. on 8!&rdquo; [='the 8th
floor'] —Ibid., p. 41.
>
>*New York Times* [picture of many kinds of balls]:
>
>&ldquo;Have a ball with the Sports Pages of The New York
Times.&rdquo; —Ibid., n.p.
>
>Henri Bendel [picture of 2 models, one pointing]:
>
>&ldquo;The point is that Perry Ellis does clothes for dedicated
collectors.&rdquo;  —Ibid., p. 52.
>
>UV Factors Corporation:
>
>&ldquo;Raising Capital?  Don't plant in the heat of day.&rdquo;
>
>—Ibid., Section 3, p. 2.
>
>CCS Communication Control, Inc. [anti-bugging
device]:
>
>&ldquo;Bugged?&rdquo;  —Ibid., Section 5, p. 16.
>
>Okun Co. [patching compound]:
>
>&ldquo;Don't Crack Up.&rdquo;  —Ibid., p. 16.

If that isn't enough for one day's advertisements in *The New
York Times,* regard the following headlines in the same day's
paper:

>&ldquo;Star-Crossed At the Bolshoi.&rdquo;  —Section 4, p. 1.
>
>&ldquo;Rhodesian Theme: Guns Before Barter.&rdquo;  —Ibid., p. 2.
>
>&ldquo;Ivan Go Home, Says Nigeria.&rdquo;  —Ibid.
>
>&ldquo;Sauce for the Gander.&rdquo;  [about a golfer who clubbed a Canada goose to death] —Ibid., p. 6.
>
>&ldquo;State Fairs: The Pulse Slows in the Heartland.&rdquo;
>
>—Section 3, p. 1.
>
>&ldquo;Runaway Prices for Racehorses.&rdquo;  —Ibid.—Ibid.
>
>&ldquo;A Horse!  A Horse!  $1 Million for a Horse!&rdquo;  —Ibid.,
p. 6.

We'd best keep on our toes, since something is obviously
afoot....

My only adverse comment about this book is about the
price: the text is not even typeset, and the production is, in
general, of rather low quality.  The hardbound edition might
appeal to libraries, but ordinary mortals could be well satisfied
with the paperback edition.

[Note: It might be difficult to find this book at your neighborhood
bookshop, so orders should probably be sent to University
Press of America, Inc., P.O. Box 19101, Washington, D.C.
20036.]

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Much of South Florida was plagued by an abnormally
dry rainy season this past spring...&rdquo; [From *Today*, October
10, 1981, page 1.  Submitted by Deborah J. Rahn, Melbourne
Beach, Florida.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Words*
Jane Sarnoff and Reynold Ruffins, (Scribner's, 1981), 64pp.

Directed at parents of children 9 to 12 years of age who
are interested in language—or whose interest in it might be
aroused—*Words* is an attractive book with illustrations that look
like linocuts.  Most of the etymologies, which are couched in
suitably simplified syntax, are accurate, but a few misspellings
here and there (&ldquo;Romney&rdquo; for *Romany,* p. 18; *&ldquo;pupura&rdquo;* for
*purpura,* from *porphyra,* p. 24; *&ldquo;muscalus&rdquo;* for *musculus,* p. 33)
mar the work.  Also, there are some word origins the accuracy
of which may be questionable, such as *genuine,* which comes
from *gen(u)us* 'kind' plus the adjectival suffix -*ine* and not from
&ldquo;an old custom in which the father of a newborn child placed
the infant on his knee as a way of accepting the child as his
real son or daughter&rdquo;; *shirt* and *skirt* are not given their
traditional etymologies; *flotsam,* 'the part of a ship's wreckage
floating on the water,' and *jetsam,* 'ship's gear or cargo
deliberately cast overboard to improve stability, especially in a
storm,' are distinguished by those who know the difference; the
Old French forms of the *ker* and *chief* of *kerchief* were
not *couvrir* and *chief:* they were properly *cuevre* and *chef* and
first appeared in English as *keverchef,* of which *kerchief* is a
syncopated form.  I am not for a moment suggesting that such
terms as &ldquo;syncopated&rdquo; should be used in a book for children
(and they could probably be avoided, to advantage, in books
for adults, too), but I do think that the authors (or was it the
proofreaders?)  should have attended better to their sources.
One other matter that crops up as a continual source of
annoyance in books written by amateurs and based on evidence
adduced in, for instance, the *Oxford English Dictionary:*
the earliest citation given in the *OED* is not necessarily—and
certainly not probably—the first time a given word was used,
merely the earliest written evidence that *OED's* citation readers
were able to find for a form.  Thus, it is probably inaccurate
to date words as the authors have: &ldquo;It was not until the 17th
century that *cracked* or *crazy* was used about people,&rdquo; &ldquo;In the
late part of the 13th century, the word *[scyrte]* divided into
*shirt* and *skirt,&rdquo; &ldquo;Car* has meant a 'wheeled vehicle'... since
the middle of the 14th century,&rdquo; and so on.  Admittedly,
continual hedging and qualification make for a dull book, but a
note in a foreword could absolve many authors from the onus
of commitment to unattested scholarship.  Among the sources
credited is *Fowler's Modern English Usage,* &ldquo;especially the
entry of *irrelevant*.&rdquo;  That entry does not appear in this book;
perhaps it was deemed to be a self-referring word.

—*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Jonathan David Dictionary of First Names*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780824602345/Jonathan-David-Dictionary-First-Names-082460234X/plp) and [*The Name Dictionary: Modern English and Hebrew Names*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780824602833/Name-Dictionary-Modern-English-Hebrew-0824602838/plp)
Alfred J. Kolatch, (Jonathan David Publishers, Middle Village, N.Y., 1980), xxxii + 506 pp. and Alfred J. Kolatch, (Jonathan David Publishers, Middle Village, N.Y., 1967), xiii + 418 pp.

If the availability of name books is a gauge of the birthrate
in the United States, then those who lament the decline should
not worry.  A spate of dictionaries and other listings of first
names is now marketed, including some good ones by Leslie
Dunkling, George R. Stewart, Elsdon C. Smith, and Christopher
P. Anderson; several bad ones by here unnamed compilers
who have freely plagiarized their superiors in the field are on
display in supermarket bookracks alongside aphrodisiacal reading
material that possibly contributed to the pregnant need for
such books in the first place.  Even with a reduced birthrate, a
sufficient demand by parental expectants exists to require a
book of names for those either not necessarily concerned with
traditional naming practices or not imaginative enough to
create a sensible name that will not be an embarrassment to a
child when he or she becomes an adult.

Alfred J. Kolatch has been active in onomastics since at
least 1948, when his first book on names appeared.  His *The
Name Dictionary,* published in 1967, now appears in tandem
with *The Jonathan David Dictionary of First Names*, both
handsomely bound and jacketed.  These two books, however,
are presumably too scholarly to appear side by side with the
usual fare found on mass-media racks.  Still, the popularity of
the first is such that it had gone through its sixth printing by
1979; *The Jonathan David* obviously grew out of the first, for
most of the same names and &ldquo;meanings&rdquo; appear in both.

The popularity of *The Name Dictionary* is not difficult to
account for: it is an unabashed &ldquo;guide to Jewish parents
seeking an appealing English and Hebrew name for their
offspring,....&rdquo;  As far as I know, Kolatch is the only specialist in
Jewish first names, although, as he points out, the dictionary &ldquo;is
more comprehensive in scope&rdquo; than an ordinary baby-name
finder, including, as it does, many surnames and other information.
Furthermore, it contains thousands of names, both English
and Hebrew, and provides enough material for choices to
be made.  The main entry is a name found in English,
appropriate though not always commonly so: *Vered, Noga,
Datia, Hemda, Shalgia, Gozal,* and many others just do not
occur often.  Nevertheless, Kolatch has found enough instances,
he says, to warrant their listing, but he omitted *Bonaparte*
simply because it appeared only once &ldquo;in an army list of Jewish
names.&rdquo;  Beneath each entry, Kolatch lists Hebrew variants, not
always equivalents, for both men and women.  The appendices
contain a slight history and development of the use of personal
names, as well as a listing of 3,221 names, printed in Hebrew,
followed by the Anglicized spelling and reference to text
entries.  *The Jonathan David* moves into the mainstream of
name dictionaries as we now know them but compares unfavorably
with ones by Smith, Stewart, and Nurnberg and
Rosenblum.  Although a sameness hovers over these accumulations
of names, they differ somewhat in direction and scholarship.
A command of Hebrew gives Kolatch an edge but also
causes him to load his entries with purely Hebrew names from
his previous books.  In addition, he continues to claim that his
more than 10,000 names, with derivations, will serve as &ldquo;an
invaluable guide for parents-to-be,&rdquo; as well as for &ldquo;scholars&rdquo;
and &ldquo;students of language.&rdquo;  Perhaps.  The earlier work, however,
provides a better service for baby-name searchers.

The format for *Jonathan David* derives from the one used
by Maxwell Nurnberg and Morris Rosenblum's *What to Name
Your Baby,* an excellent, no-nonsense compilation last copyrighted
in 1962 but not listed in Kolatch's bibliography.  Also,
their front matter, including the history of naming, is much
better than Kolatch's, whose loosely written account is both too
short and questionable in categorization.  His scholarship shows
better in the appendices to *The Name Dictionary*, where a
good account of the history can be found.  Nurnberg and
Rosenblum, whose listing is not nearly so comprehensive as
Kolatch's, have a main entry, followed by an etymology,
followed by a historical name and a contemporary one.  Kolatch
uses the same pattern but is scant on some incidental information;
he does add, however, place-name notes.  One comparison
will be sufficient to show the entries in each:

>Nurnberg and Rosenblum:
>
>*Bert* Short form; see Albert, Bertram, Burton, Bertie.
Literature: The comical zany, Bertie Wooster of the
Pelham Greenville Wodehouse novels of the British upper
classes.  Stage, Screen and TV: Comedian Bert Lahr, &ldquo;the
inimitable.&rdquo;
>
>Kolatch:
>
>*Bert, Bertie* Pet forms of Albert, Berthold, Bertol,
Bertram.  Place-Name Usage: Bertie County, North
Carolina, named for James and Henry Bertie (1722),
property owners.

With Kolatch's *Jonathan David*, however, several quibbles
and nitpicks are in order.  He enters *Boyce* as derived from 'the
county called Powys, in Central Wales,' and gives usage
examples as 'John Cowper Powys, Llewelyn Powys, and T. F.
Powys.'  Surely this is a proofreading error.  The name can be
derived only from the French *bois* 'woods.'  He lists the dates of
the life of Brian Borhus as 910-1014, when others list that
long-lived Irish leader as living from 926-1014; the difference,
however, is hardly worth noting, except that such matters
begin to add up.  Under *Kyle, Kyle Rote* is listed as a
sportscaster, which he was for a time in order for the network
to capitalize on his recent fame, but he is remembered as a
football player for the New York Giants after a fabulous college
career at Southern Methodist University.  *Pink* is glossed as 'a
pet form of Pinkerton,' but *Pink May* as the contemporary
example should be *Pinky May*, Philadelphia Phillies baseball
player from 1939 through 1943, whose name was *Merrill Glend
May.  Potter Stewart*, under *Potter*, is identified as an American
statesman, while *Lewis Franklin Powell,* two entries later,
appears as a U.S. Supreme Court Justice.  Is there a difference?

*Brinard* is given the etymology of British *bren* 'a prince,'
which is all right for the Welsh *brenin* 'a chief' but cannot
produce *Brainard* or *Brainerd* 'sword-hard.'  *Gordie Clark*
should be *Gordie Howe*, the hockey player.  *Redd Fox* should be
*Redd Foxx* (stage name for John Elroy Sanford); also, *Redd* is
obviously a fancy spelling of *red*, therefore not derived from
Old English *hreod* 'a reed,' as Kolatch claims.  *Nolina* and *Noma*
are not Hawaiian for *Noreen* and *Norman*; nor is Hawaiian
*Noelani* akin to *Noel*, despite some parallel letters.  In fact,
Kolatch should be ignored when he mentions Hawaiian names.

*Wapeka* cannot be derived from &ldquo;Old English *waepen*&rdquo;
'weapon,' &rdquo; since it is an American Indian name.  Besides,
*waepen* should be *w&aelig;pen*.  For *Loy*, the entry is &ldquo;A pet form of
Loy.  See Loy.&rdquo;  A proofreader should have referred the entry to
*Loyal*.  Kolatch writes that *Boog* derives from &ldquo;Anglo Saxon *boc*
or *bec* [sic] 'beech,' &rdquo; but &ldquo;Boog&rdquo; here is the nickname for
John Wesley Powell, a &ldquo;booger&rdquo; of a man at 6'4&rdquo; or taller and
230 lbs. in his prime as a baseball player for the Baltimore
Orioles.  *Luis Gomez*, the famous Lefty of the New York
Yankees in the 1930s, was born *Vernon Louis Gomez*.  And to
draw this list short, *Francis Scott Key* may have been a U.S.
lawyer, but he *really* is better recorded as the composer of an
important song that no one seems to be able to sing.

The numerous errors, and I have mentioned only a few
detract from the worth of the dictionary and exasperate
someone slightly familiar with the scholarship of onomastics
and with the rudiments of proofreading.  Perhaps the more
glaring goofs will be corrected in the next edition; otherwise, a
scholar of the caliber of Benzion C. Kaganoff, *A Dictionary of
Jewish Names and Their History*, should assume the task of
producing a decent text from Kolatch's accumulated material
of thirty-five years.

*[Kelsie B. Harder, State University College, Potsdam, New York]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *A Foreign Student's Guide to Dangerous English!*
Elizabeth Claire, illustr., (Eardley Publications, P.O.
Box 281, Rochelle Park, NJ 07662, 1980), 86pp.

Anyone who cares to try writing a book like this will find
out very quickly how difficult it can be; although there may be
much to criticize, Claire must be commended on her forthright
approach to a delicate subject: How can the foreign learner of
English be informed about American English vulgarisms and
taboo words?  The standard works adopted for use in classes for
learners of English avoid the problem, and there must be
millions of instances in which new speakers of English have
had to endure embarrassment because of lack of knowledge
about ambiguous words and because of imperfect pronunciation
of perfectly harmless words.  An example of the former
appears on page 13: A foreigner in a sporting goods shop
enquires of the proprietor, &ldquo;Do you have red balls?&rdquo;  The
speaker means red tennis balls; the proprietor understands—
well, you know.  Examples of the latter (pages 34 and 35)
include, &ldquo;I put some clean *shits* on the bed&rdquo; and &ldquo;Do you
mind if I take a *piss* [of cake]?&rdquo;  I know of one instance in
which a refined lady, new to America from eastern Europe,
was shopping in a drugstore; unable to remember the word
*toothpaste*, she asked for &ldquo;something for brushing my teats,&rdquo;
evoking not only laughter but expressions of amazement at
such a diligent obsession for cleanliness.

For native speakers, as can be seen, this book is good for a
lot of laughs.  But it is serious business to the neophyte speaker
of a language that abounds in ambiguities distinguishable only
when used in specific contexts.  Those who know French can
imagine my consternation at discovering the nature of my
request when I asked a (nice) French lass to *baiser* me: I
thought I had said *baiser*, (and, indeed, I had); I was totally
unaware of having talked my way right into a French pun.

Nonnative speakers have a hard time learning to distinguish
taboo from standard usages of words like *bang, bone,
box, can, come, eat, fairy,* and many others.  Perhaps there are
other books that can help them, but I know of none.  Also,
*Dangerous English* gives lists of words and phrases in tabular
form, under such headings as Formal, General Use, Euphemism,
Children's Words, Slang, and Vulgar.  A small book, it is
not exhaustive and cannot solve every problem that the
foreigner will encounter.  But it is of some help, at any rate.
More than half of the book is occupied by a glossary, and it is a
pity that the words and phrases are not cross-indexed from one
part of the book to another.  Illustrations of anatomical parts
and of various bodily functions may not be as important as
some of the other information, but they nonetheless provide a
quick guide to what should be avoided.  A more thorough work
would be welcome for those who are learning English, in
particular: English dictionaries, unlike those for many other
languages, often avoid naughty words, a reflection of American
nice-nellyism that would keep such dictionaries out of the
hands of children, the only native speakers who might need
them, and deny their availability to those who are learning the
language.  *Dangerous English* is a good start in the right
direction; perhaps the author will expand the material for a
second edition.

*—Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary of Imaginary Places*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Imaginary-Places-Updated-Expanded/dp/0156008726)
Alberto Manguel and Gianni Guadalupi, illustr. Graham Greenfield, maps and charts by James Cook, (Macmillan, 1980), 448 pages.

Do you know about the island of Hooloomooloo?  If you
have read Melville's *Mardi, and A Voyage Thither,* you will
remember that it is an island in the Mardi Archipelago, heaped
with rocks and covered with dwarfed, twisted thickets.  It is
sometimes known as the Isle of Cripples because the inhabitants
of the surrounding islands, averse to the barbarous
custom of destroying at birth all infants asymmetrically formed
but wanting equally to remove them from sight, long ago
established there an asylum for cripples.  The natives do not
know that they are cripples and explain to visitors that whether
a person is hideous or handsome depends upon who is made
judge.

I don't know whether that brief summary makes you want
to visit the island or not.  Hooloomooloo is just one of the 1200
imaginary places in world literature described in this Baedeker
for armchair travelers.

I am not quite sure what it is all in aid of.  It is a large,
expensive book, with 100 rather stiff illustrations and 150
lovingly intricate maps.  If you want to take a trip to
Cloudcuckooland or Lilliput, you will see more by reading or
rereading Aristophanes or Swift.  The entries in this dictionary,
as in all travel guides, are inevitably shorter, more jejune, and
less satisfying than the original places.  The fact that neither
author's first language is English shows in stilted and unidiomatic
writing.

They have certainly searched the seven seas of literature
diligently and come up with some remarkable Utopias and
Dystopias.  For your money you get not just the obvious
Looking-Glass Land (to be reached by proceeding to the rooms
of the Dean of Christ Church and finding the vast looking-glass
above the chimney piece, carefully avoiding the vases of dried
flowers protected by Victorian belljars; visitors should climb up
onto the mantlepiece....), but also Hermaphrodite Island
(Thomas Artus, 1724); not just Tolkien, Carl Sandburg, and the
Narnia stories of C.S. Lewis, but the less obvious Dostoyevsky,
W.S. Gilbert, Graham Greene, and John Lennon.

The authors indulge in whimsical flights of fancy of their
own.  Thus, Baskerville Hall is in the hands of the National
Trust, and Toad Hall has now been restored to order; it seems
that the riotous goings-on there have had a salutary and
calming effect on the formerly exuberant Mr. Toad.

I think the reference to Tolkien gives away the secret of
the point of this book.  Over here the Tolkien elves-and-wizards
industry flourishes mightily.  Almost every month some new
jottings from the Master's wastepaper basket are published.
There are a Tolkien newsletter, Tolkien calendars and diaries,
Tolkien clubs.  I understand that the cult also flourishes in the
States.  He became a wizard for the Sixties generation, loosely
categorized by the press as Flower People and Hippies, who
did not like the world as they saw it and wanted to escape into
a prettier, imaginary world.

Now, I am not immune to the charm of Tolkien and Never
Never Land.  I remember waiting impatiently for volumes II
and III of *The Lord of the Rings* and buying them in
Blackwell's on publication day.  But I have to assert that *The
Hobbit* is the only flawless masterpiece that Tolkien wrote and
that *The Silmarillion* is almost unreadable.  And, since I am
being pompous, I also have to assert that the wish to escape
from it all to an imaginary world is as old as the choruses in
Greek tragedy, who, as the great axe is about to fall, burst into
agitated anapaests, wishing that they could fly like birds to the
Garden of the Hesperides or somewhere else at the ends of the
earth, where humans are not so beastly to each other.  There
clearly is an insatiable appetite for imaginary worlds among
those who do not like the world they have been born into.

If this gazetteer of fantasy worlds encourages people to
read or reread the original books, it will serve a worthy
purpose.  I am afraid that the other purpose that I see for it is a
less worthy one.  People in my inky trade need to appear
convincingly omniscient at the drop of a deadline.  I can see the
day coming when I have to put on instant familiarity with the
precise geography of Dracula's castle without having Bram
Stoker to hand.  I shall keep the book for such hack's emergencies.
But for the rest of the time, it is more sensible to live in
the real world and read proper books.

*—Philip Howard*

## Antipodean English: *Tok Bidjin*
*G. W. Turner*

Every schoolboy knows that the Pidgin English word for
*piano is big fellow box you fight him he cry*.  Or *was*, when
Jespersen recorded this curiosity.  In current New Guinea
Pidgin (or Neo-Melanesian to use a name designed to emphasize
its status as an independent language), the word is *piano*,
easily pronounced and short enough to name a now common
detail of a modern environment.

The validity of pidgin languages (languages used only as a
trade or auxiliary language) and creoles (pidgin languages that
have become the sole language of a community) is now
recognized.  Like other languages, they have their rules and
orderliness and can grow and change by borrowing from
influential neighboring languages.  But not all their problems are
over.  Like other languages, they are diverse, consisting of a
number of sublanguages—technical, regional, and of varying
formality.  This variety may baffle those who come into contact
with a pidgin or creole, promoting the idea that there is no
order or structure in it, that it is a muddle of disjointed
elements.

Some years ago, I, among others, recorded such a judgment
of the pidgin and creole languages of Australian Aborigines,
but recent work, especially by researchers of the Summer
Institute of Linguistics, has clarified their structure and orderliness,
recording their grammar and giving them a spelling
system.  The early dismissive judgments have proved wrong.

There are four possible ways in which Aborigines may
relate to English.  They may be fully integrated and speak
English as anyone else does; they may speak a recognizably
Aboriginal variety of English; they may speak a creole or
pidgin best regarded as an independent language; or they may
retain a native Aboriginal language.  In most parts of Australia,
one of the first two possibilities is common, but in desert
regions or in parts of the north and west the other two are
realized.

In the Roper River area of Northern Australia, the
Ngukurr and Bamyili creole was given an orthography in 1976.
The needs of the native speakers being the main consideration
in choosing a spelling, a phonemic rather than an etymological
spelling was chosen.  The difference may be illustrated by
taking a sentence from a story told by the linguist John R.
Sandefur.  The English translation is &ldquo;One day they heard that
a kangaroo had a lot of children.&rdquo;  In etymological spelling this
would run *One-day two-fellow been listen gammon kangaroo
been have-him lot-of piccaninny*.  In phonemic spelling it is
*Wandei tubala bin lisin geman deingurru bin abum loda
biginini*.

The pronunciation of an Aboriginal pidgin or creole is
likely to develop through two stages.  In the first, sounds
unfamiliar to Aboriginal speakers are replaced by sounds from
their own language and unfamiliar distinctions are disregarded.
Thus, a word like *policeman* may be borrowed as *balidjiman*,
because voiced and unvoiced stops are not distinguished in the
language: there is no *s*-phoneme, so that [s] is realized by a
lamino-palatal stop (something like and English *j*-sound), and
syllables are simplified to a consonant-plus-vowel pattern.  (In a
similar way Maori changes *policeman* to *prihimana*.)  In the
second stage, the creole adopts new sounds from the donor
language; in this way *balidjiman* is adapted towards *plisman*.

Words are formed by borrowing from English or Aboriginal
languages (e.g., for kinship terms) or by compounding, (e.g.,
*gabadidaim* 'tea-time, mid-morning or afternoon'; *boimilk*
'underdeveloped breast'; *wail dog* 'dingo'; or, with folk etymology,
*wailwin* 'whirlwind').

Traces of earlier phases in development may remain in
current creole.  The word for 'food' may appear as *dagadaga*,
derived from Australian 'tucker' and reduplicated in the pattern
of an earlier general pidgin *kaikai*.  Reduplication is
common: 'pig' is *bigibigi;* the domestic fowl or chicken—
Australian 'chook'—is *jukjuk* in Roper creole.  (A 'cormorant' is
*wailjuk*.)

The kind of English contributing to Australian creoles is,
of course, Australian English.  So, along with *jukjuk* and
*dagadaga*, there is *loli* 'candy,' *nokimap* 'to tire' (the innocent
meaning of *knocked up* in Australian English is 'fatigued'),
*stikibik* 'mind someone else's business' (Australian *stickybeak*),
*krik* 'creek,' and of course, *bush*.

Meaning as well as pronunciation may change as a word
passes from English to creole.  The verb *garadjimbat* (with
transitive suffix *-im* and continuative aspect *-bat*) is from
English scratch (and *him* and *about*) but means 'to dig.'  Words
may be extended in meaning; e.g., *uk* means 'hook' but also
'fishing gear in general.'

The source of creole words is spoken, not written, English,
so that it is not always possible to decide whether a particular
simplification of pronunciation (*amini* 'how many' or *olfeshanwan*
'outdated,' for instance) took place in English or
creole.

With information gleaned from this brief account, the
reader might like to attempt etymologies of these words:

>*meigidat* 'understand'
>
>*jangudanwei* 'westerly'
>
>*meigapwan* 'artificial'
>
>*nogudbala* 'sinner'
>
>*gambek bumareng* 'returning boomerang' (not all
boomerangs return)
>
>*brennu* 'modern'
>
>*riligudwei* 'excellently'
>
>*boniwan* 'skinny'
>
>*gulujap* 'near'.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Bad English usage is a continuing battle for everyone.
It requires unending vigilance, even by those who apparently
should know better.&rdquo;—From an editorial in the
Kitchener-Waterloo Record, June 2, 1980, p. 6. [Submitted
by Carol Verdun, Wellesley, Ontario.] ...*Or should that
be especially by those who should know better?*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...wild and wooly snap-front yolk-shouldered shirts
are showing up under $300 sports jackets.&rdquo;—*Playboy*, July,
1980.  [Submitted by Dennis Moore, Greenville, South
Carolina, who comments, *The yoke's on y'all, boys.*]


### OBITER DICTA: *The Language of Medicine*
*John H. Felts, M.D., Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest University*

The requirements for hospital accreditation in the United
States are such that house officers and staff physicians must be
compulsively complete in recording what happens to patients.
As Dr. McArdle has indicated, this is something of a chore at
which most of us are less than competent.  Medical college
curricula are so laden with courses in the sciences, basic and
behavioral, that proficiency in our language can hardly be
expected.  In 1898, the University of North Carolina School of
Medicine asked only that matriculants pass examinations determining
their proficiency in English composition arithmetic,
algebra, and Latin; today the requisite courses for entry into
most American medical schools are chemistry, biology, and
physics.  The need for brevity, simplicity, and clarity in medical
writing is still recognized and appreciated, but only the most
ardent optimist has any hope for improvement in our prose
anytime soon.

Most hospital record rooms have their own selection of
amazing arrangements of words put together by dictator and
the typing pool.  Here are some, for which doctors, I fear, must
assume major responsibility.

>The left leg became numb at times and she walked it off.
>
>The patient has chest pain if she lies on her left side for
over a year.
>
>Father died in his 90s of female trouble in his prostate and
kidneys.
>
>Both the patient and the nurse herself reported passing
flatus.
>
>Skin—somewhat pale but present.
>
>On the second day the knee was better, and on the third
day it had completely disappeared.
>
>The pelvic examination will be done later on the floor.
>
>By the time she was admitted to the hospital her rapid
heart had stopped and she was feeling much better.
>
>If he squeezes the back of his neck for four or five years it
comes and goes.
>
>Patient was seen in consultation by Dr. &mdash;, who felt we
should sit tight on the abdomen, and I agreed.
>
>Dr. &mdash; is watching his prostate.
>
>Discharge status: Alive but without permission.
>
>Coming from Detroit, Mich., this man has no children.
>
>At the time of onset of pregnancy the mother was
undergoing bronchoscopy.
>
>Healthy appearing decrepit 69-year-old white female, mentally
alert but forgetful.
>
>When you pin him down, he has some slowing of the
stream.

Further comment would be superfluous, but one physician
did offer some marginal notes about the results of a physical
examination recorded by a third-year medical student.  *Martial
introitus* provoked &ldquo;camp-follower?&rdquo;  and *no brewery* the more
facetious &ldquo;ailing?&rdquo;  *Marital* and *bruit* were obviously intended.

In a less permissive era, one of the surprises for a young
medical student was the variety and vigor of sexual terms.
Gonorrhea, known variously as *clap, gleet, rupture*, or *strain* in
most of the rest of the country, was called *running reins* by
black residents of South Carolina's Sea Islands who attended
the outpatient clinic of the Medical College of South Carolina
at Charleston.  My inquiries failed to account for the usage;
nowhere else have I encountered the expression.

The *OED* may offer a clue identifying *reins* as once a
common term for 'kidneys or loins.'  Presumably these definitions
survived in the isolation of the Islands after their
introduction by Scots or English overseers to slaves working the
plantations.  An interesting example of similar usage appears in
*A Counter-Blaste to Tobacco*, by James I, published anonymously
in 1604: &ldquo;But by the contrary, if a man smoke himselfe
to death with it (and many have done) O then some other
disease must beare the blame for that fault.  So do olde harlots
thanke their harlotrie for their many yeares, that custome being
healthfull (say they) *ad purgandos Renes*, but never have
minde how many die of the Pockes in the flower of their
youth.&rdquo;  But nowhere have I heard the Elizabethan term for the
venereal sore in the groin, *Winchester goose*, and only in
Charleston have I heard the term *haircut* used for the chancre
of syphilis.  The origin of this use should be apparent.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;When officers arrived, they heard...a loud disturbance
caused by people congregated in a yard, on the street and on
the sidewalk.  All but two who were arrested obeyed the
officers' request to disburse.&rdquo;  [From Police Beat in The Outlook,
October 21, 1981, page 8.  Submitted by Douglas Lind, Seattle, Washington....  *And we thought Seattle was a clean town....*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The Trojans, symbolized by their white horse, Traveler
III, who races around the Coliseum's running track when USC
scores, always strikes fear in the opposition because, like that
steed, they are big and flashy.&rdquo;  [From *Sports Illustrated*, 5
October, 1981, page 27.  Submitted by William Simon III, Ramstein Air Base, Federal Republic of Germany.  Eh?]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;And what to my wondering ears should appear but a
Secretary of State speaking perfectly coherent, intelligent
English.&rdquo;  [From the *Wall Street Journal*, October 15, 1981, n.p.
Submitted by McColl Pringle, Charleston, South Carolina.
*Should that be wondering* eyes?  *or, maybe*, wandering eyes?
or...]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary of Anagrams*](https://www.abebooks.com/Dictionary-Anagrams-Samuel-C-Hunter-Routledge/830925256/bd)
Samuel C. Hunter, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1981), 267 pp.

*Je n'en vois pas le n&eacute;cessit&eacute; de ce livre*.  Surely the point
about anagrams, like playing Patience or doing crosswords
generally, is that one does them for oneself.  A dictionary of
anagrams is cheating, like a pianola that makes one look as
though one is playing, let us say, Mozart's Piano Sonata no. 11
in A as delicately as Solomon, when everybody knows that one
is pumping it out mechanically.

There are many of us whose genius calls us not to
purchase fame in keen iambics, but mild anagram, notably
those of us who do not consider that the day is satisfactorily
concluded until we have done *The Times* crossword.  Clues that
are anagrams are indicated by some coded hint like
&ldquo;embroiled&rdquo; or &ldquo;broken up&rdquo; or &ldquo;resorted.&rdquo;

Digression: I once asked Edmund Akenhead, who has
been crossword editor of *The Times* for many years, which of
the many thousands of clues he has set he enjoyed most.
Impossible to decide, he replied.  But he remembered with
pleasure the clue which was a total blank (7 letters), to which
the solution was &ldquo;missing.&rdquo;  I remember with rage the clue that
was simply a capital letter O (8,6); solution: &ldquo;circular letter.&rdquo;

I am afraid that it is a legend that he once set: &ldquo;Listen
carefully for an aural perversion&rdquo; (5,2,4,4); solution: &ldquo;Prick up
your ears.&rdquo;

To have to resort to a dictionary of anagrams to solve the
crossword is as lowering as to have to look the quotation clues
up in a dictionary of quotations.  I confess that I have on
occasion committed the latter, but I have always felt dirty
afterwards.

Samuel Hunter retired two years ago from working for
British Rail.  To mitigate the tedium of that employment he has
been compiling crosswords for more than thirty years.  No
wonder the trains never run on time.  He has now compiled this
majestic Folly, listing about 20,000 anagrams grouped alphabetically
in sections by length from words of five to thirteen
letters.  His collection is confined to single-word anagrams,
which spoils the fun: the best anagrams are ones scrambled out
of many words.  For example, &ldquo;The Dictionary of Anagrams
by Samuel C. Hunter&rdquo; can be anagrammatized into
(3,10,2,8,2,6,1,6) &ldquo;Racy tome useful in broaching many a hard
test.&rdquo;

Much of the information in this dictionary, particularly
about the longer words, is obvious.  I need no crossword
compiler come from British Rail to tell me that versification is
an anagram of verifications, or that rumel-gumption (whatever
that may be) makes rumle-gumption.  Akenhead would never
put so stupid a word in his crossword.

I suppose that this dictionary may be useful to compilers
of crosswords, poor harmless drudges.  But I should have
thought that they would prefer to concoct their own anagrams,
and in any case would be cribbed by the restriction to single
words.  We seldom have anything as simple as a single-word
anagram in Akenhead's daily examination.  Solvers of crosswords
who surreptitiously turn to it in desperation are frauds
and poor fishes, as solvers of crosswords by definition are on
occasions.

Anagrammania is an old affliction.  I could give you
examples from Classical Greek, except that my typewriter does
not have the Greek alphabet, and it might cause grief to
VERBATIM's compositors.  Wordy wits have been transposing
letters for want of anything better to do for centuries.  Dame
Eleanor Davies (a prophetess from the Moral Majority in the
reign of King Charles I) was appropriately turned into &ldquo;Never
so mad a ladie.&rdquo;  Marie Touchet (mistress of Charles IX of
France) was anagrammatized by Henry IV as &ldquo;*Je charme tout*.&rdquo;
And in case this suggests an unduly royalist bias in anagrams,
Voltaire is accepted as an anagram of Arouet l(e) j(eune); well,
OK, with a bit of fudging around the u's and j's.  Florence
Nightingale makes &ldquo;Flit on cheering angel.&rdquo;  Horatio Nelson
makes &ldquo;Honor est a Nilo.&rdquo;  Queen Victoria's Jubilee makes &ldquo;I
require love in a subject.&rdquo;  Quid est Veritas (Jesting Pilate, John
xviii, 38) makes &ldquo;Vir est qui adest.&rdquo;

I am a greedy collector of reference books of all sorts.  I
think that my trade makes me need the security blanket of
knowing that I can look the answer to anything up somewhere.
But I think that a dictionary of anagrams may be taking things
too far.  If I find myself using it, I may have to give up the
crossword.

*—Philip Howard*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Naming Names*](https://www.biblio.com/book/naming-names-stories-pseudonyms-name-changes/d/24692154)
Adrian Room, (McFarland &amp; Co Inc., Jefferson, North Carolina, 1981, and Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, London, 1981), 359pp.

The first thing to say about this book is that it deserves a
place in any collection of serious onomastic works.  It is *the*
authoritative dictionary of pseudonyms and can be relied upon
both for its accurate rendering of a name adopted by a
particular person and for the name that was abandoned.  That
is something that cannot be said of many books on the subject.
Leslie Halliwell's *Filmgoer's Companion*, for example, though
very useful as a reference work on films and the people
connected with them, is sloppy in its dealings with the name
changes of actors and actresses.

Room's scholarly thoroughness has been demonstrated
now in several books.  I have recently been using his *Place-Names
of the World* and was again impressed by its accuracy
and conciseness.  *Place-Name Changes Since 1900*, another from
the Room one-man factory, can also be thoroughly relied on.
Of late, several word books have also been emerging with the
Adrian Room stamp of authenticity on them.

But what pleases me most about *Naming Names* is that
the first half of the title is taken seriously.  We have here a full
discussion of naming, if &ldquo;discussion&rdquo; is the right word for a
large collection of entertaining anecdotes which illustrate how
people go about the task of literally making a name for
themselves.  Thus we are told not only that Oscar Wilde
became Sebastian Melmoth when he went to live in France,
but *why* he chose that name.  &ldquo;Melmoth&rdquo; was a name that had
been invented by a remote ancestor of Wilde's for the hero of
his novel, *Melmoth the Wanderer*.  &ldquo;Sebastian&rdquo; recalled Saint
Sebastian, usually portrayed as being martyred by arrows.
Wilde felt himself to be a martyr, and the arrows on his prison
uniform had specifically recalled Sebastian.

Actually, Room could have continued a little with the
Sebastian Melmoth story.  Frank Harris, who went to visit
Wilde in exile, says that he would not allow anyone to address
him by his assumed name.  &ldquo;Mr. Melmoth is unknown, you see.
I only use the name Melmoth to spare the blushes of the
postman.&rdquo;  Wilde wanted to be called Oscar Wilde, the name
he had made famous.  A few years previously he had remonstrated
with an American who entered his name in a guest
book as &ldquo;O. Wilde.&rdquo;  That too he looked upon as a disfigurement
of his name.

Wilde was also responsible for a typical witticism about
pseudonyms in a letter he wrote from France to Ada Leverson:
&ldquo;Reggie Turner is staying here under the name 'Robert Ross,'
Robbie under the name 'Reginald Turner.'  It is better they
should not use their own names.&rdquo;

That particular anecdote is not in *Naming Names*, but
there is plenty of humor there, often in the names themselves
as well as in the stories about them.  Rip Torn, for example,
seems like one of those names of the Justin Case, Tom Katz
variety, that you dream up after a few potent glasses.  But Torn
is the actor's real name, and the &ldquo;Rip&rdquo; nickname had been a
family joke for years, already bestowed on an uncle.  Torn's
parents named him Elmore, but they always used Rip.  For him,
then, that *was* his name, and he fought against suggested
changes (Richard Torn, Ralph Torn) when he went to
Hollywood.

A major feature of *Naming Names* is the way in which the
pseudonyms have been rearranged into lists that bring out their
common characteristics.  Lists are, of course, highly fashionable
in the publishing world at the moment, but they do serve a
useful purpose.  Room gives us lists of names changed because
the real ones were &ldquo;unsuitable&rdquo; or &ldquo;embarrassing.&rdquo;  Julie Lush
become Julie Anthony, Jean Shufflebottom became Jeannie
Carson, Diana Fluck became Diana Dors.  We learn who
changed sex by means of pseudonyms—the Brontes went the
usual way, from female to male; but Fiona Macleod, Madame
Marguerite de Ponti, and Angelina Gushington concealed male
writers.  William Sharp, who invented the Fiona of his new
name, accidentally made a contribution to our stock of first
names, since that name was later to become extremely popular
in Britain.

A thoroughly worthwhile list of names in the book might
at first glance seem curious for a work on pseudonyms, for it
gives real names only.  It makes the point that the bearers of
the apparently phoney names Johnny Cash, Goldie Hawn, Suzi
Quatro, and Orson Welles are not, in fact, concealing anything.
Those names are real.  Similarly, Adolf Hitler was quite right to
call himself that: he would only have been Adolf Schicklgruber
[*sic*] had his father not changed the family name.  I seem to
recall that another famous name, that of the Eiffel Tower,
might have been rather different but for a name change:
Eiffel's family were originally the Boenichausens.

The actor Frank Lovejoy does not get a mention in
*Naming Names* because that happens to be his real name.  A
pity though, because the distinguished British journalist, Katharine
Whitehorn, in a column she wrote for *The Observer* many
years ago, told the Lovejoy story.  When he began as an actor,
names of the Rock Hudson type were in vogue.  He became
Max Million.  Then sincere names were needed: he became Abe
Washington.  George Sweden came next, when geographical
names were *in*, and Marlon Ladd came when familiar names
were needed.  The next trend was for happy names.  &ldquo;How
about Frank Lovejoy?&rdquo;  said Frank to his agent.  &ldquo;Great!&rdquo;

Maybe you're thinking of changing your name.  It has been
suggested that we should all do so periodically because we get
too wrapped up in the egos our names reflect, too obsessed
with &ldquo;making our name.&rdquo;  That is certainly what the name-changers
in this book were determined to do, and most of them
succeeded.  I once again recommend that you read about what
they did and why they did it in this enjoyable book.

*[Leslie Dunkling, Thames Ditton, Surrey]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Oxford Dictionary for Writers and Editors*](https://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?cm_sp=plpafe-_-coll-_-first&an=oxford%20dictionaries&fe=on&sortby=100&tn=oxford%20dictionary%20english)
Comp. Oxford English Dictionary Department, (Clarendon Press: Oxford University Press, 1981), xiv + 448pp.

Everything flows and nothing stays still, in language as in
everything else.  In this constant goddam flux we long for
stability and authority.  We want a Big Linguistic Daddy to tell
us that this is the right way to spell that word and that is the
correct meaning of such-and-such, that this word takes a
hyphen and that one does not, that we are foolish to divide
words like *leg-ends* and *reap-pear* in those places at the ends of
lines.

Well, here is the house style-book of the Oxford University
Press, listing alphabetically the latest words of the clever men
at Oxford on the nice little mechanics of English.  As it
happens, it offers no advice on what to do with *goddam*,
though I guess it would prefer *goddamned*.  It pronounces that
*God-awful* should be spelled (or spelt) thus with capital and
hyphen.

The ancestor of the book was born in 1905 and then called
*Collins Authors and Printers Dictionary*.  It was intended to
give the Oxford line on all the questions and problems that
arise in preparing printed or typewritten documents and books.
Spelling, punctuation, italicization, capitalization, abbrevs, foreign
words and phrases, tricky names of people and places, and
printing technicalities were its territory.  In his original preface
the exact and magisterial F. Howard Collins wrote: &ldquo;While
probably no one will agree with everything contained in this
book, I hope it may be found that the number of marginal
notes needed to bring it into accordance with the views of
those who use it will be as few as could be expected,
considering the difficulty of the subject-matter, and the fact
that it is, I believe, the first time it has been thoroughly and
systematically investigated in any country.&rdquo;

His useful little oracle has been revised through eleven
editions since then, most recently by Stanley Beale in 1973.
Now it has been rewritten and revised by Bob Burchfield's
lexicophiles at the great word-factory of the Oxford English
Dictionaries to bring it in as a full member of the Oxford
dictionary family.  It has also been renamed and given a red
instead of a blue dust jacket.

Its territory is still the same, but the inhabitants have
changed in the past eight years.  Obsolescent and unfashionable
words have been dropped to make room for considerable
numbers of new tricks and traps of language.  There has been a
purge of such French phrases as *cheval de retour* and *gaiet&eacute; de
coeur*, indicating, I hope, that Oxford authors are less inclined
to show off with fancy foreign expressions for which there are
perfectly good English versions.  Out goes *kaffir-boom*, the
Africian tree, such unfashionable titles as *Pacha of Many Tales*
(Marryat, 1836), *paideutics*, and *palankeen*.  In come *paederast*
(&ldquo;use *pederast*&rdquo;), the new geography and politics (*Kaliningrad*
and *KANU*), the jargon of computer typesetting (*VDUs, scrolling*,
and *the Blessed K*), and a surprising number of ancient
omissions that have become fashionable or started to cause
trouble (*palladium, Tisiphone*).

Oxford judges that *tinplate* has lost its hyphen during the
past ten years, and that *kari*, the French word for 'curry,'
should now be spelled *karri* with a double *r*.  For the first time it
tells us the difference between *ti-ti* ('NZ mutton bird') and *titi*
('S. Amer. monkey'), and that *palatable* is the Oxford-approved
spelling, not &ldquo;palateable.&rdquo;  You will see that much of the matter
is trivial, but it is the stuff in which consistency is desirable,
and which is embarrassing when it goes wrong.  As Howard
Collins said of the first edition, you—and especially you Americans—will
not agree with it all.  On *The Times* we still prefer to
spell *connexion* in the etymologically &ldquo;correct&rdquo; way with an *x*.
If you have the whoreson letter in the alphabet, why not use it?
We also prefer at *The Times*, with endearing antiquarianism, to
spell *Monna Lisa* sic with the double *n*, to show that we know
that it is derived from *Madonna*.  Maybe we should change that
when we revise the style-book.

For those, particularly Brits, who have no style-book of
their own, for all who like their prose to be ship-shape and
Bristol fashion, for anybody who has worried about how to
spell Bill *Sikes* in *Oliver Twist* or how and what *Planck's
constant* is, this is a useful quick desk-book.  I reckon it has
more than 20,000 headwords.  Serious perfectionists will also
need *Hart's Rules for Compositors and Readers at the University
Press Oxford, Fowler* to harangue them in a splendidly old-fashioned
way about their *wills* and *shalls*, and a resignation to
the truth that the language belongs to all of us and that there is
no such thing as perfect Standard English.

*—Philip Howard*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;After all, you've nothing to lose, except a great way of
looking good and feeling fit.&rdquo;  [From an advertising mailing
piece for Vapa-Mist, sent by Nordic, Reigate, Surrey.  Submitted
by S.H. Bendahan, Wraysbury, Berkshire.  *There's nothing
like Truth in Advertising.*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;My guide for this visit was a charming mother of three
grown children named Nicole Paiement,...&rdquo;  [From the
*Columbus Dispatch*, n.d. Submitted by Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.  *Charming, perhaps, but a little short on imagination.*]


### OBITER DICTA
*Allen Rettberg, West Chester, Ohio*

The 70s will forever be known as the *Me* decade.  I
hope the 80s will complete this trend and become the *I*
decade.

I realized that the shift was not complete when I
received a call at 5:40 AM.  The caller, a friend, was
stranded and needed a phone number.  Groggily, I
complied.  After hanging up I realized that he had said
&ldquo;we're&rdquo; stuck out here.  I began wondering if there was
someone with him or he was just hiding behind the *we*.

It's done often, you know.  We'll say, &ldquo;Well, we've
made some mistakes along the way....&rdquo;  Of course we
mean, &ldquo;*I* have made some mistakes,&rdquo; but *we* makes us
look less foolish.  *We* also works well when we're really
not enthusiastic about something.  &ldquo;We'll be seeing
you,&rdquo; is a good example.  If we had any intention of
seeing them again we'd say, &ldquo;I'll be seeing you,&rdquo; or,
&ldquo;I'll be talking to you,&rdquo; or words to that effect.

*I* has taken its lumps over the years.  Perhaps the
best example can be found in college professors and
English teachers who would not allow the student to
use *I* when writing a paper.  (*One* was substituted for *I*.)
Another reason *I* has suffered is responsibility.  There's
no question that the two most dreaded words in the
English language are *I do*.

Few even want to take responsibility for not knowing
something.  Rather than saying, &ldquo;I don't know,&rdquo; they
say, &ldquo;Beats me.&rdquo;  So casual.  So effective.  It not only
makes you less ignorant, it gives you the upper hand.
Not only don't you know, you don't *care*.

I have a friend who I think would benefit from
using *we*.  He'll make a prediction on a football game
and then he'll start qualifying it.  Every conceivable
factor will be mentioned—including injuries, weather,
etc.—to insure that his prediction is safe.  If he said,
&ldquo;*We'll* take Pittsburgh,&rdquo; I don't think we'd have to go
through all that....

&ldquo;Federal Emergency Management Agency officials said
it was not known for certain if the dome was increasing in
size because no geologist was aboard the plane.&rdquo;—*The
Arizona Republic*, July 10, 1980.  [Submitted by Nelda S.
Crowell, Tempe, Arizona.]  *Probably*.

### READER'S QUERY: *A Punctuation Parable*

When I give a talk on behalf of SAGE (the Society for the
Advancement of Good English), I frequently begin with the
story of a man who was asked to speak at a public gathering
and who decided to prepare his own introduction.  He wrote
the following, with the request that the master of ceremonies
use it without making any changes: &ldquo;Ladies and Gentlemen, I
bring you a man among men.  He is out of place when among
cheaters and scoundrels.  He feels quite at home when surrounded
by persons of integrity.  He is uncomfortable when not
helping others.  He is perfectly satisfied when his fellow human
beings are happy.  He tries to make changes in order for this
country to be a better place.  He should leave us this evening
with feelings of disgust at ineptitude and a desire to do better.
I present to you Mr. John Smith.

Unfortunately, Mr. Smith or his secretary made a number
of errors in punctuation, so that the master of ceremonies
found himself reading the following: &ldquo;Ladies and Gentlemen, I
bring you a man.  Among men, he is out of place.  When among
cheaters and scoundrels, he feels quite at home.  When surrounded
by persons of integrity, he is uncomfortable.  When
not helping others, he is perfectly satisfied.  When his fellow
human beings are happy, he tries to make changes.  In order for
this country to be a better place, he should leave us this
evening.  With feelings of disgust at ineptitude and a desire to
do better, I present to you Mr. John Smith.&rdquo;

This story, which so vividly illustrates the importance of
proper punctuation, is not my creation.  It is a reconstruction of
something I read or heard as a high school student, several
decades ago.  I would appreciate information from readers of
*Verbatim* concerning the identity of the story's originator, so
that I can duly credit him/her when the occasion next arises.

*[Lawrence Casler, 65 Woodland Road, Pittsford, New York 14534]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Grammer is a science: punctuation is an art.&rdquo;  [From the
NJEA (New Jersey Educational Association) *Review*, September
1981, page 13.  Submitted by Chet Meyer, Wayne, New
Jersey.  *But spelling is the most creative of all....*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Complementary Bar and Buffet&rdquo; [From an invitation to
the annual Alumni Association cocktail party of the School of
General Studies, Columbia University.  Submitted by Brian-Marc
Rom, New York City.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Keyes... said she sees a need for the police department,
but feels the three officers the city had (reduced from five) is
too many and 1&frac12; would be more sufficient.&rdquo;  [From a post Election
Day article in the *World*, Coos Bay, Oregon.  Submitted
by D.R. Miller, Coos Bay, Oregon.  *1&frac12; oafs are better than
3.*]


#### EPISTOLA {Patty Williams}

Regarding the quotation of W.C. Fields in &ldquo;Pleonasties,&rdquo;
either I do not understand pleonasm or Dr. Ellner does not
understand that there are also *Anglo*-Catholics and that the
term *Roman Catholic* is, therefore, not redundant.

*[Patty Williams, Excelsior, Minnesota]*


#### EPISTOLA {Carolyn Opitz}

The article on Indian words in English [VII, 4] was both
enjoyable and enlightening.  However, I must correct a universal
misapprehension that the author, Norman Ward, accepts as
true: the words *papaya* and *papaw* (or *paw-paw*) may seem to
be interchangeable, but they are not.  The *papaya* is a tropical
melonlike fruit found growing in semitropical climes like that
of Cuba, Hawaii, Southern California, Florida, and Mexico; the
*papaw* is a watermelon-shaped fruit about three to four inches
long....  It is ripe for only a short time and is messy to eat
because of its numerous flat, black seeds, about one third of an
inch long.  The skin of the papaw, which turns from pale green
to yellow when the fruit is ripe, is very tough and has to be
peeled off before eating....  The first filling I ever had was paid
for with a large sack of papaws: the dentist adored them!  That
could never have happened with papayas, for they didn't grow
in Kentucky.  I am sorry to say that the papaw tree has all but
disappeared from the scene.  I am sure that most of the younger
generation has never even heard of papaws—much less tasted
one.

*[Carolyn Opitz, Carson City, Nevada]*


#### EPISTOLA {G.J. Grieshaber}

Mr. Axel Hornos, in &ldquo;Street Name Fun Game,&rdquo;
[VII, 3], lists a street, *Emanon*, which is 'no name'
spelled backward.  Then [VII, 4], in Mr. Harry R.
Houle's letter on odd names in Arizona, he gives &ldquo;the
anonymous award of honor...to *Camino sin nombre*,&rdquo;
which my high-school Spanish says means 'street without
a name.'  (*Emanon*!)

Now, the Russians make many doubtful claims
about their &ldquo;firsts,&rdquo; such as TV, radio, the telephone,
maybe even gunpowder.  But I believe they are one up
on us in the no-name department.  Moscow's Kremlin is
a very irregularly shaped piece of land, about 65 acres
in area.  It is completely surrounded by a high, protecting
brick battlement or wall.  At each angle in the wall
(and even in straight sections) are gates or towers—
about 19 in all.  These have names like the *Saviour's,
Tsar's, Alarm, Beklemishev, Secret*, etc.  The Kemlin
was started in A.D. 1147, long before Columbus, so the
structure is quite old.  But on a straight section along the
Moscow river will be found *First Nameless Tower* and
*Second Nameless Tower*.  The March 1966 *National
Geographic* (p. 309) has an excellent scale drawing of
the whole Kremlin, if anyone cares to check it.

*[G.J. Grieshaber, Cincinnati, Ohio]*


#### EPISTOLA {Irving Allen}

P.S. One time, in a Texas border town, I noticed a street
sign reading *Quince*.  At first I thought, &ldquo;How nice to
name their streets after fruits.&rdquo;  But the next streets were
named *Catorce, Trece*, and *Doce*.  A little learning is a
dangerous thing!

A new neighborhood shopping amenity, a Japanese
food store, opened recently on Manhattan's ethnically
diverse Lower East Side.  The store was soon stocked
with imported canned goods, cooking accessories, and a
cold counter filled with Japanese food staples and delicacies.
Shortly, a handsome, professionally lettered sign
appeared on the store's window, proclaiming &ldquo;Japanese
Dairy.&rdquo;  *Dairy*?  Milk and cheese products, of course, are
almost unknown in the traditional Japanese diet.

There is a variety of ethnic &ldquo;delis&rdquo; in the neighborhood,
and this clearly was a welcome addition.  The
store was closed, so I couldn't ask, and I wouldn't, but I
imagined a dialog between the proprietor, speaking
with a Japanese accent, and a New York sign painter:

PROPRIETOR: &ldquo;Please paint the sign to read 'Japanese
Deli&rdquo;' [confusing the pronunciation of the *l* in
*deli*, such that it had the sound of the *r* in *dairy*].

>SIGN PAINTER: &ldquo; 'Japanese Dairy,' right?&rdquo;
>
>PROPRIETOR: &ldquo;Yes, 'deli' &rdquo; [deri].

Several weeks later the sign had been professionally
changed to &ldquo;Japanese Deli,&rdquo; which it is, and may it
long be.

*[Irving Allen, University of Connecticut]*


#### EPISTOLA {David L. Gold}

I agree with Charles Bremer [IV, 2] that &ldquo;unfortunately,
our language in its present state is far from an ideal system of
symbols, growing as it has from an array of northern European
and Romance languages with a sprinkling of American Indian,
Yiddish, and a few dozen other languages&rdquo; and that &ldquo;therefore,
steps must be taken now to purify and distill our language...&rdquo;
As a first step, I propose the removal of such foreignisms as
*American, international, language, eventual, means, people,
exchange, idea, mutual, unfortunate, present, state, ideal, system,
symbol, array, European, Romance, Indian, dozen, mixture,
tend, develop, extensive, lexicon, complicate, degree,
endanger, use, purify, distill, accurate, country, effort, communication,
interest, support, Charles, city, and Oregon* (all taken
from his letter).

*[David L. Gold, University of Haifa]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Drive Slower When Wet&rdquo; [Highway sign in Ohio, in
westbound lane, about 50 miles east of Indiana state line.
Submitted by Robert E.A.P. Ritholz, Madison, Wisconsin.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;FAMILY PLANNING TO END IN FALL&rdquo; [From a
leader in the *Grants Pass Daily Courier*, June 5, 1981.
Submitted by Helen Coster, Grants Pass, Oregon, who
wonders whether the world is aware of the deadline.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The crowd was small, but that didn't stop the Allman
Brothers, noted Southern rock band, from putting on a credible
show at Sweeney Auditorium in Santa Fe on Tuesday evening.&rdquo;
[From a review by Dwight F. Loop in the *Albuquerque
Journal*, September 3, 1981, page C-6.  Submitted by Kenneth
R. Fortman, Albuquerque, New Mexico....  *Incredible as it
may have seemed....*]

## Paring Pairs No. 7

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Difficult upwind sailing with this in your stomach.  
(b). Arrest at English boys'school?  
(c). Sounds, littorally, like a palm.  
(d). Heavy traffic in hybridized flora?  
(e). Golgotha irritated him.  
(f). Jivaro trick cyclist.  
(g). Dull spouse yields nonconclusion.  
(h). Shipshape.  
(i). Barely destroyed paper, then went on the cheep.  
(j). Staff reduction: hair today, gone tomorrow.  
(k). Filthy fellow, now immaculate, wins it all.  
(l). Felne in speakeasy.  
(m). Lower than low to string us along.  
(n). That one card is worth 2000 or 2200!  
(o). Lawn game, played with grenades instead of balls, yields food for thought.  
(p). Such a person does *not* have green hair!  
(q). Priestly individual.  
(r). Source for Thatcher.  
(s). Oh my!  No honor to be observed in Jugoslavian breeches!  
(t). Raise one for Cockney intelligentsia.  
(u). Profitless test for bootlegger.  
(v). Nonagenarian homosexuals.  
(w). Sounds as if Cronos and his cronies dispatched prostitutes.  
(x). All that is left of fashion after paying the mohel.  
(y). Bungay's colleague backward in using saucepan.  
(z). Catch a crab in a one-horse town?  

1\. Altar.  
2\. Back.  
3\. Bacon.  
4\. Base.  
5\. Beech.  
6\. Blind.  
7\. Bris.  
8\. Brow.  
9\. Carrot.  
10\. Chicken.  
11\. Clean.  
12\. Collar.  
13\. Crew.  
14\. Croquet.  
15\. Cross.  
16\. Crossing.  
17\. Cut.  
18\. Dry.  
19\. Ego.  
20\. Eton.  
21\. Eye.  
22\. Frier.  
23\. Garden.  
24\. Gay.  
25\. Glass.  
26\. Hard.  
27\. Head.  
28\. Limb.  
29\. Mate.  
30\. Nineties.  
31\. Patch.  
32\. Plant.  
33\. Quires.  
34\. Roof.  
35\. Ruined.  
36\. Run.  
37\. Sent.  
38\. Shrinker.  
39\. Single.  
40\. Split.  
41\. Stale.  
42\. Sweep.  
43\. Tack.  
44\. Tiger.  
45\. Toll.  
46\. Ton.  
47\. Top.  
48\. Tree.  
49\. Trousers.  
50\. Vile.  
51\. Water.  
52\. Whores.  
53\. Wine.  

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&agrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or 18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI*; or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market
Square, Aylesbury, Bucks, England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer*.

*N.B.:* To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either office,
we shall arrange to collect correct answers for 21 days, starting
with the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw
one winner from each office.</winner>

## Paring Pairs No. 6

In North America, the correct answer to Paring Pairs No.
5 (Bow) was received from Mr. Roy K. Stevens, New York, N.Y.
The winner in North America to Paring Pairs No. 6 (Man) was
Mrs. Roy H. Anderson, Mount Vernon, Washington.  Winners
elsewhere will be announced in the next issue.

(a). Chastening influence. (32, 5) Bundling Bored.  
(b). Disappointment.  (27, 4) Hart Brake.  
(c). Coerce.  (9, 2) Rail Rode.  
(d). Origami feline.  (23, 3) Paper Tiger.  
(e). Met pieman.  (8, 1) Simple Simon.  
(f). Saint.  (1, 20) Simon Templar.  
(g). Electronic layout.  (24, 5)Bred Bored.  
(h). Where Trevi et al. might be kept.  (25, 6) Fountain Pen.  
(i). Source.  (25, 30) Fountain Head.  
(j). Jazz tune.  (3, 11) Tiger Rag.     
(k). Pre-ballpoint essential. (6, 14) Pen Wiper.  
(l). Eat. (4, 24) Brake Bred.  
(m). Row of trees.  (16, 4) Wind Brake.  
(n). Carminate.  (4, 16) Brake Wind.  
(o). CB interruption.  (13, 13) Breaker Breaker.  
(p). 007's optic.  (10, 7) Bond's I.  
(q). Infantile customers. (22, 12) Carriage Trade.  
(r). Toxophilist.  (28, 15) William Tell.  
(s). Meerschaum.  (26, 18) Pipe Liner.  
(t). Modern caravanserai. (21, 15) Mow Tell.  
(u). Turn of the century. (11, 33) Rag Time.  
(v). Expert surfer.  (10, 7, 26, 18) Bond's I Pipe Liner.  
(w). Tarkington creation.  (6, 29) Pen Rod.  
(x). For writing swinish prose.  (17, 6) Pig Pen.  
(y). Carroll's elderly acrobat.  (19, 28) Father William.  
(z). End of the line.  (9, 30) Rail Head.  
(aa). Orange king.  (28, 7) William I.  
(bb). Haute couture.  (11, 12) Rag Trade.  
(cc). Crusader.  (34, 20) Night Templar.  
(dd). Eventide.  (34, 33) Night Time.  
(ee). Stiff printing medium. (23, 5) Paper Bored.  
(ff). Hopalong Cassidy.  (28, 27) William Hart.  
(gg). Makes for rough going. (30, 16) Head Wind.  
(hh). Quality stationery.  (11, 23) Rag Paper.  
(ii). New World propellant. (12, 16) Trade Wind.  
(jj). Professional Journal. (12, 23) Trade Paper.  
(kk). Assault in the dark. (34, 12) Night Trade.  
(ll). Jacket.  (16, 13) Wind Breaker.  
(mm). Use a watch.  (15, 33) Tell Time.  
(nn). Exup&eacute;ry found it in Arras.  (34, 16) Night Wind.  
(oo). Self-contained air-breathing apparatus. (16, 26) Wind Pipe.  
(pp). Celebrity.  (30, 18) Head Liner.  
(qq). Chronologer.  (19, 33) Father Time.


### OBITER DICTA: *Lost in Translation*
*Irving Allen, University of Connecticut*

A new neighborhood shopping amenity, a Japanese food
store, opened recently on Manhattan's ethnically diverse Lower
East Side.  The store was soon stocked with imported canned
goods, cooking accessories, and a cold counter filled with
Japanese food staples and delicacies.  Shortly, a handsome,
professionally lettered sign appeared on the store's window
proclaiming: &ldquo;Japanese Dairy.&rdquo;  Milk and cheese products, of
course, are almost unknown in the traditional Japanese diet.

There is a variety of ethnic &ldquo;delis&rdquo; in the neighborhood,
and this clearly was a welcome addition.  The store was closed,
so I couldn't ask, and I wouldn't but I imagined a dialog
between the proprietor, speaking with a Japanese accent, and a
New York sign painter:

>PROPRIETOR: &ldquo;Please paint the sign to read Japanese Deli&rdquo;
[confusing the pronunciation of the *l* in *deli*, such that it had
the sound of the *r* in *dairy*].
>
>SIGN PAINTER: &ldquo;Japanese Dairy, right?&rdquo;
>
>PROPRIETOR: &ldquo;Yes, deli&rdquo; [deri].

Several weeks later the sign had been professionally
changed to &ldquo;Japanese Deli,&rdquo; which it is, and may it long be.


#### EPISTOLA {R.K. Dillon}

I lived in London for seven years and was proud of
&ldquo;knowing my way around&rdquo; the language and its variations.  For
instance, I knew that *Beauchamp* Place was pronounced
BEE'chim and that *Beaufort* Street was pronounced BOW'furt.
Imagine the difficulty I had when I was working on a movie
called *The Dirty Dozen* and had to drive to a location shooting
at a place called BEW'ly.  I followed the directions I'd been
given and passed back and forth through a town posted as
*Beaulieu*, until I was informed by a local in the main street
there that I was smack-dab in the middle of BEW'l....  Adding
to my general perplexity was a pedantic friend who insists to
this day that the *ei* in *either* and *neither* should be pronounced
as in *neighbor* and *weight*.  As you can see by my return
address, I gave up and came home.

*[R.K. Dillon, New York City]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Make a small car smaller. (7)  
5\. Give a poor fish a chance to gobble up the pot. (7)  
9\. A pretty resident at the landlord-tenant meeting. (10, 5)  
10\. TV with diminishing returns.  
11\. Sleeping partner. (7)  
12\. Supposed to be a life sentence. (1, 2)  
13\. Adam's opposite number. (4, 3)  
14\. He was O.K. in the old Persian version. (4)  
16\. A spot of some substance for the bride. (3)  
19\. Cure to restore color.  (4)  
20\. When they halt the freight, go after amber is discerned. (7)  
23\. This keeps your pot under cover. (3)  
24\. Put it on the horse's nose and he'll perform. (7)  
26\. Patch things up and forget about that divorce. (6)  
28\. &ldquo;Ladies and gentlemen, retire to the jury room and consider your verdict.&rdquo; (5, 2, 3, 5)  
29\. &ldquo;Dee-Dum, Dum-Dee, they're all the same to me,&rdquo; said Alice. (7)  
30\. Tried to keep a poor fool covered by surveillance. (7)  

**Down**

1\. Possible change of quarters for shopkeepers. (4, 4)  
2\. Mrs., ejected from best (6)  part of bed, left in a terrible state. (8)  
3\. See acrimony in the alphabetic bureaucracy? (9)  
4\. Quite a job, but one won't want to be taken to it. (4)  
5\. Shod by welfare, or was it looted? (10)  
6\. Sick transit?  Much better. (5)  
7\. Was Dorian gray in advance? (6)  
8\. No Hyde, she, but a tough customer, anyway. (6)  
12\. Humor enjoyed by spoiled brats. (10)  
15\. Morning starts well with these French airs. (9)  
17\. Government store. (8)  
18\. No. 1, yet bawled out by the chief. (3, 5)  
21\. Try to get work.  (6)  
22\. Follow the custom of hawking.  
25\. Well drilled. (5)  
27\. Change of hose for the walker. (4)  

## Crossword Puzzle Answers
 
1\. Bustles(s).  
5\. Popcorn.  
9\. SH-out.  
10\. GARGOYLES (anagram OR LAY EGGS).  
11\. Motley.  
12\. TOT-ality (laity).  
14\. No diploma.  
16\. d-IRE NE-ed.  
17\. Fat-A-1.  
19\. Pal-PIT-ate.  
22\. E-c-ON-omic.  
23\. Critic.  
26\. Duplicity.  
27\. GENUS (genius, no I).  
28\. Mode-STY.  
29\. Open air.  

**Down**

1\. Best man.  
2\. S-co-OT-ed.  
3\. Wel-L IT HE-lps.  
4\. Sign.  
5\. Person-ALLY.  
6\. Poor alibi.  
7\. Oil pipe.  
8\. No style.  
13\. COmp-licit-Y.  
15\. Pillories.  
17\. Freedom.  
18\. TR-ou-PE-d.  
20\. Antenna.  
21\. EX-cu-S-er.  
24\. R-og-UE.  
25\. TYRO.  


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

(SIC TRANSIT Dept.)  &ldquo;The advent of these sleek coaches
should provide a tremendous shot in the arm to both legs of
Nevada's passenger train system.&rdquo;—*Washington Report
from Senator Gannon to Nevadans*, May 1980.  [Submitted
by Donald Schmiedel, Las Vegas, Nevada.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v8n4_Spring_1982)