--- 
title: "VOL IX, No 1 [Summer, 1982]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Holy Water, Jeans, and Trade Unionists
*Laurence Urdang, Editor,* VERBATIM

One becomes accustomed to the slang of his own language;
yet, unless he is virtually bilingual or at least on intimate
terms with the goings-on in a foreign language, his exposure to
the slang of other languages is generally quite limited.  Some of
us have picked up a few taboo words or phrases from German
*(scheissen)* or from French *(merde; je m'en fou)*—at least the
terms that have a taboo translation in English—but for the most
part we are unfamiliar with such terms in another language.

It was interesting to read *Lexical Innovation: A Study of
Slang, Colloquialisms and Casual Speech*, by Karl Sornig (John
Benjamins North America, 1981), because it contains many
words and phrases from several Indo-European languages that
are unlikely to be met with by most of us.  In the following
paragraphs, I have drawn freely from materials in Sornig's
book—but for my own purposes in this article: the book itself
uses the examples to illustrate a variety of sources of slang in
accordance with the author's analysis of the &ldquo;nether&rdquo; reaches
of the language, an analysis I shall only touch on here and
there.

One interesting source of slang in (apparently) many
languages is in borrowings.  This, in Austrian *jemandem eine
Pantschen* '[give] someone a blow,' *Pantschen* can be traced to
English *punch*.  German *Schickse* 'girl, prostitute' comes from
Yiddish *schickse* 'gentile girl.'  Austrian *tschinkwe* 'valueless,
worthless' is from Italian *cinque* 'five,' while Italian *kitsh* 'trash'
was borrowed from German *Kitsch*, with the same meaning.
Turkish *iskarta* 'refuse, rubbish' is from Italian *scartare* 'to
discard, secrete,' and French *je m'en fou*, a mild translation of
which is 'I don't give a damn,' ended up in Austrian as
*schmafu* 'mean, stingy.'

Not all borrowings ended up as corruptions of the original
word or phrase: some were translated, as Italian *erba* 'herb'
(which probably originated as a translated version of English
*grass* 'marijuana') and Italian *cavallo* 'horse,' a &ldquo;literal&rdquo; translation
of the English slang word for 'heroin.'

Slang has always been with us.  Historically, French *t&ecirc;te*
'head' is traced to Latin *testa* '(ceramic) pot.'

A German slang term for 'money' is *Marie*, a loanword
from Gypsy *maro* where it means 'bread,' a metaphoric
extension familiar to speakers of contemporary English.  Theater
people know the expression *Break a leg!* meaning 'Good
luck!,' but how many know its origin in German *jemandem
(Hals- und) Beinbruch w&uuml;nschen* 'wish someone would break
his (neck and) leg'?  In Hebrew and Yiddish, *broche* means
'benediction' and *hazloche* means 'luck'; whether the expression
is the result of an error or a pun is not clear.  Another
expression resulting from a loanword distortion is British
English *(That's) another pair of shoes*, with *shoes* a corruption
of French *chose* 'thing,' *pair of* having been added as a joke.
Turkish *sakal d&ouml;ken* 'those who dropped their beards' derived
from French *Cercle d'Orient*, a club of pro-European, clean-shaven
intellectuals in Istanbul in the 19th century.  Nor is the
phenomenon of distorting loanwords a modern one; in fact,
there are indications that the process has diminished considerably
since the advent of printing and literacy.  Latin *lapathum*
became French *patience* (the plant) by false analogy of *la*- with
the French article.  Latin *mandragora* 'mandrake' became
French *main de gloire*.

False analysis created French *candel-arbre* literally 'candletree,'
from *candelabre* from Latin *candelabrum* in which
-*abrum* is merely a neuter suffix.  And *noble*, a coin of France
and, later, of England, originated because of association with
Latin *nobilis*, whereas its true origin was in Greek *obolos*,
rendered as *un obol(os)*.  (This latter kind of false analysis also
gave rise to English *(an) apron* and *(an) adder*, from *a napron*
and *a nadder*.)

Slang loanwords in Italian from English include *tiltato*
'tired' and *flippato* 'excited' from English slang *tilted* (as in
pinball machine lingo) and *flipped (out)*.

It is not always easy to tell whether a slang coinage has
arisen because speakers are being playful, secretive, or discreet.
Certainly much of criminal slang may be the result of deliberate
secretiveness, and the creation of neologisms for narcotics
seems to lag only slightly behind the adoption by the unhip of
terms that have been around for a while: *dope, snow, smack*,
and their synonyms are quickly replaced by dealers who trade
in language as readily as in drugs.  Discretion in avoiding taboo
words is evidenced by some expressions in British rhyming
slang: *Bristol Cities* for *titties*, for instance.  (For many more
samples, see *A Dictionary of Rhyming Slang*, by J. Franklyn,
Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1960.)  On the other hand, *titfer*,
short for *tit for tat*, which is rhyming slang for *hat*, can hardly
be more than mere playfulness, likewise *trouble and strife* for
*wife*—unless she is within earshot.  Discretion was also at work
in Austrian *Das ist f&uuml;r Friedrich*, literally 'It is for Frederick'
but really meaning 'It is worthless.'  This is a reduction of *Das
ist f&uuml;r Arsch und Friedrich* in which *Arsch* 'arse' has been
suppressed: *f&uuml;r Arsch und Friedrich* 'good-for-nothing.'

English *(the) blues* is traced to a shortening of *(the) blue
devils*, which had its association with *delirium tremens* and its
hallucinations.  The Austrian 1000-Schilling banknote was
dubbed *ein Blauer* 'a blue one,' but that designation has given
way to *Jeans*—yes, in Austrian slang—on the obvious association
with something everyone recognizes as being blue.  (For the
most interesting treatment of *blue* see William Gass's book *On
Being Blue*, Godine Press.)  Other metaphoric reflexes can be
seen in Italian *autostrada*, 'a skinny girl' (lit. 'highway')
(because she has no curves), Italian *ossigeno*, 'money' (lit.
'oxygen' because you can't live without it), Austrian and
German *M&uuml;hle*, 'bicycle' (lit. 'mill' because one has to grind
away at pedaling), Austrian *Hebamme*, 'corkscrew' (lit. 'midwife'
by obvious analogy).  *Not worth a bean* appears in
German as *nicht die Bohne*, where it has also acquired the
meaning 'certainly not.'

Slang is sometimes characterized by understatement—
litotes, if you want the literary term for the device.  In English
we see *lift, liberate*, and other euphemistic words for 'steal.'
The normally harmless (though seemingly infinitely productive)
word *take* appears in this context, too, as in the old song:

>Mamie took the measles, Mamie took to bed,  
Mamie took a doctor, and this is what he said:  
&ldquo;Take a little something, till you're feeling prime.&rdquo;  
Mamie has been taking something—something all the
time.  
Once she took a notion in a dry-goods store—  
She would be a lady, that if nothing more—  
But the bold floorwalker made her put it back:  
Mamie was a klepto-Mamie...klepto-Mamiac.  

In French, *prendre* (lit. 'take') means 'steal,' and, for other
examples of understatement one need look no further than
Turkish *ka&scedil;imak* (lit. 'scratch') 'beat someone up'; Latin
*infirmitas* (lit. 'weakness') 'disease'; Turkish *genel ev* (lit. 'open
house') 'brothel'; French *poison* (lit. 'poison') from Latin
*potionem* 'drink'; French *enceinte* (lit. 'girded') 'pregnant.'  This
device is so familiar in English that we scarcely pay much
attention to it: *lady of the evening, call girl, working girl* are
well-known euphemisms for prostitute; *(a) story* for *(a) lie*;
*second-story man* for *sneak-thief*; *cosa nostra* (lit., in Italian,
'our thing') borrowed into English for *(the) Mafia*, etc.

On the other side, we have euphemism and overstatement:
Latin *mentiri* (lit. 'to mention') 'to lie,' comparable to Italian
*trovare* (lit. 'to find, locate') with the same meaning; Spanish
*ester pelado* (lit. 'to be skinned') 'to be robbed' (compare
English *skin* or *fleece* (someone), etc.); Slovenian *sveta vodica*
(lit. 'holy water') 'brandy' (compare Gaelic *uisgebeatha*, lit.
'water of life,' now *whiskey*); Italian *bottega* (lit. 'shop')
'prison,' *cadavere* (lit. 'carcass') 'ugly person'; Turkish
*temizlemek* (lit. 'clean up') 'kill' and *sari kiz* (lit. 'blonde girl')
'hashish'; Arabic *abu jahja* (lit. 'father of life') 'angel of death';
Italian *il benedetto* (lit. 'the blessed one') 'epilepsy'; Slovenian
*sindicalista* (lit. 'trade unionist, syndicalist') 'prostitute'; German
*Emaille* (lit. 'enamel') 'make-up'; Turkish *isci* (lit. 'worker')
'thief,' *esnaf* (lit. 'craftsman') 'prostitute,' and *toz* (lit. 'dust')
'heroin'; English *bracelets* 'handcuffs'; Turkish *ok&scedil;amak* (lit.
'caress') 'beat someone up.'  The examples seem endless, and,
indeed, this area is extremely productive of new applications of
existing words.  It would seem, though, that, in addition to
playfulness, sardonicism creeps into the naming process.
(Indeed, the word *sardonic* itself is traced to the name given to
a Sardinian plant, which, when eaten, was said to produce
convulsive laughter ending in death.)

We have seen that French *t&ecirc;te* 'head' came from the Latin
slang word for 'head,' *testa* (lit. 'pot'); the expected form, from
standard Latin *caput* 'head' would have been *chef* or *chief*,
surviving mainly in the metaphoric sense 'chief.'  It remains,
though in, *kerchief* (from Middle English *kerchef* from Old
French *cuevrechef* 'cover-head'), which appears also as Modern
English *handkerchief* (from the time when kerchiefs were
carried about in the hand for uses other than covering the
head), and in *pocket handkerchief* ('a headcovering carried in
the hand and kept in the pocket').  But I digress.  In English
slang we have seen *bad* meaning 'good' *(He's real bad on the
alto sax)*, though I think that sense may now be fading.  It may
or may not be comforting to know that speakers of other
languages engage in the same practice of &ldquo;opposites&rdquo;: Italian
*bestiale* (lit. 'brutish, bestial; atrocious') 'great, marvelous, good'
and *bestia* (lit. 'beast') 'friendly'; German *Strick* (lit. 'rope')
'necktie'; Turkish *gavurca* (lit. 'language of the unbelievers')
'any foreign language' (compare the origin of *barbarian*).

As I commented earlier, it is not always easy to determine
what motivates speakers to coin slang paraphrases: Is it
sometimes merely the desire to avoid the old clich&eacute;s (and
create new ones)?  Can it be reflective of an effort to avoid
calling a spade a spade?  These and other factors are surely at
work in expressions that avoid the use of *crazy* and *insane*,
especially when those terms are not meant literally.  But here,
again, we get into trouble with *crazy*, which survives in its
original, etymological and literal senses only in *crazy* ('irregularly
patterned') *quilt* and in describing ceramic objects as
*crazed*, the latter possibly bringing us full circle to Latin *testa*
'(ceramic) pot' and, almost literally, to *cracked* (in the head).  In
Austrian we have *hin bei der Marilln* (lit. 'defect in the
apricot'), in French *sauterelle dans la guitare* (lit. 'grasshopper
in the guitar') and *hanneton dans le plafond* (lit. 'cockchafer in
the ceiling').  English resorts to *a screw loose, screwy, batty*
(from *bats in the belfry), nutty, off one's rocker, off one's
trolley, dotty*, (British) *barmy (in the crumpet), a slate missing*,
and just plain *nuts*.  Speakers also avoid talking about dying and
death (as has been documented thoroughly elsewhere), resorting
to *the grim reaper, (gathered to) Abraham's bosom, pass
away, kick the bucket, buy the farm, meet one's maker*, and,
for the bankrupt whose backer predeceased him, *to meet one's
comaker*.

Finally, we come to the unanalyzable, to those expressions
that Sornig describes as &ldquo;downright absurdities&rdquo;: Russian *odin
kak spi&ccaron;ka* 'alone like a match'; German *dumm wie Bohnenstroh*
(lit. 'stupid as bean straw') 'extremely stupid'; Turkish
*&ccedil;eviz kirmak* (lit. 'crack the walnut') and *findik kirmak* (lit.
'crack the hazelnut') 'be a favorite with the ladies'; German
*Anno Tabak* (lit. 'in the year of tobacco') 'in olden times';
Italian *Zucche!* (lit. 'pumpkin') 'Certainly not!'

Some slang is fleeting, particularly in these times when
newly minted coinages rapidly acquire the staleness of age
through overexposure on television, radio, and in the press:
there is nothing more tiresome than a freshly created clich&eacute;.
Some slang acquires respectability (e.g., French *t&ecirc;te*, English
*jazz*).  Some remains vulgar, taboo, or just &ldquo;slang.&rdquo;  Some is
crude, some colorful, some insightful, some absurd.  Yet most of
it is poetic—at least in the sense that it makes greater than
ordinary use of poetical devices like litotes, hyperbole, and,
above all, metaphor.  Of the two most productive sources of
new language, technology, which yields terms like *telephone,
transistor*, and *betalipoproteinemia*, and slang, which yields
*climb the wall, horse*, and *swell*, which do you consider to be
*real neat?*

## The Christening
*Ray Russell, Beverly Hills, California*

When I'm asked, as I am on occasion, what my name was
before I changed it, I reply that, incredible as it may
seem, the name I use is the same one I received in baptism at
Resurrection Church in Chicago when I was a baby.  I know it
sounds like the kind of cosmetic name people change *to*, but I
can't help that; nor can I help the fact that I'm not the least bit
Anglo-Saxon or Celtic, as my name implies.  My mother's
forebears came from Austria and Germany; my father—a
foundling who never knew his real father's name—got his
surname from his adoptive father, a man who, thanks to one of
those ironic quirks in which Fate delights, was ethnically far
removed from whatever Basque or Gypsy or Sicilian loins
whence issued my sire (whose early photos show a youth as
darkly handsome as Rudolph Valentino or those portraits of the
young, slim, not yet balding King Farouk or Sadruddin Aga
Khan).  His exotic features and large brown eyes have always
given the lie to his WASP name.

My own WASP name—my first name, at any rate—was, by
another of Fate's quirks, very nearly not bestowed upon me at
all.  I came just *that* close to receiving a first name that would
have made a piquant contrast with my last; a monicker with
the tang of strong wine, redolent of goat cheese, steeped in
olive oil, wrapped in grape leaves.

I wish I *had* received it, because the name I wound up
with is feeble, flaccid, forgettable, and (in view of the fact that
my unused middle name is Robert) as dully alliterative as the
foregoing trio of words.  It has no hook to stick in the memory,
and slides out of recall like a buttered noodle off a fork.  Before
settling down to the simple two-piece first-and-last-name to
which I'm now resigned, I tried a variety of other combinations.
All three names: first, middle, and last.  First name,
middle initial, and last name.  Two initials, followed by last
name.  First name represented only by its initial, middle name,
and last name (*&agrave; la* W. Somerset Maugham).  First name
incorrectly inflated to Raymond (which, according to my birth
certificate, it isn't).  Inspired by the example of Tennessee
Williams, I considered calling myself Illinois, but this left much
to be desired.  Taking a leaf from Budd Schulberg, another leaf
from the now forgotten novelist Speed Lamkin, and several
more leaves from certain comic strip characters, I toyed with
such sobriquets as Buck, Flash, Butch, Spike, Slug, Buzz, Lefty,
and the like.  I was rather partial to Lefty (it had an Odetsian
touch), but the plain truth was, and is, that I'm right-handed.  I
carefully weighed the possibility of Boze, short for Bozo, which
has always been my father's nickname for me, but thought
better of it.

Back to the christening.  The way my father tells it, the
day of my baptism had dawned and everything was all set, or
almost all set: the church, the priest, a good woman to &ldquo;stand
up&rdquo; for me as my godmother, all these had been lined up...
but no godfather.  I don't know why.  The man originally cast in
the part got sick, perhaps, or drunk; but for whatever reason,
my father was deputized by my mother to go forth at the last
minute and dig up a replacement and show up at the church
with him at the appointed time.  In his entire career as
paterfamilias, my father never once failed to bring home the
bacon, even in the deepest abyss of the Depression, and he was
determined not to come up empty-handed this time.  He
phoned here, went there, buttonholed this man, begged that
man, all to no avail, and zero hour was fast approaching.

In those days, and for long after, he worked as a
conductor on the &ldquo;L.&rdquo;  He used to wear a dark blue, almost
black, uniform with shiny buttons and a visored cap with a
badge on it.  The cap was worn at a dapper tilt.  The neighborhood
kids, until corrected, thought he was a cop.  He walked
with a spring in his step, and he often whistled or hummed in
time to the swing of his stride.  But that morning, after failing
to find a godfather for me, he wasn't whistling.  His step had
lost its spring.  He sat, glum, over a cup of untasted coffee in
Sam's Sandwich Shop, a hangout of &ldquo;L&rdquo; men and their
passengers, at the Laramie Avenue terminal station.

Sam, the proprietor—I think his last name was Contos—
asked, in his heavily accented English, what was wrong.  My
father told him.  On the spot, Sam volunteered to be my
godfather.  He whipped off his apron, hung the &ldquo;Closed&rdquo; sign
on his door, and the two men were soon in a taxi, en route to
the church.

During the ride, my father undoubtedly asked Sam if he
was a Catholic, and Sam must have replied either that he was
or that the Greek Orthodox faith was close enough to the
Roman to make no difference.  Then he added that, among his
people, it was a custom to name the godson after his godfather.
He was adamant about the custom being honored that
morning.

&ldquo;Well, as a matter of fact,&rdquo; said my father, beginning to
see trouble ahead, &ldquo;we really hadn't planned on calling the boy
Samuel.&rdquo;

In a tone of reassurance, Sam revealed that his name
wasn't Samuel, and that &ldquo;Sam&rdquo; was merely an approximation
hung on him by ignorant Americans.  &ldquo;My name is *Stamatos*,&rdquo;
he announced proudly.  My father, uncomforted by this disclosure,
felt his fears increase tenfold, but the taxi had screeched
to a stop at the curb outside the church, and there was no
turning back now.

Being possessed of an inventive and somewhat crafty
mind that may have been a legacy from his Corsican or
Armenian or Semite ancestors, my father collared the priest for
a moment of private consultation.  He may have slipped him an
extra fiver for the poor box as he explained the nature of the
dilemma, emphatically vowed that he had no intention of
christening his son Stamatos, and asked if the baptism might
not be conducted in such a blur of ritual and muttered Latin
that Mr. Contos would only *think* the baby was receiving the
godfather's name.  &ldquo;Leave everything to me,&rdquo; said the clever
cleric.

The ceremony went smoothly and everybody was happy,
particularly Sam.  I think he was a childless man who had
always yearned for a son, and he probably felt that, although it
had pleased God to deny him true fatherhood, a kind of minor
miracle had come to pass that had given him a boy who would
bear his name.

He was, of course, deceived in this, but, because he never
knew of the deception, it may be said that he wasn't deceived,
after all.  As soon as I was old enough to understand, my father
told me the story of my christening.  He made clear to me how
important it was to my godfather to believe that my name was
his, and how hurt he would be to learn otherwise.  It made
sense to me and I accepted it as a game to be played strictly
according to the rules: a bit of play-acting to be performed
seriously, sincerely, without giggling or winking at the audience.
An element of deviousness in my character, a love of
hoaxes and pseudonyms, may be rooted in that early
masquerade.

In any case, whenever Sam and I would meet in his shop
and he would pat me on the head and offer me a free ice
cream cone—or later, when I had grown up and was about to
be conscripted into the wartime Army, and a manly handshake
was in order, and manly tears, and a fierce hug—he would
always, until he went to join Plato and Aristotle and his other
kinsmen, call me &ldquo;Sam,&rdquo; and I would never bat an eye.

## Who Needs Enemies...?
*Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium*

Some time ago I was employed in an office where letters
were written in either French or English, depending on the
addressee.  About half the secretaries were French, and the
others English.  However, all were skilled in both languages, so
the letters could be dictated to any secretary.  The instructions
about the number of copies to be typed were given in the
typist's mother tongue.  So you would say to an English
speaker: &ldquo;Six copies, please,&rdquo; and you would get six letters.  On
the other hand, if you requested &ldquo;*Six copies, s'il vous pla&icirc;t*&rdquo;
from a French employee, chances are your letter would be
typed sevenfold.  In the French office, *copies* is understood to
mean 'carbon copies,' not counting the original.  A copy too
many does little harm, but the effects of this confusion were
quite irritating for my French colleagues, who often received a
copy too few.  And, although everybody knew about the catch,
misunderstandings kept popping up, because each tended to
stick to his or her own linguistic habits.

This situation is by no means unique.  Many English
speakers now and again come across a French word that at first
sight seems to be the equivalent of an English one: the spelling
is similar or even identical, and both occur in the same sort of
context.  There appears to be every reason to believe that the
two have the same meaning.  But they don't.  Almost, but not
quite; or sometimes, but not usually.  For instance, French
*&eacute;ventuel* ought not to be translated 'eventual,' but rather by
'possible,' whereas the French counterparts of *eventual* are
words like 'final' and 'ultime.'  In the same way, *actuel* is
'present' or 'current,' rather than 'actual,' and the latter is best
rendered in French by *r&eacute;el*, or *concret*, or *effectif*, or indeed
*pr&eacute;sent*.  To make things even more confusing, there are also
instances where the meanings of *actuel* and 'actual' do in fact
overlap.

These examples are classics, but it is not too difficult to
find more of the same kind.  In fact, that's exactly what the
Frenchmen Koessler and Derocquigny did more than half a
century ago in their little book *Les Faux Amis* (False Friends).
One large category of their finds can be traced back to French
words adopted in England during Norman rule, whose meanings
subsequently evolved along different lines in each country.
For instance, *proc&eacute;s* and 'process' are false friends, because the
former nowadays means 'trial,' and the latter should be
translated by *processus*.  To express the present meaning of 'to
control,' you have to use words like *ma&icirc;triser, dominer* or
*diriger*, while *contr&ocirc;ler* has stuck to its original meaning of 'to
verify.'  To complicate the situation even more, the English
sense is admitted in modern French in certain cases, especially
in loan translations, such as *contr&ocirc;le des naissances* 'birth
control.'  (Conversely, what about an English expression like
'passport control'?)  Another example is 'female.'  The English
term is applicable to all species, but the French *femelle* is no
longer in use in respect of the human race—not in nice speech,
at least.  (I have been told that Canadian French has diverged
less from its origins on this point.)

*Faux amis* have not sprung only from French words that
migrated to England to lead a life of their own.  Another
category is made up of words both languages borrowed directly
from Latin, especially during the Roman occupation or as
ecclesiastical terms.  A striking example of the latter is 'curate,'
a function which corresponds to *vicaire* on the other side of the
Channel.  A French *cur&eacute;* is a parish priest; so, in a Church of
England context, the correct translation would be 'vicar'—a
perfect cross-cousin marriage.  Less intricate examples are
'library' *biblioth&eacute;que* &#92;neq&#92; *librairie* 'bookshop,' 'infant' *b&eacute;b&eacute;* or
*enfant en bas &acirc;ge* &#92;neq&#92; *enfant* 'child,' 'sane' *sain d'esprit* &#92;neq&#92; *sain*
'healthy,' and 'salary' *traiteman* &#92;neq&#92; *salaire* 'wages.'

Obviously, French and English also have words in common
that are drawn from other languages.  Examples of ensuing
*faux amis* are sparse, but I could perhaps point out *couque* and
'cookie,' both derived from Dutch *koek* 'cake.'  The two varieties
of pastry are *quite* different.

A relatively new category consists of &ldquo;second degree *faux
amis*,&rdquo; English words whose specifically American meaning
differs from that of their French cognates.  For example, how
much is a billion?  In France, where such issues are *officially*
decided upon, it is a thousand times more than in the United
States.  Before World War II, the British leaned toward the
French system (US 'billion' = *milliard*), but an increasing
number of their financial institutions conform with American
usage.  Some try to avoid the problem with an uncommitting
&ldquo;1,000 million,&rdquo; but they get into trouble with *trillion*.

Not all *faux amis* have their roots in the distant past.  A
relatively young pair are 'brassiere' and *soutien-gorge* &#92;neq&#92; *brassi&eacute;re*.
The latter word is nowadays used only for certain
children's gear, expecially leading-strings ('reins' in Britain).
Again a garment: 'slip' *combinaison* &#92;neq&#92; *slip* 'briefs.'  This
demonstrates that *faux amis* can originate on the English side
of the Channel.  One more of this kind, from the world of
motor cars: 'starter' *d&eacute;marreur* &#92;neq&#92; *starter* 'choke.'

The last two examples really result from the advent of
*Franglais*, a recent phenomenon *Les Faux Amis* does not, of
course, deal with.  However, the modest booklet has grown into
a weighty volume with a long, learned introduction in its sixth
edition, published by Vuibert, Paris 1975.  It is all very thorough,
but hunting for *faux amis* can be just a hobby, free from
scientific pretensions.  If you would like to build a *faux amis*
collection of your own, the material abounds.  Few of the
examples used in this article, for example, appear in the book.

True false friends derive from the same root.  So don't pair
'core' with *coeur* 'heart,' because the two words have, in spite
of a certain similarity in spelling and a semblance of semantic
kinship, no common forebear (unless you go back to Sanskrit,
perhaps, but remember: it is an amateur game).  Secondly, even
genuinely false friends do not always show an all-round
difference of meaning.  In other words, you often have to settle
for a partial overlap of meaning.  Let us therefore agree that a
difference between the most frequently used meanings suffices.
For instance, 'talon' *serre* &#92;neq&#92; *talon* 'heel' make an almost pure
couple, but 'to chant' *psalmodier* &#92;neq&#92; *chanter* 'to sing' show
some overlapping, because 'to chant' sometimes stands for 'to
sing.'  Partial candidates are 'to assist' *aider* &#92;neq&#92; *assister* 'to
attend,' 'chamber' *salle* &#92;neq&#92; *chambre* 'room,' 'parole' *parole
d'honneur* &#92;neq&#92; *parole* 'word,' 'gallant' *vaillant* &#92;neq&#92; *galant
'courtly*,' 'psychic' surnaturel &#92;neq&#92; *psychique* 'psychological.'
When a man plans to entertain a French lady, he had better
not speak of *entretenir* her.  The most benevolent interpretation
of his words would be that he proposes to converse with her.

It follows that you will have to apply standards for the
meaning of 'meaning,' or rather of 'difference of meaning.'  In a
case like *&eacute;diteur* 'publisher' &#92;neq&#92; 'editor' *r&eacute;dacteur*, the difference
is clear enough, but what about 'versatile' and *versatile*?  I
would indeed classify these two as *faux amis*, on the grounds
that the former expresses a positive quality and the French
counterpart is anything but complimentary, perhaps best translated
by 'time-serving.'  Others may not wish to take such
differences in moral content into account.  A case more difficult
to define is 'sympathetic' &#92;neq&#92; *sympathique* (the closest 'English'
equivalent of the latter seems to be 'simpatico').  You may also
choose to include word pairs of which one member is used
exclusively in the figurative sense, whereas the other has kept
its literal meaning ('meager' &#92;neq&#92; *maigre* 'lean').  In some pairs,
one member has an archaic or literary flavor, but the other
belongs to everyday language ('felon' &#92;neq&#92; *felon*).  Even lesser
differences in style could do: 'soup' *potage* &#92;neq&#92; *soupe* (colloquial),
while *potage* &#92;neq&#92; pottage.

Remember also that French is not the only possible
partner to English for this game; Germanic languages serve just
as well.  Some research in this direction has already been done.
Perusing dictionaries can be rewarding, but the most endearing
finds stem from real-life situations, like the carbon copy case
recounted above.  By the way, we eventually decided to say just
'One plus five, please.'

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard*

Commercials are the poetry of the television generation.
You can see this for yourself by going to a Christmas pantomime
or a summer variety show at the end of the pier at a
seaside resort.  A generation ago the jokes were about politicians,
film stars, characters out of books, and, maybe just
starting, well-known performers on the radio, or, as we used to
call it then, the wireless.  Today they are about the telly, and
the audience chant the commercial jingles about washing
powders and brands of instant coffee as familiarly as their
grandparents quoted the Authorized Version.

It is a natural process for names to come into the language
as proper words.  From Amelia Jenks Bloomer, with her
bicycling knickerbockers, to Venetian blinds to Harris tweed,
names are continually becoming words.  But I think that this
generation of mass advertising is the first one to turn trade
names into words at such a rate.  *Pace* Laszlo Biro, a *biro* today
is any ballpoint pen; we *hoover* the carpet with any old
vacuum cleaner, much to me rage of the Hoover company,
founded by William Henry Hoover.  There is demotic poetry as
well as a great deal of interest in these trade names that are so
big a part of the language in a society that spends so much of
its time and effort on consuming.

We have just had published over here the first systematic
examination of trade names: *Dictionary of Trade Name Origins*,
by Adrian Room (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, &pound;7.95).  Room
is senior lecturer in Russian at the Ministry of Defence, a
hardened and shameless word-man.  His dictionary is a well of
curious information and speculation.

For example, take lavatory paper, or, in the genteel
euphemism of Adspeak, toilet tissue.  I don't know about you
over there, but over here we have two main brands, one soft,
called Andrex, and the other hard and abrasive, used in
government departments because it is cheaper, called Bronco.  I
suppose I had imagined that Andrex had echoes of the Greek
word for 'soft' and that Bronco had connexions with the
Spanish word for 'rough.'  Nothing so etymologically satisfying,
dammit.  Andrex took its name from St Andrew's Road,
Walthamstow, where it was originally manufactured.  There is
an onomatopoeic theory that Bronco represents the sound
made when a sheet of hard lav paper is detached sharply from
its roll; the more likely origin is that the British Patent
Perforated Paper Company originally made two types of paper
called British No 1 and British No 2; the Bronco is a boring old
contraction.

With scholary passion for categorization, Adrian Room
distinguishes among name names *(Woolworth, Marks &amp; Spencer)*,
word names *(Fine Fare, Mothers Pride, Tuf Shoes)*, and
arbitrary names *(Omo, Kodak)*.  I find it enchanting that the *St
Michael* brand name of Marks &amp; Spencer, where all sensible
Brits buy their knickers and shirts, represents not the Archangel
Michael with a flaming sword, but Michael Marks, a Polish
Jewish refugee who set up his stall on the open market at
Leeds in 1884.

Trade names are powerful and dangerous magic in these
days of multinational companies.  Your name must be able to
cross frontiers without causing difficulties of pronunciation or
double entendre.  A few years ago Rolls Royce were looking for
a suitable name to follow their successful series of ethereal car
names, *Silver Ghost, Silver Wraith*, and *Silver Phantom*.  Their
public relations department come up with *Silver Mist*.  However,
it was pointed out that in Germany this would mean
'Silver Shit.'  The car has been called the *Silver Shadow*.  Ford's
*Corsair* car was originally to be called the Ford *Copreta*, until
somebody noticed that this would sound equally defecatory in
Greece.  The *Cona* Coffee Machine Company calls its Cona
*Acolon* in Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries,
where *Cona* is slang for the female pudenda.  The Foden truck
manufacturing company has the same trouble in Portugal that
the German Fokker aircraft company has in English-speaking
countries.

There is much food for thought in the origins of trade
names.  I meditate a learned monograph on the popularity of
such names as *Oxford, Cambridge, Crown, King, Jupiter*, and
*Hercules* as classy and snobbish labels.  I am staggered about
*Marlboro Country*.  This cigarette is advertised with a picture of
your President, Hopalong Cassidy, surrounded by cattle and
tumbleweed and Arizona sunset, looking as if he is about to
rope a steer or tear off a strip of bronco.  In fact, Philip Morris
originally named its fags after the Duke and public school
Marlborough; they were originally promoted as a cigarette for
ladies (they had red filter tips: 'a cherry tip for your ruby lips').

There is mystery about naming things for the first time,
as Adam discovered in the Garden of Eden.  It is not surprising
that many of the firms did not reply to Adrian Room's
questionnaires.  They were either embarrassed or had forgotten
how they came to call the product *Blotto*.  Some years ago, *The
Times* of London decided to have a Diary or Gossip column for
the first time.  Our formidable editor, Sir William Haley, the
only man in London with two glass eyes, summoned his
editorial staff and offered a prize of &pound;10 to the person who
came up with the best name for the column.  In those days,
&pound;10 was a lot of money for underpaid cub reporters, and we
tried hard.  Two weeks later, Sir William summoned us again to
announce the winner.  It was Sir William himself with the name
*From All Quarters*.  I have been wary of name-droppers ever
since.

## Negative Words
*Norman W. Schur, Weston, Connecticut*

An interesting phenomenon of language, especially English,
is the prevalence of words, particularly adjectives, whose
negative forms are much more frequently met with than the
positive ones on which they are based, as in the case, for
example, of *illicit/licit* or *inscrutable/scrutable*.  It often happens
that a word, though negative in form, imparts a quite
positive quality to the word it modifies.  This is not surprising in
words like *unforgettable* (to *forget* is to *fail* to remember), or
*unmitigated* (to *mitigate* is to *lessen*—a negative operation), or
*unflagging* (to *flag* is to *fall off* in vigor—likewise a negative
act), or *untrammeled* (to trammel is to *restrain*—an action
negative in effect); and there are *undoubtedly* (there's another
one for you!) many more in this category.  As in mathematics,
the negative of a negative is a positive, but remember: two
wrongs don't make a right.

A man of *unimpeachable* character, of *unassailable* integrity,
of *unquestioned* probity, of *undisputed* honesty, who
always speaks the *unvarnished* truth with *uncompromising*
adherence to the straight and narrow and *incalculable* energy
is, you will admit, a far from negative chap.

And one is being quite affirmative in singing the praises of
a face of *irresistible*, nay *ineffable* beauty, in gazing with
*unalloyed* pleasure at the *immutable* mountains and the *immemorial*
elms and the wonders of the *changeless* progress of the
seasons, in facing an *implacable* foe or a *relentless* adversary, in
deploring the *indescribable* damage wrought by a hurricane, in
predicting *ineluctable* progress, *inescapable* achievement, and
*inevitable* success, in denouncing an *unconscionable* rascal,
admiring *unbounded* enthusiasm, exclaiming about the vastness
of the *untrod* wastes, and extolling the virtues of a pure,
*unadulterated* product, *untouched* by human hands.

There are, of course, those well-known adjectives, negative
in meaning as well as form, whose positives, though (to the
surprise of many) they do exist, are practically never seen:
*uncouth, unkempt* and *disgruntled* (sounds like a law firm).
There is a group without positive forms at all: *disheveled*, from
Old French *descheveler* 'to mess up (someone's) hair'; *ineluctable;
inordinate (ordinate* is a noun, a term in mathematics);
*intransigent; intrepid; inviolate (violate* exists, but only as a
verb); *nondescript; nonpareil;* and a very common, if hidden,
negative with a very positive meaning: *immense*, from Latin
prefix *im*- plus *mensus*, past participle of *metiri* 'to measure';
and here, too, there must be many more.  An exhausting effort
is not always exhaustive.

There is also a class of negative/positive pairs, involving
various parts of speech, that, in current usage, are not opposite
in meaning.  In the following examples, the true antonym
appears in parentheses: *disaffection/affection* (loyalty); *dissimulate/simulate*
(act openly); *immemorial/memorial* (within
memory); *nonentity/entity* (V.I.P.); *disinterested/interested*
(biased)—(*uninterested* and *interested* are true antonyms);
*nonobjective/objective*—as applied to art—(representational);
*nonsectarian/sectarian*—as applied to schools—(denomi-national).

The negative forms fall into a number of classes: those
introduced by the prefixes *a-*, taken from the classical Greek
alpha privative (*amoral, apolitical*); *dis*- (*disingenuous, disinterested*);
*in- (incongruous, inescapable*), which sometimes takes
the form *il*- (*illiberal, illicit*), *im*- (*impossible, improbable*) or *ir*-(*irresistible,
irresponsible, irrational); mis- (mislike, mistrust*);
*non*- (*nonexistent, nonobjective*); and most commonly, *un*(*unbelievable,
unquestionable*); and those ending with the
suffix -*less* (*merciless, reckless*).  *Mis*- is rare as a negative prefix;
its normal use is rather to indicate error or impropriety.  Thus, a
*misbegotten* son of man is nonetheless begotten; *misbehavior* is
still behavior, if the wrong kind; a *mistrial* is still a trial, though
terminated without conclusion; a *misprint* is not usually a
blank; and a *misdeed* is indeed a deed, though a wrongful one.
*Mistrust* is an example of the small group where the *mis-* spells
negation.

There is at least one case where the negative form is
almost never used while the positive is in everyone's vocabulary:
*misknow*, believe it or not, is a valid, if ignored English
word.  But to get back to our original point, here are some
samples of adjectives whose negative forms are in much greater
use than their positives:

>illicit            
immutable          
imperturbable      
impervious         
implacable         
imponderable       
incalculable       
inclement          
incongruous        
incontrovertible
ineffable      
inescapable    
inevitable     
inexplicable   
inextricable   
innocuous      
innumerable    
inscrutable    
insuperable    
nonexistent  
unassuming  
unbeknown(st)  
unblinking  
unbounded  
unbridled  
uncalled-for  
unceremonious  
uncompromising

But here we must stop, inviting the reader to ramble
through the unabridged to find hundreds more to add to the
list.  Perhaps you might also enjoy the exercise of changing the
negative words in the following silly sentence to their positive
forms and see what you come up with.

>The ungainly fellow, despite his unheard-of unnerving
and unsettling experience, managed in some unfathomable
way to behave unimpeachably in his uncompromising,
unswerving, dauntless determination to put an
unceremonious end to the indescribably unconscionable,
nay unmentionable misdeeds of his implacable antagonist.
I wish him luck.

To end on a positive note, I trust that this inimitable,
incomparable piece of deathless prose will prove to be a
peerless, priceless gem of inestimable value, and of incalculable
assistance to you in the endless days ahead.

## English: The Lagoon of Nations
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

English is unique among languages in the number and
variety of its borrowed words.  Throughout the centuries,
English has become the most cosmopolitan and the most
democratic of all languages by cheerfully welcoming representatives
from tens of other tongues and assimilating them
completely.

Joseph Bellafiore has described the English language as
&ldquo;the lagoon of nations&rdquo; because &ldquo;in it there are hundreds of
miscellaneous words floating like ships from foreign ports
freighted with messages for us.&rdquo;  To appreciate fully the range
and richness of these imports from all over the globe, examine
the following list of fairly common English words, along with
their original nationalities:

Abenaki: *skunk*; Afrikaans: *apartheid*; Amoy: *tea;* Anglo-Saxon:
*lord*; Angolan: *chimpanzee*; Arabic: *alcohol*; Araucanian:
*poncho*; Australian: *boomerang*; Balt&iacute;: *polo*; Basque:
*bizarre*; Boer: *trek;*

Cantonese: *typhoon*; Carib: *hurricane;* Chaldean:
*mazuma*; Choctaw: *bayou*; Congolese: *zebra*; Cree: *Eskimo*;
Croation: *cravat*; Dahomey: *voodoo*; Dakota: teepee; Dutch:
*boss*;

Egyptian: *oasis*; Eskimo: *kayak*; Finnish: *sauna*; French:
garage; Gaelic: *whiskey;* German: *kindergarten*; Greek: *drama*;
Guarani: *jaguar*; Gujarati: *bungalow*; Haitian: *canoe*; Hawaiian:
*ukelele*; Hebrew: *camel*;

Irish: *banshee*; Japanese: *tycoon*; Javanese: *batik*; Lapp:
*tundra*; Latin: *circus*; Magyar: *vampire*; Malagasy: *bantam*;
Malayalam: *teak*; Mandingo: *mumbo jumbo*; Marathi: *mongoose*;
Mexican Indian: *coyote*; Micmac: *toboggan*;

Nahuatl: *tomato*; Narragansett: *moose*; Old Norse: *skill*;
Ojibwa: *wigwam*; Persian: *bazaar*; Polish: *mazurka*; Portuguese:
*molasses*; Powhatan: *raccoon*; Quichua: *quinine*; Romany:
*pal*; Russian: *vodka*;

Sechwana: *tsetse*; Singhalese: *beriberi*; Spanish: *rodeo*;
Swedish: *sm&phgr;rgasbord*;

Tagalog: *boondocks*; Tahitian: *tattoo*; Tamil: *pariah*; Taino:
*hammock*; Tibetan: *yak*; Tongan: *taboo*; Tungus: *shaman*;
Tupi: *tapioca*; Turkish: *jackal*; Welsh: *flannel*; Yiddish: *kibitzer*.

No wonder that Dorothy Thompson once referred to &ldquo;that
glorious and imperial mongrel, the English language&rdquo; and that
the poet Carl Sandburg once proclaimed: &ldquo;The English language
hasn't got where it is by being pure.&rdquo;

If I stopped here, I would be telling only half the story of
English as a universal language.  For it turns out that many of
those word-laden galleons that visit American shores also return
home with their hulls stuffed with American exports: the traffic
is two-way.  Through our contributions to other languages, we
are beginning to repay many of our debts and establish a
linguistic balance of trade.

Our word *automobile*, for example, has been exported
without spelling change into French and Italian and with
minor alterations into Spanish (*automovil*) and Swedish
(*automobil*).  *Baseball* and *aspirin* turn up in French as *baseball*
and *aspirine*, in Spanish as *beisbol* and *aspirina*, in
German as *Baseball* and *Aspirin*, and in Swedish as *baseball*
and *aspirin*.

As *Time* magazine has pointed out, Germans have translated
some American expressions almost literally, such as *im
gleichen Boot sitzen* 'to be in the same boat,' Germanized
others, like the verbs *parken, twisten*, and *hitchhiken*, and
adopted others totally, like *scoop*, *paperback*, and *blue jeans*.
French has imported such English terms as *baby, bridge club*,
and *film*, while Spanish has embraced *romance*, *motor*, and *gas*.
Many a Japanese businessman has a *kakuteiru* ('cocktail') with
his *fantazikku garu-furendo* ('fantastic girl friend').  And American
words have even infiltrated Russian stores, with products
like *miksers, tosters, komputers*, and *antifriz*.

Doubtless, if our descendants make contact with thinking
beings on other planets and in other solar systems, we shall
start adding words from Martian, Saturnian, and Alpha
Centaurian and exporting our vocabulary across outer space.
Then English will become a truly universal language.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;MEN UNIQUE IN HABIT—Men are the only animals
that make a habit of taking their own lives.&rdquo;  [From the
*Hartford Courant*, n.d. Submitted by Grace Grant Snyder.
*That is a habit that is very easily broken*.]

## The Misplaced Stop
*Herman Doh, Plattsburgh State University College*

Lawrence Casler's nicely devised demonstration that alternative
punctuation will result in different, even contrary,
meaning [VIII, 3] is essentially an example of the misplaced
stop, in writing indicated (or not) with a mark of punctuation.
He asks about &ldquo;something [he] read or heard as a high school
student&rdquo; that may be the prototype for his &ldquo;reconstruction.&rdquo;

The classic example of the misplaced stop as a comic
device is in *Ralph Roister Doister*, a play by Nicholas Udall.
The only early copy of the play is usually dated 1566—67.  A
mischievous rascal, Matthew Merrygreek, reads aloud to Dame
Christian Custance a letter from Ralph designed to &ldquo;win a
woman.&rdquo;  He reads as follows (the punctuation is by Baskerville,
*et al., Elizabethan and Stuart Plays*, 1934):

>Sweet mistress, whereas I love you nothing at all,  
Regarding your substance and richesse chief of all,  
For your personage, beauty, demeanor, and wit,  
I commend me unto you never a whit;  
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare,  
For, as I hear say, such your conditions are,  
That ye be worthy favor of no living man;  
To be abhorred of every honest man;  
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice;  
Nothing at all to virtue giving her due price.

After twenty-five more lines of similar sentiment, Dame
Custance is insulted, and Ralph, standing near, is utterly
confused by the effect of the letter he hoped would &ldquo;win a
woman.&rdquo;  We learn shortly what he intended when the Scrivener
reads the letter aloud, with appropriate attention to the
pointing (punctuation):

>Sweet mistress, whereas I love you—nothing at all  
Regarding your richesse and substance, chief of all  
For your personage, beauty, demeanor, and wit—  
I commend me unto you; never a whit  
Sorry to hear report of your good welfare.  
For, as I hear say, such your conditions are  
That ye be worthy favor; of no living man  
To be abhorred; of every honest man  
To be taken for a woman inclined to vice  
Nothing at all; to virtue giving her due price.  

Merrygreek's mischief is thereby exposed, and the Serivener
explains:

>Then the fault was in the reading, and not in the
writing;
>
>No, nor I dare say in the form of the inditing.

Here *inditing* means the 'penning' or 'inscribing' (*OED* indite,
1)  and may be understood to argue that the pointing was
appropriate.

Clear rules—or more accurately, conventions—to guide
punctuation practice were not established in the 16th century,
so writers and editors and printers muddled along with whatever
marks caught their fancy.  Nevertheless, there was a
consciousness of pointing (certainly to indicate a full stop) so
that ambiguity of the sort illustrated outrageously in *Ralph
Roister Doister* could be avoided.

Shakespeare makes use of the misplaced stop device in *A
Midsummer Night's Dream* (V.i.).  To introduce the Pyramis and
Thisbe scene, Quince, evidently reading, serves as Prologue
(First Folio punctuation):

>If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think, we come not to offend,
But with good will.  To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.

Consider the following (my punctuation):

>If we offend, it is with our good will
That you should think we come not to offend,
But with good will to show our simple skill.
That is the true beginning of our end.

After a few more lines, also misread, the onlookers comment:

>THESEUS: This fellow doth not stand upon points.
>
>LYSANDER: He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt;
he knows not the stop.  A good moral, my lord:
it is not enough to speak,
but to speak true.

Misplaced stops in these examples from the Elizabethan
stage of course illustrate wrong delivery of the lines and are
not, strictly speaking, demonstration of faulty pointing, which
we do not really know about.  Only rarely can we see what an
Elizabethan playwright actually set down, and even then the
pointing is likely to be slapdash and inconsistent.  We can
nevertheless turn Theseus' moral to the crux of Casler's
illustration: it is not enough to punctuate, but to punctuate
true.


### OBITER DICTA: *(I) could care less*
*Eric P. Hamp, University of Chicago*

*The Second Barnhart Dictionary of New English* (1980),
an excellently documented gain to our resources, carries a first-class
entry for this troublesome collocution of *care*.  The
absence of the expected *-n't* has been credited to ellipsis,
phonetic assimilation or masking, lack of contrastive function (a
semantic neutralization which has failed to delete otiose negatives
in hosts of situations and languages), usurpation of the
negative function by *less* as if it were the suffix *-less* (which
seems prosodically unlikely and inexact), and shortening by
frequency.  To the last I would object that shortening seems to
arise through allegro discourse, with its own motivations, or
from predictable compressed semantics of institutionalized
speech situations *(g'bye*), but not from mere frequency.  I
wonder whether the source here is not to be found in contexts
of irony, as with *I should live so long*.  Could this be a
Yiddishism?

### NOTA BENE

The problem with the publication of certain continuing
features in a periodical is that the editor can go along blithely
for years running items that few readers may want.  It is silly to
produce a quarterly without occasionally asking its 50,000
readers what it is they would like to see added or discountinued.
VERBATIM needs some feedback.  Please drop us a line—a card
will do if you are in North America—letting us have your
responses to the questions below by merely listing the numbers
and writing &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; &ldquo;No,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Don't Care.&rdquo;  You need not feel
inhibited or restricted to the card if you wish to expand your
comments.

>1.  Philip Howard on English English.  
>2.  George W. Turner on Antipodean English.  
>3.  Paring Pairs.  
>4.  More EPISTOLAE.  
>5.  Ango-American Crossword Puzzle, by Jack Luzzatto.  
>6.  More BIBLIOGRAPHIA.  
>7.  Longer articles.

## 698 Japanese Loanwords in English
*Garland Cannon, Texas A&amp;M University*

Histories of the English language and other scholarship on
that subject credit Japanese with having supplied very few
loanwords to English, an erroneous view which was corrected
in my &ldquo;Japanese Borrowings in English,&rdquo; *American Speech*,
LVI (Fall 1981), 190—206.  Now it may be useful to publish the
complete body of work used for that study, adding the items
that turned up later, such as the 39 items that Robert
Burchfield kindly supplied me from Volume III of the ongoing
*OED Supplements*.  Of the several dictionaries used in the
collection of the corpus, the following provided the largest
number of items, with some overlapping: *Webster's Third* 363
items, Volumes I—III of the *OED Supplements* 205, *Random
House Dictionary of the English Language* 202, *OED* and the
*1933 Supplement 79, Barnhart Dictionary of New English since
1963 34, Second Barnhart Dictionary of New English 33*, and
Merriam-Webster's *6,000 Words 26*.  The only social variation
marked in the corpus is the slang *Nip*; there are no regional
variations such as Hawaiian or American English vs. British
English.

The list which follows will not be marked as to source,
since the great majority of the items occur in at least one of the
sources listed above, if not in several other standard dictionaries.
In the interest of economy, meanings will not be given,
though there are a few homonyms with identical spellings.
Arbitrarily, the few items with English elements are included
as loanwords, though they could be alternatively analyzed as
original Japanese borrowings that were anglicized into the
language and then underwent the usual process of derivation or
compounding, as in *soyate* and *yenbound*.  All items are main
entries, with the few run-on and run-in derivations omitted.
Where there are variant spellings or long and short forms (as in
*Zen* vs. *Zen Buddhism*), no effort has been made to choose a
preferred form, since dictionaries frequently disagree.  Finally,
all items may be assumed to be nouns unless marked otherwise.
Indeed, forty-four of the adjectives are functional shifts from
noun place-names as defined in *Webster's Third* by the formula
for all such place-names listed there: &ldquo;of or from the city of X,
Y country: of the kind or style prevalent in X.&rdquo;

>abukumalite  
aburachan seed  
aburagiri  
adsuki bean  
adzuki bean  
aikido  
aikuchi  
Aino  
Ainu  
akamatsu  
akamushi mite  
akebi  
Akebia  
akeki  
akenobeite  
Akita  
Akita, *adj.*  
ama  
amado  
Amagasaki, *adj.*  
amanori  
Amaterasu  
Amidism  
Amidist  
Amidist, *adj.*  
andon  
ansu  
arakawaite  
arigato, *interj.*      
Arita ware  
Aucuba  
awabi  
ayu  
bai-u, *adj.*  
baka bomb  
bancha (tea)  
bandaite  
banzai  
banzai attack  
banzai, *adj.*  
Banzai, *interj.*  
baren  
basho  
beddo  
bekko  
bekko-ware  
betto  
biwa  
Bizen ware  
black mist  
Bon  
bon-seki  
bonsai   
bonze  
bu  
bu  
Bugaku  
Bunraku  
buraku  
burakumin  
bushido  
Butsu  
butsudan  
chadai  
chanoyu  
chashitshu  
Chiba, *adj.*  
cho  
chonin  
chorogi  
Chosenese, *adj.*  
chrysanthemum  
chu  
Dai Nippon  
dai-sho  
dai-sho-no-soroimono  
Daibutsu  
daikon  
daimiate  
daimio  
daimyo  
dairi  
dan  
daruma  
disease              
do  
dojo  
dotaku  
emakimono  
Eta  
fuchi  
fugu  
fuji  
Fukuoka, *adj.*  
fun  
funori  
furoshiki  
fusuma  
futon  
gagaku  
gaijin  
geisha  
genro  
geta  
gi  
gingko  
ginkgo  
ginkgo nut  
giri  
go-moku  
gobang  
gobo  
gomokuzogan  
goumi  
gumi  
gun  
guri bori  
habatsu  
habu  
habutai  
hagi  
haikai  
haiku  
hakama  
Hakodate, *adj.*  
Hamamatsu, *adj.*  
hanami  
hanamichi  
hanashika  
haniwa  
haori  
happi-coat  
hara-kiri  
harai goshi  
hashigakari  
Hashimoto's  
hatamoto  
hayashi  
hechima  
Heian, *adj.*  
heimin  
hiba arborvitae  
hibachi  
hibakusha  
Himeji, *adj.*  
hinin  
hinoki  
Hirado  
Hirado ware  
hiragana  
Hiroshima, *adj.*  
Hizen  
Hizen porcelain  
hokku  
honcho  
hooch  
hootch  
I-go  
iaido  
ikebana  
ikunolite  
Imari  
inlayo  
inro  
ippon  
irofa  
iroha  
Ishihara test  
ishikawaite  
ishime  
issei  
itai-itai  
Ito sukashi  
itzebu  
jaburan  
janken  
jigotai  
jimigaki  
jingu  
jinja  
jinkai senjitsu  
jinricksha  
jinrikisha  
jinriksha  
jito  
jiu-jitsu  
Jodo  
jomon, *adj.*  
joro  
joruri  
judo  
judoist  
judoka  
jujitsu  
junshi  
kabane  
Kabuki  
kabuto gane  
kabuzuchi  
kadsura  
kago  
kagoshima, *adj*  
kagura  
kakemono  
kaki  
Kakiemon  
kakke  
Kamakura, *adj.*  
kamashimo zashi  
kambara earth  
kami  
kamikaze  
kamikaze, *adj.*  
kana  
kana-majiri  
kanamono  
kanazawa, *adj.*  
kanji  
kanten  
karate  
karate-chop  
karate, *vb*.  
karateka  
Karatsu ware  
kashira  
kata  
katakana  
katana  
Katayama  
katsu  
katsuo  
katsura  
katsura (tree)  
katsuramono  
Katsuwonidae  
kawaguchi, *adj.*  
kaya  
kegon, *adj.*  
Kempeitai  
kendo  
kesa-gatame  
keyaki  
ki-mon  
kiaki  
kibei  
kiku  
Kikuchi  
kikumon  
kikyo  
kimono  
kimono sleeve  
kin  
kiri  
kirigami  
kirimon  
kirin  
ko-katana  
koan  
kobang  
kobe, *adj.*  
kobeite  
kobu  
kochi, *adj.*  
kodogu  
kofu, *adj.*  
koi  
koi-cha  
koji  
kojic acid  
kojiri  
kokeshi  
Kokka, *adj.*  
koku  
kokura, *adj.*  
kombu  
koniak  
konjak  
Korin  
koro  
kotatsu  
koto  
kotoite  
koza  
kozo  
kozuka  
Kubo  
kudzu  
Kuge  
kumamoto, *adj.*  
kumaso  
kumite  
kura  
kure, *adj.*  
kurikata  
kuromaku  
Kuroshio  
kuroshio extension  
kuroshio system  
kuroshiwo  
kuruma  
Kurume  
Kurume azalea  
Kutani  
Kutani ware  
kuzushi  
kwaiken  
kwazoku  
kyogen  
kyoto, *adj.*  
kyu  
kyudo  
linked verse   
mai  
maiko  
makimono  
mama-san  
mamushi  
mana   
matsu  
matsuri  
matsuyama, *adj.*  
mebos  
medaka  
Meiji  
menuki  
metake  
miai  
mikado  
mikan  
Mikimoto  
Minamata disease  
mingei  
miso  
mitsukurina  
mitsumata  
Miyagawanella  
mochi  
moji, *adj.*  
mokko  
mokum  
momme  
mompei  
mon  
mondo  
moose  
mousmee  
moxa  
mume  
mura  
muraji  
Nabeshima ware  
Nabeshimayaka  
nagami kumquat  
nagasaki, *adj.*  
nagatelite  
Nagoya, *adj.*  
nakodo  
namban  
nanako  
Nandina  
Nanga  
Nara, *adj.*  
narikin  
Nashiji  
nematode           
Nembutsu  
netsuke  
Nichiren  
Nihon  
Niigata, *adj.*  
nikko  
nikko fir  
niku-bori  
ningyoite  
Nip  
Nippon  
Nippon  
Nipponese  
Nipponese, *adj*  
Nipponian, *adj*  
Nipponism  
nipponize, *vb.*  
Nippostrongylus  
nisei  
No  
nogaku  
noh  
nori  
norimon  
norito 
noshi  
notan  
nunchakus  
o-goshi  
O-soto-gari  
oban  
obang  
obe  
obi  
odori  
ofuro  
oiran  
ojime  
Okayama, *adj.*  
Okazaki  
Okazaki fragment  
okimono  
omi  
Omuta, *adj.*  
on  
onnagata  
onson  
origami  
orihon  
osaekomi waza  
Osaka, *adj.*  
oshibori (towel)  
Otaru, *adj.*  
oyama  
ozeki  
pachinko  
R&omacr;j&umacr;  
raku  
raku ware  
ramanas rose  
randori  
randori, *vb.*  
red tai  
renga  
ri  
ricksha  
rickshaw  
rikisha  
rikka  
rin  
riobitsu  
rioyo  
ritsu  
Romaji  
Romazi  
ronin  
Roshi  
rumaki  
ryo  
Ryobu (Shinto)  
ryokan  
Ryukyu  
Ryukyuan  
sabi  
sakai, *adj.*  
sakaki  
sake  
sakura  
samisen  
samsien              
samurai            
san           
Sanda ware              
sanpaku, *adj.*               
Sanron              
sansei  
Sapporo, *adj.*               
sasanqua (or Sasankwa)             
Sasebo, *adj.*            
sashimi            
satori            
satsuma          
satsuma ware           
sawara cypress            
sayonara             
sayonara, *interj.*               
sen             
Sendai virus             
sendai, *adj.*              
sentoku            
seppa    
seppa dai            
seppuku            
sesshin            
Seto ware           
shaku       
shakudo    
shakuhachi            
shiatsu           
shibuichi          
shibuichi-doshi          
Shiga bacillus              
shigella            
shigellosis              
shikii            
Shikimi           
shikimic acid           
shikken             
shimonoseki, *adj.*               
shimose (powder)            
Shin            
Shin-shu  
Shingen tsuba      
Shingon             
shinkansen             
shintai  
Shinto  
shinto, *adj.*   
shintoism  
shintoist, *adj.*  
shintoistic, *adj.*     
shippo (ware)  
shirakashi  
shitogi tsuba  
shizoku  
Shizuoka, *adj.*  
shogaol  
shogi  
shogoin turnip  
shogun  
shogunate  
shoji  
shomio  
Showa  
shoya          
shoyu              
shubunkin             
Shuha, *adj.*  
sika            
Siomio               
skibby         
skimmia               
soba             
sodoku          
Soka Gakkai            
soy              
soy flour        
soy frame           
soya               
soya bean            
soyate    
soybean            
soybean cyst           
soybean lecithin              
soybean milk           
soybean oil          
soybean oil meal              
soymilk            
sub  
sub  
sub  
sub  
sub  
sub  
sugi            
suiseki            
sukiyaki           
sumi     
sumi-e             
sumo              
sumotori            
sushi           
tabi            
tachi       
Tago-Sato-Kosaka              
tai           
Taisho           
Taka-Diastase            
Takamatsu, *adj.*            
Takaoka, *adj.*          
tamo                
tan            
tanka           
tanto      
tatami          
tempo   
tempura  
Tendai  
tenno  
teriyaki  
tobira  
tofu  
tokonoma  
Tokushima, *adj.*  
tokyo, *adj.*   
torii  
Toyama, *adj.*  
toyo  
Toyohashi, *adj.*  
tsuba  
tsubo  
Tsuga  
tsugaresinol  
tsunami  
tsurugi  
tsutsugamushi  
tsutsugamushi mite             
tsutsumu               
tycoon               
udo             
uji             
ukiyo-e                 
ume            
urushi               
urushic acid        
urushiol            
urushiye             
wacadash               
waka           
Wakayama, *adj.*              
wakizashi            
warabi           
wasabi           
yagi             
yakitori            
yakuza       
Yamaguchigumi                
yamamai                
Yamato-e           
yamoto           
Yawata, *adj.*           
yayoi, *adj.*           
yeddo hawthorn             
Yeddo spruce                              
yen           
yenbond            
Yokkaichi, *adj.*             
Yokohama bean           
Yokohama fowl         
Yokohama, *adj.*            
Yokosuka, *adj.*            
yokozuna            
Yoshino paper          
yusho           
zaibatsu             
zaikai      
zazen          
Zen           
Zen Buddhism              
zendo          
ziogoon           
zogan                
zori  

***

A new quarterly, *Letters from Limerick*, has appeared on
the scene, published by the Limerick League, Inc., J. Beauregard
Pepys, Chairman and Editor.  If you are an addict—or
even merely a devote—of the five-liner, write to the League at
1212 Ellsworth Street, Philadelphia, PA 19147, USA, for information.
Prudes need not apply.

## Witcraft, or The Growth of English
*Leonard Cochran, O.P., Priory of St. Thomas Aquinas, Providence*

*I'll accept your saywhat, but not your foresaye; therefore, I
don't draw the endsaye*.

In London, in 1573, there appeared a book destined to take
its place among the more peculiar of a genus of objects
peculiar in its own right: logic texts.  Its title is *The Arte of
Reason, rightly termed Witcraft*, and its author was Ralph
Lever, Doctor of Divinity and Master of Sherburn Hospital.

According to the *Dictionary of National Biography*, Lever
was a native of Lancaster.  There is no indication of his
birthdate, but he is recorded as having died in 1585.  He
attended St. John's College, Cambridge, receiving the B.A. in
1547—48.  At different times in his life, he was reader or tutor
to Walter Devereux (later first Earl of Essex, to whom Lever
dedicated, in a somewhat plaintive preface, his book on logic),
archdeacon of Northumberland, and canon of Durham.  In
1577, he was appointed to the mastership of Sherburn Hospital
and one year later made Doctor of Divinity at Cambridge.

*Witcraft* is the second complete logic to appear in English,
having been preceded by Thomas Wilson's *Rule of Reason*,
published in London in 1551.  Lever's work is interesting not
for its profundity or for any original contribution to the
discipline of logic, but for the curious characteristics of its
nomenclature, an outgrowth of the author's purpose, as
expressed in the &ldquo;Forespeache&rdquo;:

>Then, as English men can compasse this Arte by wit:
so can they also declare and sette it forth by speache.
Nowe whereas a number of men soe suppose, that our
language hath no words fitte to expresse the rules of
this Arte: and where as some men do argue, that it
must needs be so, bycause they that speake or write
thereof at large, use termes and wordes, that no mere
English man can understande: it is playn, that neyther
their supposition is true: nor yet their reason good.  For
as time doth invent a newe forme of building, a
straunge fashin of apparell, and a newe kinde of artillerie,
and munitions: so doe men by consent of
speache, frame and devise new names, fit to make
known their strange devises.

Lever's ire had been roused by those who urged that the
English language was not suited to certain disciplines.  He
rejected &ldquo;inkhorn&rdquo; terms, arguing that &ldquo;...for devising of
newe termes, and compounding of wordes, our tongue hath a
speciall grace, wherein it excelleth many other, and is comparable
with the best.&rdquo;  And he sets out to present the &ldquo;witcraft&rdquo;
of which he speaks, and to present it in plain English.

Ralph Lever knew the manner in which vocabulary grows.
Conscious of the necessity of borrowing, he was equally
cognizant of the tendency among some languages to form new
words by a process of compounding.  He protests that he does
not intend to invent new words just for the sake of novelty.  At
the same time, he avers that &ldquo;... olde names will not serve to
make new devises knowne.&rdquo;  Thus, contrary to his expressed
view that old words will not serve to name new things, he
makes use of two principles of language growth: (1) compounding
and (2) the use of an already existing word to stand
for something new.

Anticipating the confusion his new terminology might well
produce, Lever placed at the end of the work a kind of
combination index and dictionary, wherein the bulk of his
vocabulary either is defined or has its occurrence in the text
cited.  Before we look at a selection of some of the terms most
necessary to a study of logic, we should pause for a moment to
see Ralph Lever in action.  The following definition appears on
page eighty-four of his book: &ldquo;every simple shewsay, whether it
be of the first order or of the second order, is eyther a yeasay,
or a naysay.&rdquo;  This is Dr. Lever's way of saying that a
proposition, whether it is concerned with a nature or what
belongs to a nature, is either affirmative or negative.

Of those terms which are obvious examples of old words
given new meanings, we find the following: *backset, foreset,
foresaye, inholder, plainmeaning, yeasaye,* and *storehouse*.  In
the terminology of today's logic, they are, in order: predicate,
subject, premise, substance, univocal, affirmative, and predicament.
For the most part, the borrowed terms are anything but
common to us today.  Nevertheless, in all but one instance, the
*OED* indicates a usage either prevalent at the time of Lever's
book, or earlier.  (In defining *plainmeaning* it cites Wilkinson
(1579): &ldquo;Playn meaning men walk openly at noone.&rdquo;  Did
Wilkinson borrow it from Lever?)

Examples of original words are *witcraft* 'logic,' *starcraft*
'astronomy, *speachcraft* 'science of speech,' all cited in the
*OED* as appearing in Lever.  There are others, both new and
old, in Lever's little excursion into the realm of the eccentric.

Lever's failure to reach the presses before his rival,
Thomas Wilson, may have resulted not only in the frustration
of having been beaten into print, but also of having lost a great
opportunity for more than a footnote in history: that of setting
the style of the language of logic in English.  This, at least, is
the suggestion of W.S. Howell, writing in *Logic and Rhetoric
in England 1500-1700:*

>In view of Lever's theory of the proper terminology for
English logic, he might have changed the whole vocabulary
of this science in the English-speaking world, had
his *Witcraft* preceded Wilson's more conservative work
and gained for itself the authority that any original
effort usually commands.
>
>—p. 57

Of course, by now you have mastered Lever sufficiently to
know that the epigraph of this little paper is rendered into
modern English as &ldquo;I'll accept your definition, but not your
premise: therefore, I don't draw the conclusion.&rdquo;


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The reference form included with the application
must be filled out by a person within the University
whom you feel knows you best academically...&rdquo; [From
the *Student's Instruction Sheet for Harvard/Radcliffe
Financial Aid Application*1981-82.  Submitted by Pane
Pascal, University of Washington, Seattle.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Froidian Slip: &ldquo;Saturday—Clearing, in 40s; Sunday—Partly
cloudy, 40s.&rdquo;  [From the weather ear in the
*Boston Globe*, November 15, 1980, reporting a sudden
drop in temperature from the 60s to the 40s.  Submitted
by R. Merrill Ely, Chicago.]

## Antipodean English: *The Flight of the Kiwi*
*George W. Turner*

Some words die out of a language as the last speakers to
use them pass away, but others don't wait for that and
disappear from the memory as occasion to use them becomes
less and less frequent.  I was reminded of this and of a
forgotten name when I read the other day that on Cape Barren
Island, off the north coast of Tasmania, a local form of English
preserves the term *morning wood* for 'kindling.'  It brought
back a world of an iron range and wood fires lit first thing in
the morning on a New Zealand farm half a century ago.  We
used morning wood.  Cape Barren Islanders also go *out on the
rangtang* ('out on a spree,' though where they find one on that
tiny island I don't know), and this too recalls New Zealand
idiom, where *out on the rantan* survives (or did when I left the
country seventeen years ago) along with other old-fashioned
colloquialisms like *go to market* or *kick up bobsie-die* (etymologically
'bob's a-dying'), both meaning 'make a fuss.'

These are old-fashioned in that they have elsewhere died
out of the common language, and they are old-fashioned to me
because of their association with bygone days.  Sometimes such
words survive on the periphery of an innovative area: New
Zealand (at least formerly) and Queensland retain *duchesse* for
a 'dressing table with a swing mirror'; the same two areas use
*Hooray* as a farewell greeting.  But perhaps to readers abroad
the faintly rustic New Zealand popular idiom will have a
freshness; the kiwi's attempt to fly might to them seem less
stumbling.  It may amuse some to find *thingummy* replaced by
*doodackie*, to hear a sausage called a *snarler* or to hear *he did
his bun* for 'he was angry'.

There is an arbitrariness in slang just as in more formal
language.  Just as what some call a *cattlegrid* is to others (in
parts of Australia) a *cattleramp* or *cattlepit* or (in the U.S.) a
*cattleguard* or (in New Zealand) a *cattlestop*, so what Americans
call a *derby* (hat) and the British call a *bowler hat* used to
be slangily a *boxer* in Australia and a *bun hat* or *hardhitter* in
New Zealand, and a minor ailment going around is a *wog* in
Australia and a *bot* in New Zealand.  New Zealand adds the
facetious greeting 'How are the bots biting?'

The recently published *Macquarie Dictionary*, though
claiming to be primarily a dictionary of Australian English, is
also rich in New Zealandisms.  For me it brings back many
familiar expressions, *in the dogbox* 'in disfavor,' *to be in donkey
deep* 'to be thoroughly involved,' *jack up* 'arrange, organize'
(not, as in Australia, 'break down'), *the keg's cut* 'the beer has
run out' (I don't know whether '*s* means *is* or *has*), *rafferty*
'rough, ragged,' *hokonui* 'illicit whiskey' (from the remote
Hokonui Hills), *fair do* an appeal for fair play equivalent to the
Australian's *fair go*, and *make a do of* (something) 'make a
success of' it.  As in any slang there are (or were) numerous
words meaning 'excellent': *snitcher, rube* (short for *rubydazzler*),
or *corker*.  (I used *corker* as an adjective in a childhood
diary in 1933, antedating the *OED* by four years.)  Maori
provided a number of words, *taihoa* 'wait a bit,' *waipiro*
'alcoholic drink' (literally 'stinking water'), *puku* 'belly,' and
*puckeroo* 'break, damage' (Maori *pakaru*).  To break or damage
in a grinding sort of way is to *graunch*, a word tending to
replace *puckeroo*, I think.

New Zealand speech seems to be changing rapidly (even
to me now in the pronunciation of the young New Zealander
*learn* sounds like *loon* and *loon* is heading towards *lean*), so
that it is not surprising that I am unfamiliar with some items
noted as New Zealandisms in the *Macquarie Dictionary*.  I
remember the railway station luggage trolley with a short
wheel fore and aft but did not call it a *noddy* (the name
suggests Enid Blyton's character, mercifully created 'after my
time'), and while I remember Maori *PT* (i.e., 'Physical Training')
as a way of describing lying down and doing nothing, I
did not encounter *m.d.o.* 'Maori day off' for a 'day off work,'
the Australian *sickie* with even more of a hint of leadswinging.
I knew *dag* for a 'hard case' or 'amusingly eccentric person'
and also *dag* for the 'wool impacted with excreta on the back
end of a sheep,' but when a very eminent lexicographer
recently heard his New Zealand niece say, &ldquo;Well I must rattle
my dags and be off,&rdquo; he was not more surprised and amused
than I would be.

I have not heard a lamb's testicles called *mountain oysters*
(also U.S.) nor an unpleasant person called a *drop kick* nor a
mental hopital called a *rat factory*—there is a tendency to
crudity in some of the New Zealand idiom—nor a sweetbriar
called *missionary* (but *lawyer* for an equally engaging briar was
quite familiar), nor have I encountered *hairy* meaning 'dilapidated.'
These expressions may then be new or were less than
universal a couple of decades ago.  In some cases, changed
conditions have brought change.  Opossums are recent imports
from Australia but now prolific, so that the word *joey* (in
Australia a 'baby kangaroo') for an opossum is likely to be
recent.  *Pottle*, which I knew as a 'container for strawberries,' is
now used for a 'carton of hot chips' (french-fried potatoes), a
result no doubt of the growth of the fast-foods industry.
*Birdcage boy* a 'used-car dealer' is another mark of this sort of
progress.  The reference is to a wire-fenced display yard.

In many cases I can't be certain now whether I knew an
expression or not.  I knew *Pongo* as a rather derogatory word
for an Englishman (Australian *Pom*) and would certainly have
understood *Pongolia* 'England,' but did I know it live or learn
it, as I would learn Old Norse, from professional literature?  I
more or less knew a *huntaway* was a 'dog trained to drive
sheep forward' but when did I first know *Nelson huntaway* a
'boulder rolled down a hill to start sheep'?  (The slur on Nelson
province is no more justified than the slur on Taranaki province
in *Taranaki gate*, a movable bit of a wire fence.)

There seems to be an increasing use of diminutives in
New Zealand, either shortened forms or forms in -*ie* (not in -*o*
as in Australia).  A 'semi-trailer,' called an *articulated lorry* in
Britain and New Zealand, is briefly an *artic*; a 'donnybrook' is
a *donny*; a 'locomotive' a *loci*; a 'milkman' a *milkie*; a 'nappy' a
*nap*; a 'differential' a *diffy*.  All of these are new to me.  A
number relate to occupations: a *slabby* handles slabs; a *crosscutter*
uses a crosscut saw; a *gummy* digs for kauri gum (if he is
not an old toothless sheep); and a farmer talks of his *chow*
'chou moellier.'  *Chow* in the sense of 'food' is known, as are
many Americanisms through films, books, and television programs,
but is not used much.  The local word is *tucker*.

All this is, of course, only a random selection from the
treasures of New Zealand's colloquial vocabulary, but it is time
to say Hooray.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It also permits a flight steward to dash down to the
onboard freezers for a special steak for the President or a
change of clothing for the First Lady.&rdquo; —*The Flying White-house
- The Story of Airforce One*, by J. terHorst and R.
Albertazzie, page 253.  [Submitted by
B.D. Leitch, Regina, Saskatchewan,
who writes that he was not aware that First
Ladies kept their wardrobes in the freezer: Was that hamburger
patties you wanted or hamburger panties?]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Languages of Australia*](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/languages-of-australia/DCF7E588B58440DCB4424CC29281B82A) and [*Australian Aboriginal Languages*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/australian-aboriginal-languages/author/barry-blake/)
R.M.W. Dixon, (Cambridge, University Press, 1980). and Barry J. Blake, (Angus and Robertson, 1981).

For a long time Australians showed tragically little interest
in the rich linguistic resources represented by Aboriginal
languages.  This was tragic not only because much valuable
linguistic information was lost forever but also because the lack
of intelligent interest in Aboriginal languages was part of—and
part cause of—a wider failure to understand a very different
culture.  Europeans have invaded sacred sites in Aboriginal land
with the same failure to understand different values that led
early Aboriginals to shoot privately owned cattle as they might
have shot a kangaroo when no concept of ownership over living
animals existed.

There were a few early observers of Aboriginal languages,
and their notes, however unprofessional, are often all we can
know of languages now extinct.  In recent years, much more has
been done to record surviving or disappearing languages, but it
has been something of a race against time, often a matter of
finding a few elderly people who still use or partially remember
a disappearing language.  The general public and even linguists
who are not specialists in Aboriginal studies have long lacked
an overview of what is going on, and while it has been
necessary to be patient while scarce trained manpower was
directed to the most urgent tasks, it is very good now to
welcome two books to fill the gap, a very full and technical
account by Professor Dixon and a more popular one by Barry
Blake.

The study of Aboriginal languages is of current practical
interest in understanding problems in Aboriginal education.
Since many Aboriginal languages distinguish only three vowels
and distinctions between voiced and unvoiced consonants are
not significant, Aboriginal children learning English might
pronounce *piggy, Vicky*, and *Peggy* or *Fanny, Penny*, and
*Benny* alike and not be able to hear a difference, just as we
might fail to hear differences among up to four phonemically
distinct pronunciations of what to us is in each case *n*.  One
result of such phonetic differences is that English words appear
in Aboriginal languages in strange disguise: *mityityi* 'white
woman' (from *missus*), *putyikata* 'cat' (*pussycat*), or *tyupu*
'soap' for instance.  The differences in the Aboriginal and
European conceptual worlds are sometimes just as great.

It is accepted that no language can be meaningfully
described as &ldquo;primitive.&rdquo;  Some communities are more technologically
developed than others, and their vocabulary will
reflect that difference.  The native Australians, who had not yet
mastered the art of boiling water (having no pottery), seemed
backward to a conquering age of steam.  They had no word for
*locomotive*, but then their conquerors had no simple word for
'hit by throwing a boomerang,' or 'the hole left by a goanna
when it has broken the surface after hibernation,' or 'a hole in
a spear where the hook of a woomera [i.e., a throwing stick for
launching a spear] is inserted,' concepts as important to
Aboriginal life as *centrifugal force* or *gunpowder* to their new
neighbors.

An age that valued arithmetic was impressed by the
absence of numerals higher than four in Aboriginal languages,
easily concluding that the lack reflected mental inferiority.  In
fact, Aboriginals quickly adopt European counting if employed
as stockmen, just as European medical researchers can cope
with the intricacies of Aboriginal kinship terms if it is useful
for tracing the history of hereditary conditions.

Most Australians know little about Aboriginal languages.
Their ideas about them are often naive, that they are &ldquo;simple,&rdquo;
&ldquo;have no grammar,&rdquo; or are &ldquo;primitive.&rdquo;  Even the better
informed might have little idea how many Aboriginal languages
there are or what their relationship is.  We now have an
informed discussion of such questions.  For the reader interested
in exotic languages or wanting to acquire a brief but
reliable outline of the languages of Australia and their (rather
small) contribution to English, Barry Blake's book will be an
enjoyable discovery; for the scholar wanting to go more deeply
into the details of Australian Aboriginal linguistics, Dixon's
book will be a standard work.

*[G.W. Turner, University of Adelaide]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary of Word Origins*](https://www.abebooks.com/9781442237261/Dictionary-Word-Origins-Shipley-Joseph-1442237260/plp) and [*Roots: Family Histories of Familiar Words*](https://www.biblio.com/book/roots-family-histories-familiar-words-davies/d/731366197)

Joseph T. Shipley, (Philosophical Library, 1945), x + 430pp and Peter Davies, (McGraw-Hill, 1981), vii + 216pp.

The old and the tired and the revived Shipley's *Dictionary
of Word Origins* (1945) has been reissued.  Why?  It is a ragbag
of uninformation (*aard-vark* contains Dutch 'pig,' unexplained),
misinformation (*grammar* from a root *gra*-; total ignorance of
laws of phonetic change, e.g., for *four, seven, eight, ten*, and
the fictitious Latin *pinque* under the headword *number; sneeze*
from *fnese* is a misprint!), jumbled information (e.g., *college*
and *grave*, which read like free-association transcripts,)[^a1] garbled
information (*havoc* 'plunder' &lt; Old French *havot* &lt; German
*Haft* to Latin *capt*-, somehow bringing in *hawk*), and the
goddamnedest information (*yellow...gelb...chloros*... fool
...love...German women of pleasure...lust...*gooseberry
fool*...custard—what next?).  I mustn't take more of your
time.  Quick!  To your most indispensable entry: *Harpocrates*
&ldquo;The Gr. god of silence.&rdquo;  And then the epigraph to this book:
&ldquo;his cult is forgotten today.&rdquo;

Peter Davies's *Roots* (1981) is an entirely different kettle
of trout (see 4, 144, and below).  I will have some adverse
things to say, but we must welcome this as a real step in the
modern world on our slow climb back up to a state of literacy
and decently exact knowledge.  If enough copies of such books
(suitably revised) were distributed, we might even end up with
a high school that taught something, and a better than
accidental crop of literate college graduates.

*Roots* is really a rather old-style book, rewarmed,
rearranged, and cosmeticized.  It is inspired by the same
instincts as Otto Schrader's *Die Indogermanen* (Leipzig, 1911;
revised by H. Krahe, 1935), and they are good instincts—to
distill the truth about Indo-European and the Indo-Europeans
and to disseminate it broadly—and this aim has been leveled at
the lexicon of English.  Davies has been bitten by the Indo-European
bug (1—7).  If I carp, it must be clearly understood
that I applaud his enthusiasm, his perception of important
things, his energy in carrying out a plan, his very real respect
for the use of 2 learning and technical knowledge.  It is therefore
a bit disappointing to find that half of his argument on pp. 2—3
and 6—7 regrinds the flour of Bloomfield, *Language* (1933)
319-20 &sect; 18.14. 3  But, although Davies wants us to glory in our
Indo-European heritage (dictionary or no), the main lesson of
his book is that our language has two principal sources, the
inherited IE and the borrowed-ultimately IE.  The big theoretical
point, of course, is that this dichotomy is a fallacy: The
borrowed component comes in, and speakers are unaware
whether it was born branded IE or not.  Even more, if we had
started growing our learned stock in Avicenna, we would
probably now be cheerfully expanding productively among
Arabic broken plurals and participles, but the chances of
history simply decreed otherwise.  So we have little Old Latin
and Greek and Indo-European.

Davies revels (3—4) in *hound* and *canine*, in *naked* and
*nude*.  This is old news, but it is good news.  He calls (4) this
duality &ldquo;a significant and little-noticed theme.&rdquo;  I wasn't aware
of that.  I thought it was one of the most noticed and most
misstated items in our culture and in our books.

I say, let us accept the platitude Mr. Davies discovers for
us, let us refine and sift his formulations, let us overcome our
soporific publishers, let us drown the scummy crap in our
public schools and their texts, let us annex the &eacute;lan of Peter
Davies.

Davies's method is a simple bipartite one: For about 100
IE etyma, the discursive history and diagramed family tree are
given on facing pages to show the modern outcomes of a given
inherited IE form and of its cousin forms inherited by other IE
branches (Latin, Greek, Sanskrit, etc.), then borrowed from
them by English.  Thus you see in diagrams and words the twin
histories from the same IE source (e.g,. **bhr&amacr;ter*) of native
English *brother* and borrowed (Latin) *fraternal, fraternity*, (Old
French) *friar*, and (Gypsy) *pal*.  This is interesting stuff, and it
deserves publicizing, but there is a distortion here, which *pal*
well illustrates.  Romany is indeed IE and it is true that
**bhr&amacr;ter*- &gt; *pral* &gt; *pal* &gt; English argot, but Romany is no
less exotic and no more a natural relative and source than
Eastern New England Algonquian, which contributed *skunk*.

Moreover, there is a technical difficulty here.  These etymologies
must be absolutely accurate.  I do not mean to be
harsh on Davies; they need not be *exhaustive*, but they lose
their point without *exactitude*.  The Germanic descent must be
correct (**apoter*- will not give **aftar*- directly).  Even small,
nondamaging detail should be observed: The Germanic ancestor
of *corn*, etc., should not be given with -*m* (**kurnam*), as if
identical with Latin (*gr&amacr;num*).  In Classical philology and
linguistics, the derivation of the Latin cognates sometimes
imposes difficulties of a major order: the deviant vocalism of
Latin *magnus, 4 maximus* or of *frangere* under the roots **meg*-and
**bhreg*-, or the problematic *s*- of Latin *super* to the root
**uper*.  Numerous points of detail could be raised.5  Not all of
these are trivial, but it is not my purpose here to grade the
effect or damage resulting from errors of different magnitudes.
My point is that we *can* be accurate and principled; etymology
is no less orderly, as a subject, than chemistry, though sadly it
is often practised as an amateurish and less serious discipline.
In etymology we can and do get results, and the world should
know this.  *Roots* has too many errors, great or small, and so do
its sources, nostra culpa.

There is a grave flaw in the principles of the stemma
diagrams: Branches for separate etyma of a single dialectgroup,
usually Germanic (e.g., **af* 'off' and **after*- 'after') are
twigged improperly off the same node as other, quite different
dialect-groups (e.g., Latin *ab* and Greek *apo*).  This is a gross
genetic error in this form of representation.6

Now to the sermon.  What is all this useful for, and why
should we be deadly accurate?  I say, because it can make a
better world and, with good will, could clean up our high
schools mightily.  There is a natural curiosity about language,
one's own language.  Let us exploit it.  Etymology is precise and
gets results—when done with an engineer's or logician's precision.
They say we Americans can't market automobiles and
machinery; our products are slovenly, our controls lax.  I
shouldn't be surprised when one considers how little of accurate
knowledge (e.g., in geography or composition) our schools
impart today and how low the demand on students' skill really
is.  I say in all earnestness that historical linguistics and
etymology, rightly practised, have a vital lesson to teach.

*[Eric P. Hamp, University of Chicago]*

***

[^a1]: In the footnotes to his review, Professor Hamp has provided a
detailed analysis of many of the matters with which he takes
issue in the Shipley and Davies books.  Because of its complexity,
we have not published it in VERBATIM, but anyone wishing
to have a (typeset) copy need only send a request and enclose a
self-addressed, stamped envelope.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The [Texas 36th Division] Association is now looking
for the former men that served this Division.  Purpose Annual
Reunion and Convention... —*San Antonio Light*,
April 28, 1980, page 9-A.  [Submitted by Dean Duncan, San
Antonio, Texas, who reports, I was a member [sic], but I
haven't had the operation making me eligible to attend the
reunion.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The staple of Bowman's business was picture
cards, such as the one below of two ornately costumed
girls that cost $3 per dozen.&rdquo;  [From a photo caption in
the *Chicago Tribune*, January 20, 1981.  Submitted by
Leslie L. Lewis, Rockford, Illinois.  Those were the good
old days.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our investors are profiteering from... way above
average results, and many of their investment problems
were solved by us.&rdquo;—From an advertisement of Explora Oil
Corporation N.V., in *The International Herald Tribune*,
Paris, 11 April 1980.  [Submitted by Kurt Opitz, Hamburg,
Federal Republic of Germany, who wonders how reputable
such an organization can be.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;LOST &amp; FOUND—Found vicinity of 24th—28th &amp; South,
male brindle Boxer, wearing choke chain with broken lease.&rdquo;
[From the *Sunday Journal and Star*, Lincoln,
Nebraska, January 4, 1981.  Submitted by
Doris Cole, Lincoln.  Landlord
Problems?]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Even some agents of the I.R.S.'s criminal investigation
division concede privately that the agency has
badly skewered its priorities by virtually ignoring major
tax cheaters in favor of making 'easy' cases against
middle-class taxpayers.&rdquo;  [From &ldquo;The I.R.S. Muscles the
Middle Class,&rdquo; by Ernest Volkman, in Family Weekly,
April 19, 1981.  Submitted by Dr. and Mrs. W.P. Scheel, Mount Berry, Georgia.  It's the middle class that feels
badly skewered.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Please Smoke in Grand Foyer.&rdquo;  [Sign at the Opera House
entrance doors, Kennedy Center, Washington, D.C. Submitted
by Eric Ostergaard, who observes, &ldquo;... as a nonsmoking
supporter of the opera,...in order to comply with their latest
request, I must now participate in the smoking habit.&rdquo;]

## Deadline
*Dale Roberts, Chattanooga, Tennessee*

I had just returned from Nostalgia Night at the Bijou where
I had covered the between-double-features Barton
MacLane
and Shirley Temple Look-Alike Contest.  Thanks to a write-in
vote I came in fifth and third, respectively.  By the time I got
back to the paper I was beat.  I shucked my coat, plucked off
the snap-brim with the press card stuck in the band, and sent
the hat sailing like a fedora discus across the City Room toward
the hat stand.

This newspaper had been my home since I started in the
business.  In those early days I was too young to be a cub
reporter or even a copy boy.  Spunk and enthusiasm won out,
though, and I managed to talk my way into a job as an
apprentice cuspidor.  Now, after years of laboring with the
newspaperman's eight Ws (Who, What, Where, When, Why,
Wine, Women, and Wsong), I was known throughout the city.
My wire stories were legendary, especially my famous feature
piece about copper wire.  My byline—Ace Capades, star
reporter (a monicker I picked up during my stint as astrology
editor)—was a household name.  I had printer's ink in my blood,
which meant that I would have a hell of a time if I ever needed
a transfusion.  But my career was in trouble.  My job was on the
line.  The dread affliction that attacks so many wordsmiths had
finally caught up with me.  Unless I could kick it I would be all
washed up.

I decided to drown my sorrows in sweat.  Work, that was
the answer.  I pounced on the old Underwood with a vengeance.
After a brief scuffle with Miss Underwood at the
switchboard I hurried to my desk and sat down before my
trusty helpmate, my ancient typewriter, my embattled Royal.  I
began to type.  The words were flowing through the old digits
pretty well until I noticed that I had neglected to put any
paper into the machine.  My newsman's instincts told me that
this could make for some problems in the composing room, so I
began to riffle through the compost on my desk, hoping to find
some copy paper.

As I searched for platen fodder I noticed a scrap of paper
impaled on a quill on the back of the hedgehog which I keep
on my desk for spiking inter-office communiques.  It was a note
from the boss.

>Muttonhead:  
Be at the Hotel Albergo by 5:00 to cover the funeral
director's convention.  If there is even one of your lousy
puns in your copy I'll see to it that you are fired from
this paper and excommunicated from the English language.
This is your last chance.
>
>Ed.

That was my boss, all right, the crusty old city desk pilot who
had stayed on when the old *Sun* was bought by Reverend
Moon and renamed the *Daily Eclipse*.  I could see him across
the City Room typing in that unique closed-fist-hunt-and-peck
style of his as he chomped on the cigars stuck into each corner
of his mouth.

So this was it, huh.  The curse had finally caught up with
me.  Just one more pun and I was through.  Fall off the word
wagon once more and that's all he wrote.  I began to break out
in a cold sweat.

It had all started so innocently.  I had never been one of
those people who pun indiscriminately in conversation.  It had
seemed such a harmless prank that day I slipped my first pun
past the copy desk.  That pun led to another, and another, and
yet another, and the first thing I knew I was sweating to put at
least one pun into the paper every day.  I lived for the days
when I could sneak one into a headline or kicker.  I was hooked,
but good.  And it had all started so innocently, just like the
career of Johnny &ldquo;Two-Nose&rdquo; Scarlatti, the Mafia don who
controls the penny candy scam and empty milk bottle racket in
Jersey: he got his start in crime as a kid of six when he bumped
off Al &ldquo;Horsebreath&rdquo; Stallone by forcing him to drink a case of
industrial strength Listerine.  You see how these things begin.
The threats and abuse of my readers and my fellow scriveners—not
to mention the boss—hadn't swayed me from my
course.  But now my job was on the line.  Now it was go straight
or get canned.

By the time I got to the hotel my photographer, Frank
Stopp, was already there.  He was standing in an alcove with
his mouth open, a thin spiral of smoke curling up from the
charred tip of his tongue.

&ldquo;I told you, Stopp, you're supposed to lick the base of the
*bulb*, not stick your tongue into the flashbulb socket.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Oh, yeah.  I'll get the hang of it, Mr. Capades.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Let's get in here and get the story, kid.  We've got a
deadline to meet.&rdquo;

I walked to the nearest bellboy and asked him where I
could find the mortician's convention.

&ldquo;It's over there in the Palindrome Room, sir, but it won't
be starting until the Philosopher's Club luncheon is finished.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Putting Descartes before the hearse, eh?&rdquo;

I bit my tongue.  Already it was starting.  The philosophers
adjourned and as they left the meeting room two of them, a
visibly lovestruck couple, strolled hand in hand toward the
registration desk.  Stopp elbowed me in the ribs and winked
lewdly.

&ldquo;Don't be crude,&rdquo; I said, &ldquo;I'm sure the relationship is
Platonic.&rdquo;

I wanted to rip my tongue out.  Was there no stopping me?

As the morticians began to move into the hall my palms
began to sweat.  I took a seat in the rear of the room and took
out my notebook.  I could feel the first hot flush of fear; another
attack on the way, I knew it.  I felt the beginnings of a tic in
that muscle that runs from beneath the left eye to just behind
the right kneecap.

The meeting was gaveled to order.  As the membership
considered the first item on the agenda, a motion to change the
name of the profession to &ldquo;necro-engineers,&rdquo; I dutifully
recorded the events in a straightforward fashion, determined to
maintain the pristine purity of punless prose (the boss hadn't
said anything about alliteration).  Then one of the members
began to speak of an important funeral he had handled, a
military affair at which the guest of honor had been an Army
officer who died just before he was to have been promoted to
lieutenant colonel.  As he spoke I felt an icy wind on the back
of my neck.  I looked down at my notebook in horror.  I had
written:

&ldquo;Possible sidebar—Mortician recounts Major undertaking.&rdquo;

That did it.  As the business changed from old to new I
began to scribble madly, out of control, a muffled high-pitched
giggle accompanying the torrent of words that gushed onto my
pad.

&ldquo;Move to Houston, for only two things are certain: death
and Texas....  Styx and stones may break my bones....  If half
of the famous dictionary team died would they then be
'Defunct and Wagnall's'?... Obituary writers work a dead
beat....  Inter at your own risk....  At Twin Cities funerals do
they have St. Paulbearers?... In nature, vultures are carrion on
the role of undertakers....  A chauffeur's epitaph: When the
Rolls is called up yonder I'll be there.&rdquo;

I filed the story.

A few hours later I was out on the street, broke and
without a job.  I felt a strange sense of relief, though, as if a
burden had been lifted from me.  I mean a burden other than
the oak desk which the boss had placed on my chest after he
read my last story.  I knew in my heart that my demon had at
long last been exorcised.  My life was beginning anew.  Of
course, word would get around and I could never work on an
English language newspaper again.  But there were lots of other
jobs.  At least now I was free.  Even as I walked the streets of
Skid Row I was happy in the knowledge that I was my own
man once again, no longer a slave to demon pun.

As I walked past the entrance to an alley a man in rags
staggered out, looked me up and down, and shoved his paper-bag-wrapped
bottle into my face.

&ldquo;Buddy, you look like you could use a little drink,&rdquo; he
said, &ldquo;Wanna buy a shot of this wine?&rdquo;

I sniffed at the neck of the bottle.

&ldquo;Aha!&rdquo;  I cried, &ldquo;Second hand ros&eacute;!&rdquo;

Then he hit me and that's the last thing I remember.


#### EPISTOLA {Carmine Verna}

The comments following W.M. Woods's letter may not
have been &ldquo;very much to the point of pleonasms,&rdquo; but they
must have excited every language-loving reader of VERBATIM.  I,
for one, would rather enjoy more diffusion of information
about the nuances of the English syntax.  I would like, therefore,
to relate a 'discovery' about this syntax.

Someone had chid a friend of mine for writing, &ldquo;The tapes
we maintain are...,&rdquo; as, so the argument went, correct written
English does not allow the omission of the relative pronoun in a
relative clause.  When asked to judge the argument, I recalled
that when I learned English (my native language is Italian), I
encountered a rule whereby, in a relative clause, the relative
pronoun could be omitted as long as it was not the subject.
Therefore, I corroborated the correctness of my friend's
writing.

Later, however, spurred by uncertainty, I consulted Fowler,
and there I read that, according to Onions, the pronoun's
&ldquo;omission is often felt to be undignified&rdquo; in the written
language.  &ldquo;But this feeling,&rdquo; Fowler added, &ldquo;is not so strong
now as it may have been.&rdquo;

This simple *laissez-faire* attitude left me unsatisfied; so I
decided to consult my ultimate source: Curme.  And there I
was pleasantly surprised to find that the asyndetic relative
clause (the name of the clause in question) is not only an &ldquo;old
primitive construction&rdquo; (not simply a clause with an omitted
pronoun), but that it is a &ldquo;good natural English expression...
performing its function with elegant simplicity&rdquo; (Curme's
*Syntax*, p. 234).

To those of us who like to follow a &ldquo;more careful,
deliberate adherence to...syntax,&rdquo; the use of the asyndetic
relative clause affords a degree of satisfaction.

*[Carmine Verna, Issaquah, Washington]*


#### EPISTOLA {Lester Saferstein, M.D.}

The article by Bryan Garner on &ldquo;Meretricious Words&rdquo; is
one of the most interesting you have ever published.

I don't know how many other meretricious appellations
are missing from his well-researched list, but at least one
designation, *round-heels*, came to my attention when, in a
recent *Time* magazine article, appeared, &ldquo;the round-heeled bar
girl.&rdquo;

A definition for *round-heel* can be found in the Supplement
of Partridge's *Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional
English*, 5th Edition, 1961: &ldquo;sexually compliant; a girl with
heels so round that the least push will put her on her back.&rdquo;

Wentworth and Flexner's *Dictionary of American Slang*,
2nd Edition, 1965, indicates that *round-heel* was first used in
1920 to mean a 'prize fighter who either developed round heels
from spending so much time on his back, or was an easy pushover
because he had round-heeled shoes.'  According to these
authorities, the definition 'a woman of easy virtue' appeared in
1943.  They note that Raymond Chandler's *Lady in Lake*, 1951,
contains the following, &ldquo;I've just sort of been resenting your
idea I would be an easy conquest.  I'm not a round-heel like
Livy.&rdquo;

*[Lester Saferstein, M.D., Prairie Village, Kansas]*


#### EPISTOLA {John R. Boyce}

Mr. Jay Ames of Toronto did not explain why he had been
nicknamed &ldquo;Stuka&rdquo; by his German captors during World War
II, because his POW dogtag number was 88.  [VIII, 3]

The reason might interest your readers.  The Junkers Ju 88
was one of the most effective divebombers used by the
Luftwaffe during the late unpleasantness in Europe.  As everyone—or
nearly everyone—of my generation knows, German
divebombers were called *Stukas*, a contraction of the word
describing their modus operandi: Sturzkampfflugzeug.  An
approximate translation would be 'Dive- (as in the stoop of a
hawk) fight aircraft.'  In like manner, German aircraft used the
first two letters of the manufacturer's or designer's name in
their identification.  Other examples would be *Me*, as in *Messerschmidt;
He*, as in *Heinkel*; and *Do*, as in *Dornier*.

While the Stuka the Western Allies best knew was the
Ju 87, to the Germans, the much more effective Ju 88 was
probably even better-known, since the 87 didn't remain in
active service much past 1941, except on the Eastern front.
The Ju 87 was never very successful in a theater of war where
there was any significant aerial opposition, being very slow,
short-ranged, and inadequately armed.  It was used very effectively
on the Russian front, where it usually operated from
unprepared surfaces very close to the front lines.  Typical
missions lasted less than thirty minutes.  It was a single-engined
aircraft and had limited carrying capacity.

The 88, on the other hand, was a very fast, well-armed,
and versatile aircraft.  It served also as a medium-altitude level
bomber and radar-equipped night fighter, being particularly
effective against the night bombing missions of the Royal Air
Force.  It was a formidable and much respected opponent.

*[John R. Boyce, Bethany, Connecticut]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The [Northwest Power Planning] Council is required
under the 1980 Northwest Power Act to develop a program to
'protect, mitigate, and enhance' the salmon and steelhead runs
along the Columbia and its tributaries along with developing a
20-year master energy plan.  The fish program is aimed at
making up for some of the loses [sic] caused by the dams along
the river.&rdquo;  [From *Northwest Energy News*,
March (?) 1982, p. 3.  Submitted by
Sandra Kirschenbaum, San Francisco.
We are at a lose to know how one protects, mitigates, and enhances all
at once.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'We are a little angry,' Moss said.  'We were never able to
have a discussion, but that's all water over the damn.  I think
it's important that there not be a lot of negativity between
Fernando and the Dodgers.'  'Has this thing left scars?' &rdquo;  [From
the *Los Angeles Times*, 24 March 1982.  Submitted by Jean
MacAllister, Beverly Hills, California.  &ldquo;Scars&rdquo; may not be the
right word, but we're damn sure that &ldquo;damn&rdquo; isn't!]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Place Your Order and Get Out of the Way.&rdquo;  [Sign in
Mexican restaurant in Chicago.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;All Peoples Welcome for the Gifts.&rdquo;  [Sign in Turkish shop
next door.  Both submitted by Jerry B. Jenkins, Deerfield,
Illinois.]


#### EPISTOLA {John Brunner}

This is a battle I shall never win... &ldquo;Big Bertha&rdquo; was not
a &ldquo;huge railway gun used by the Germans in WWI,&rdquo; as Eric
Hamp makes out [VIII, 4, 4].

Big Bertha was a siege *howitzer* named after Frau Krupp—
who apparently had an ample waistline—because of its enormous
calibre: about 18 inches, as far as I can establish.  It was
short and squat and delivered shells with a relatively low
muzzle-velocity over a short range.  I think Americans might
call this type of gun a siege mortar.

The rail-mounted guns, on the other hand, were generally
converted naval guns, with extremely long barrels.  Specifically,
the guns that shelled Paris in 1917 (often also erroneously
referred to as &ldquo;Big Bertha&rdquo;) were tubed-down naval guns of
the type nicknamed &ldquo;Long Max.&rdquo;  I wonder why it is that one
never sees that name mentioned in a list like the present one.

See for details Henry W. Miller: *The Paris Gun* (George
G. Harrap &amp; Co. Ltd., London, 1930).  I note he used the term
*mortar*, rather than *howitzer*, but the implication is certainly
the same.

*[John Brunner, South Petherton, Somerset]*


#### EPISTOLA {Richard Stooker}

In &ldquo;Meretricious Words, or the Quean's English&rdquo; [VIII, 3]
Bryan Garner implies that there's no connection between *punk*
used in place of *prostitute* and *punk-rocker*.  This is not
necessarily true, although they certainly aren't synonyms.

Around the turn of the century, *punk* was American
prison slang for 'young man used by an older and stronger
convict as an exclusive sexual outlet.'  A really tough man could
have a &ldquo;harem&rdquo; of *punks*.  (See, unless I misremember, Mezz
Mezzrow's *Really the Blues*.)

*Punk* left the prisons but continued to be a term of
approbation applied to young men and usually had subtle
homosexual overtones.  In the fifties, sneering &ldquo;hoods&rdquo; with
duck-ass haircuts, who modeled themselves on James Dean and
Marlon Brando, were called *punks*.

When the Beatles invaded America in 1964, they inspired
countless youngsters—who had listened to (but had never been
moved to imitate) Frankie Avalon and others of his clan then
dominating radio—to start playing guitars and forming bands
themselves.  Often these were restless and dissatisfied working-class
men expressing their anger.  Some of them were beginning
to grow their hair long by the standards of that time.  All of
them knew that adult—and some segments of youth—society
considered them punks.  The Standells' &ldquo;Why Pick on Me?&rdquo;
was one of their biggest hits.

They played school dances and bars; some of them
attained a degree of skill and made recordings.  Around
1966-1967, the dedicated musicians among them evolved into
playing acid rock.  Most of them have disbanded.

In the early 1970s, Greg Shaw began referring to the
music of this period in his rock fanzine, *Who Put the Bomp*, as
*punk rock*.  Several years later, when a new generation rebelled
against lifeless commercial music and found yet new ways to
shock their elders, someone in the media lifted *punk* from 1966
and applied it to the Ramones in the U.S. and to the Sex Pistols
in England.  I don't know whether or not Greg Shaw accepts
this new usage for his label, *Bomp* Records.

It's logical to assume that *punk* as a sexually dominated
man in prison came from *punk* 'prostitute,' a woman sexually
dominated (usually by a pimp) and subject to her clients'
demands.  If this is the case, *punk-rocker* also descended from
the latter usage.

*[Richard Stooker, St. Louis, Missouri]*


#### EPISTOLA {Frank E. Day}

I enjoyed Bryan Garner's article, &ldquo;Meretricious Words,&rdquo;
and hasten to add a footnote or two.  Mr. Garner overlooked
two appellations which instantly come to mind:

*Bimbo*, the exact derivation of which I do not know, but
which I can remember having heard from the 1930s until the
present, from time to time.

*Blister*, I know from memory and not from research.  I
believe this was of English usage, probably from the late 19th
to the early 20th century.

I was surprised to read his explanation of *hooker*.  It's
possible that, someplace in the United States during the 20th
century, *hooker* had a connotation other than the one he
assigns to it, but I have never run into that in my lifetime.  We
are told that when the Army of the Potomac was camped at
Falmouth, following the removal of Burnside as its commander
after the fiasco at Fredericksburg, it was placed under the
command of General Hooker, who issued passes to &ldquo;ladies of
the evening,&rdquo; passed through the lines by sentries to his
quarters.  The sentries referred to them as &ldquo;Hooker's women&rdquo;
and this later devolved into *hookers*.  This, I believe, is the true
story of the origin.

I am eager to see the other letters you may receive
concerning this article; I am almost certain that no one could
compile a complete list with absolute accuracy, for it is
probably a subject which all mankind, from the beginning of
time, have at one time or another addressed.

*[Frank E. Day, Portland, Oregon]*


#### EPISTOLA {G.S. Harman}

How curious that Bryan Garner should have listed the
obscure Cantonese *mui-tsai* while omitting the well-known
*Suzie Wong*.

*[G.S. Harman, Hollywood, California]*

## Paring Pairs No. 8

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). No specific truck inspired Scottish song.  
(b). Was spring drink kept in composer's catafalque?  
(c). WW II (U.S.) agency dimly sited.  
(d). Where secrecy reigns.  
(e). Bilabial flowers.  
(f). Male mythological bird.  
(g). Uneven member of society or on third wheel?  
(h). Celtic power from the wind.  
(i). Giant steps evoke emotionless look.  
(j). A suitcase or influenza in California?  
(k). From the horse's mouth? Negative!  
(l). Carthusian potato cooker.  
(m). Top-ranking a.d.c.  
(n). Change the acolyte—he gets a lift from church.  
(o). Scapegoat ruins the picnic.  
(p). Musicians form a circle at forbidden nuptials.  
(q). Damage from entering the wrong accommodation in the Pullman.  
(r). Kiss your relatives, or give them the boot?  
(s). Rules made by the R.C. bigshots.  
(t). Major L'Enfant had it.  
(u). Shoemaker takes final opportunity to intone incantations over his models.  
(v). Tick off the playwright.  
(w). Saudi Arabian elegance *(U.S.)*.  
(x). Exploit the soda fountain beverage (*Br.*).  
(y). What the Trojans should have done before the Greeks entered.  
(z). Tudor car used by cowards.

1\. Aide.
2\. Altar.
3\. Ant.
4\. Any.
5\. Arab.
6\. Bach.
7\. Banned.
8\. Berth.
9.\ Bier.
10\. Bull.
11\. Buoy.
12\. Buss.
13\. Cannon.
14\. Capital.
15\. Chants.
16\. Check
17\. Chic.
18\. Chicken.
19\. City.
20\. Close.
21\. Coop.
22\. Felloe.
23\. Finch.
24\. First.
25\. Force.
26\. French.
27\. Friar.
28\. Gael.
29\. Grippe.
30\. Hoarse.
31\. Idea.
32\. Kin.
33\. L.A.
34\. Last.
35\. Law.
36\. Lips.
37\. Lorry.
38\. Mark.
39\. Milk.
40\. Nay.
41\. Odd.
42\. Off.
43\. O.P.A.
44\. Queue.
45\. Sally.
46\. Say.
47\. Sheik.
48\. Stair.
49\. Stony.
50\. Tea.
51\. Thrown.
52\. Two.
53\. Wedding.

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or 18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market
Square, Aylesbury, Bucks, England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer*.

*N.B.:* To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either office,
we shall arrange to collect correct answers for 21 days, starting
with the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw
one winner from each office.

## Paring Pairs No. 7

(a). Difficult upwind sailing with this in your stomach.  (26, 43) Hard Tack.  
(b). Arrest at English boys' school?  (20, 12) Eton Collar.  
(c). Sounds, littorally, like a palm.  (5, 48) Beech Tree.  
(d). Heavy traffic in hybridized flora?  (32, 16) Plant Crossing.  
(e). Golgotha irritated him.  (15, 31) Cross Patch.  
(f). Jivaro trick cyclist.  (27, 38) Head Shrinker.  
(g). Dull spouse yields nonconclusion.  (41, 29) Stale Mate.  
(h). Shipshape.  (53, 25) Wine Glass.  
(i). Barely destroyed paper, then went on the cheep.  (35, 33) Ruined Quires.  
(j). Staff reduction: hair today, gone tomorrow.  (12, 17) Crew Cut.  
(k). Filthy fellow, now immaculate, wins it all.  (11, 42) Clean Sweep.  
(l). Felne in speakeasy.  (6, 44) Blind Tiger (no eye).  
(m). Lower than low to string us along.  (4, 50) Base Vile.  
(n). That one card is worth 2000 or 2200!  (39, 46) Single Ton.  
(o). Lawn game, played with grenades instead of balls, yields food for thought.  (10, 14) Chicken Croquet.  
(p). Such a person does *not* have green hair!  (9, 47) Carrot Top.  
(q). Priestly individual.  (1, 19) Altar Ego.  
(r). Source for Thatcher.  (34, 23) Roof Garden.  
(s). Oh my!  No honor to be observed in Jugoslavian breeches!  (40, 49) Split Trousers.  
(t). Raise one for Cockney intelligentsia.  (21, 8) Eye Brow.  
(u). Profitless test for bootlegger.  (18, 36) Dry Run.  
(v). Nonagenarian homosexuals.  (24, 30) Gay Nineties.  
(w). Sounds as if Cronos and his cronies dispatched prostitutes.  (37, 52) Sent Whores.  
(x). All that is left of fashion after paying the mohel.  (7, 45) Bris Toll.  
(y). Bungay's colleague backward in using saucepan.  (3, 22) Bacon Frier.  
(z). Catch a crab in a one-horse town?  (2, 51) Back Water.

The correct answer is (28) Limb.  The solutions are given
below.  The winners of No. 7 were Edward T. McHugh,
Fitchburg, Massachusetts, and Thomas Lillis, Kilkee, County
Clare, Ireland, Catching up: the winner in Europe of No. 4 was
Anne Cutler, Brighton, Sussex; of No. 5, G. Williams, Sinfin,
Derby; of No. 6, Jared Weinberger, Bologna, Italy.

## Neither &ldquo;God&rdquo; Nor &ldquo;Aleichem&rdquo; Is a Last Name
*Zellig Bach, Lakehurst, New Jersey*

A pastor of a congregation of the Church of God denomination,
in Long Island, New York, recently received a letter
soliciting funds for the Republican National Committee.  The
letter was signed by President Reagan.  The salutation read:
&ldquo;Dear Mr. God.&rdquo;

While it may be true—and possibly foreboding—that the
Republican Party badly needs God's help, one wonders
whether this is really the best approach.  There are older and
possibly better ways of conveying supplications to God, and in
these modern times a silent prayer by way of wireless telegraphy
might have been more appropriate and up-to-date than a
form-letter printed by photo-offset.  Besides, to address God as
&ldquo;Mr.&rdquo; is bound to antagonize many women, particularly those
of the women's liberation movement.

The reason for this curious salutation is that a computer
does not know the meaning of words, and when it is programmed
to use the last word of the first line of an address as
the last name, it &ldquo;deduces&rdquo; that *God* in *Church of God* is the
last name of the addressee.  In this respect, you cannot blame
the computer.

But when a theater critic (Stefan Kanfer) of a national
magazine (*Time,* February 22, 1982, p. 70) uses *Aleichem* as a
last name, erroneously derived from the pseudonym *Sholem
Aleichem*, that is a totally different story.  In his short review of
the Broadway play *The World of Sholem Aleichem,* he used
*Aleichem* as a last name twice, and the caption under the main
actor's picture read: &ldquo;Gilford as a Russian [*sic*] peasant in
*Aleichem*.&rdquo;

*Sholem Aleichem* is a compound expression of greeting,
usually accompanied by a handshake, and literally means
'Peace be unto you.'  It was a common greeting among Jews in
Lithuania, Poland, and Russia before World War II.  *Sholem*—in
this case—is not a first name, nor is *Aleichem* a last name.  (If a
writer chose to publish his works under the byline &ldquo;Peace Be
Unto You,&rdquo; no one would address him as &ldquo;Mr. Unto You.&rdquo;)  To
truncate the name *Sholem Aleichem* to *Aleichem,* as if it were
his last name, betrays a deep misunderstanding, if not ignorance,
of the meaning and nuances of Sholem Aleichem's pen
name.

Sholem Aleichem was a famous writer in Yiddish who
depicted Jewish life in the *shtetl* with great humanity and
humor.  *Fiddler on the Roof,* which won world-wide acclaim
from New York to Tokyo, was based on his works.  It was often
said that he was the Jewish Mark Twain.  His real name was
Sholem Rabinovitz, and the choice of *Sholem Aleichem* as his
pen name carried a singular emotional meaning—a genuine
fellowship with people, regardless of his fame and stature as a
writer, an ever-present warm-hearted reaching-out, and a symbolic
gesture of a strong and friendly handshake.

The Jewish masses all over the world responded with a
joyous sense of *Aleichem Sholem* 'Peace be unto you, too,' the
traditional answer to the greeting *Sholem Aleichem,* and
embraced him with unbounded love and respect.  When he
died in New York in 1916, at the age of 57, he was mourned by
all as if he were a beloved member of one's family.

While God very likely smiles benevolently at the fact that
the Republican Party elected to send its plea for help through
the mails, Sholem Aleichem must be laughing himself &ldquo;to
death&rdquo; in his grave in the Workmen's Circle section of Mt.
Carmel cemetery in Brooklyn.

(Ed. Note: It is interesting that the pseudonym of the
&ldquo;Gentile Sholem Aleichem&rdquo; is almost invariably treated as an
ordinary name when alphabetized or shortened with the title
&ldquo;Mr. The *AHD* gives *&ldquo;Aleichem, Sholem.*  See *Sholem
Aleichem.&rdquo;*  But: *&ldquo;Twain* (tw&amacr;in), *Mark.*  Pen name of Samuel
Langhorne *Clemens* *(see)*.  [From the expression *mark twain*,
'by the mark two fathoms,' used by Mississippi riverboat pilots
in sounding shallows for minimum navigable depths.]&rdquo;  Apparently
&ldquo;Mr. Two Fathoms&rdquo; is deemed appropriate.


### CORRIGENDA

&ldquo;When Paragons Nod&rdquo; by Lillian Mermin Feinsilver [VIII,
4]:

Page 3, column 2, paragraph 3, line 7: comma after parenthesis;
same paragraph, line 16: delete asterisk.

Page 4, paragraph 2, line 2: for &ldquo;Associated Professor&rdquo; read
&ldquo;Associate Professor.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Paring Pairs No. 6&rdquo; [VIII, 3]:

Page 19: (ff) Hopalong Cassidy was William Boyd and not, as
given in (28, 27), William (S.) Hart.

The 3W (= Wicked Witch of the West) has been at it
again.  In Philip Howard's review of *The Dictionary of Anagrams*
[VIII, 4], for &ldquo;Je n'en vois pas le n&eacute;cessit&eacute; de ce livre,&rdquo;
please read, &ldquo;Je ne vois pas la n&eacute;cessit&eacute; de ce livre.&rdquo;

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. House blasted away by a blowgun.  (8)  
5\. Are we the ones to copy for the rank and file?  (6)  
9\. Crucial trial of subject by arbitrary dictates... (4, 4)  
10\. ...or, as much pressure as the wig can apply.  (6)  
12\. Point near Pike's Peak. (9)  
13\. Ill at ease among nudes out of habit.  (6, 2)  
15\. Quite manifest about a tired move showing poor economic planning.  (9, 6)  
17\. Pushovers, so inept as no peer ought to be.  (6, 9)  
20\. Destroyer of vain dreams to force one out of bed.  (8)  
22\. Snake dance?  (5)  
24\. Tartlet.  (6)  
25\. Double-checker with something to say?  (8)  
26\. Salary split to hold hot car?  What a farce!  (6)  
27\. Pretty as an asterisk.  (4, 4)  

**Down**

1\. &ldquo;Fireman&rdquo; who fed old flames to Dracula?  (4, 6)  
2\. When in session uproar is so distracting.  (9)  
3\. How the millionaire felt when all his paintings were stolen.  (7)  
4\. Dark deeds, or forgotten books.  (7, 5)  
6\. Subject the UN brought up about food.  (3, 4)  
7\. Like that little island with all the Scotch... (5)  
8\. ... ever hear mention of the place?  (4)  
11\. Leave the Orient unspoiled... (5, 7)  
14\. ...especially if interest proves costly.  (2, 4, 4)  
16\. Drink for a rummy party?  (3, 6)  
18\. Crowed over one's tea with deluxe backing.  (7)  
19\. Clouded train of thought for the unjust.  (3, 4)  
21\. When the old general returned he became a fisherman.  (5)  
23\. Make waves?  (4)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Compact.  
5\. F-urn-ISH.  
9\. INTERESTED PARTY.  
10\. RE (t) RUNS.  
11\. Bedmate.  
12\. I do.  
13\. Last man.  
14\. Omar.  
16\. Dot.  
19\. ECRU.  
20\. EMBAR-go.  
23\. Lid.  
24\. Feedbag.  
26\. Re-pair.  
28\. Order in the court.  
29\. Tweedle.  
30\. E-ssa-YED.

**Down**

1\. Coin roll.  
2\. M-att-R-es-S.  
3\. ACRONYMI-c.  
4\. Task.  
5\. Freebooted.  
6\. Rapid.  
7\. INROAD.  
8\. HOYDEN.  
12\. Indulgence.  
15\. AM-bien-ces.  
17\. Treasury.  
18\. Top-rated.  
21\. Effort.  
22\. Peddle.  
25\. Bored.  
27\. Shoe.



[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v9n1_Summer_1982)