--- 
title: "VOL IX, No 2 [Autumn, 1982]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Eponymous Anonymous
*Diane Chapman, Phoenix, Arizona*

An eponym is the person for whom something is named or
one whose name is so prominently connected with something
as to be a figurative designation for it.  But at the point
where the name passes into such widespread usage as to be
figurative, the fame or notoriety once attached to it has,
ironically, often evaporated into the great mist of obscurity.
Let these notable people be rescued—or at least momentarily
recalled—from the anonymity of the common noun.  Excluded
are such forms as Morse code, Erlenmeyer flask and Brinell
hardness, where the eponym has retained its capitalization.
Geiger counter, for example, is clearly not some epidemiological
eponym, some census sensor for counting Geigers.  (Actually,
the apparatus is, properly speaking, a Geiger-M&uuml;ller
counter.)

In the scientific disciplines, eponyms have naturally flourished.
Each measurment, unit of energy, or energy characteristic
is a scrupulously defined entity.  The name stands, jewel-like,
splendid and unadorned: ampere (Andre), watt (James), ohm
(Georg Simon), and volt (Alessandro [Volta]) are all part of our
daily lives, companions of such delightfully arcane quantities as
the (Michael) farad[ay], (Karl) gauss, (Anders) angstrom,
(Samuel) langley, (Joseph) henry, (Heinrich) hertz, (Johann)
lambert, (Isaac) newton, and (James P.) joule.

Many terms give a lower-case and, sometimes, differently
spelled but lasting fame: the macabre guillotine of Dr. Guillotin,
Rudolf Diesel's engine, artist William Morris's chair, John
McAdam's macadam road surface, Fran&ccedil;ois Mansart's mansard
roof, John Mason's jar.  Cotton is given luster, strength, and
receptiveness to dye by being mercerized (John Mercer).  When
metal is coated with zinc for resistance to rust, it is galvanized
(Luigi Galvani).  Louis Daguerre created a type of photograph,
the daguerreotype.  Chemist Charles Macintosh developed a
method of rubberizing cotton to waterproof it; the name
remains the British generic term for raincoat, in much the same
way that, on the Continent, a browning (American John M.)
refers generally to any automatic pistol.  On this side of the
Atlantic, nearly any small pocket pistol is now called a
derringer, from Henry Deringer's short-barreled muzzle-loader.

In the United States, John Philip Sousa is both recent and
popular enough to remain the recognizable parent of the
sousaphone, but what of Antoine (known as Adolphe) Sax, a
Belgian maker of musical instruments, and his marvelous reedbrass
hybrid that enriches all types of twentieth-century music?
Hollywood's dazzling lights were the joint invention of the
brothers Kleig[l], John and Anton.  (*Klieg eyes* is a condition
marked by conjunctivitis and watering of the eyes resulting
from excessive exposure to intense light.)  Perhaps unique
among eponymous inventors is Benjamin Day, the American
printer who developed the technique whereby line engravings
can be shaded by the addition of varying numbers of dots.  To
the name of the process he contributed both of his: benday.
And then, of course, there's John Montagu, fourth Earl of
Sandwich, layering his roast beef between two slabs of bread
that he might eat and still keep his fingers grease-free at the
gaming table.

&ldquo;Thomas Crapper,&rdquo; however, whose life is supposedly
chronicled in *Flushed with Pride*, must be exposed as a
sophomoric joke.  A quick peek into the Oxford English Dictionary
reveals the root noun has a pedigree almost a millennium
long. Still, the hoax has been highly successful when
measured by the number of presumably scholarly types
deceived.  (Less effective was the same prankster's *Bust Up* by
&ldquo;Otto Titsling,&rdquo; which purported to describe the development
of the brassiere.  That aggrandizing appliance arose anonymously
in France about 1600.  At the time of her death in 1603,
Queen Elizabeth I owned one.)

Politics has spawned some memorable eponyms, perhaps
the inevitable offspring of its proverbially strange bedfellows:
Charles Boycott, the English land agent in Ireland who was
ostracized for refusing to reduce rents; Nicholas Chauvin,
legendary blind adherent to Napoleonic patriotism; &Eacute;tienne de
Silhouette, Louis XVI's controller-general of finances, either
because he demanded such confiscatory taxation that its victims
were left with nothing but the outline of things or because
his term of office was &ldquo;incomplete&rdquo; (March—November 1759);
Vidkun Quisling, the collaborator with Norway's Nazi invaders,
who made his name a synonym for traitor.  A (Vyacheslav M.)
molotov cocktail is a crude hand grenade.

Fashion, too, has its eponyms.  A bertha, a wide round
collar covering the shoulders, is presumably named for a queen
of the Franks, the mother of Charlemagne—an exceptionally
durable eponym, if true, since she died in 783.  Prussian field
marshall G.L. von Bl&uuml;cher designed the blucher, a sensible
(one might even say pedestrian) shoe, but American feminist
pioneer Amelia Bloomer startled the world with her underpants.
Outside of England, a certain style of man's hat is called
a derby (after Edward Stanley, Twelfth Earl of Derby); in
England the identical article is a bowler (after John Bowler, a
nineteenth-century English hatmaker).  French aerial gymnast
Jules L&eacute;otard gave us a garment; so did James Thomas
Brudnell, seventh Earl of Cardigan, who distinguished himself
in the Crimea, but Lord Raglan, a fellow campaigner, had to
be content with adding a sleeve style to history.  (Irresistible,
though a geographical eponym, is the snug knitted peaked cap
from the same war: the balaklava.  It has not fared so well as
the Earl's sweater, perhaps because of its overly exotic sound,
leaving some misreading moderns to wonder why anyone
would name a hat after a sweet, sticky Levantine pastry.)

In the realm of the gastronomic, where a chef's flair seems
inextricably related to his fame, proper nouns abound but some
true eponyms exist.  Peach Melba retains its personalization, but
Australian soprano Nellie's taste in toast prevails in today's
calorie-conscious kitchens.  Sylvester Graham was a nineteenthcentury
dietary reformer.  Graham flour referred, originally,
simply to whole wheat flour.  What would the old faddist have
said about the only popular survival of the eponym, the usually
chocolate-covered graham cracker?  Would he have condemned
it as nutritionally oxymoronic or merely smiled at the sugarcoating
of his wholesome message?  Less than ambrosia—less,
even, than a graham cracker—is the understandably embarrassed
anonymity of K-rations, the World War II soldiers'
lightweight packaged emergency food.  Stand up and take a
bow anyway, Dr. A.B. Keys, American physiologist.  At the
opposite extreme, some foods preserve the panache (not to be
confused with a portmanteau *stomache* from overindulgence
therein) of their aristocratic origins.  What pudding, pie, or ice
cream is not ennobled by Nesselrode?  Where is the gourmet
punster who can refrain from querying: who ate napoleons
with Josephine when Bonaparte was away?

In botany the convention has been that he who discovers a
flower adds to its loveliness his own name.  Although most of
these become obscure because of the unpronounceability of
their Latin construction (the modest wild rose languishes under
the burden of *Rosa bourgeauiana*), the names of some gentlemen
and scholars long dead flourish under the noses of
gardeners around the world: begonia (Michel B&eacute;gon); bougainvillea
(Louis Antoine de Bougainville); camellia (Georg Josef
Kamel); dahlia (Anders Dahl); forsythia (William Forsyth);
freesia (F.H.T. Freese); fuchsia (Leonhard Fuchs); gardenia
(Alexander Garden); kerria, an attractive yellow rose-like flower
(William Kerr); lobelia (Matthias de Lobel); poinciana (de
Poinci), poinsettia, perennial martyr to misspelling in the
supermarket, being nearly always rendered as pointsettia, or
pointsetta, or, in the chance absence of that upstart third t,
poinsetta (Joel R. Poinsett); weigela (Christian Weigel); and
wisteria (Caspar Wister).  Patent roses are often named for
great or lovely ladies. W. Atlee Burpee, the famous American
horticulturist, wished to so honor Clare Boothe Luce and,
chancing upon her in the club car of the train bearing them
cross country, hastened to introduce himself:

&ldquo;How do you do?  I'm Burpee.&rdquo;

The quick-witted but impatient lady replied with icy
dismissal: &ldquo;Yes, I sometimes get queasy on trains too.&rdquo;

Or so the story goes.  In any case, there is no Clare Boothe
Luce rose, though there *is* John Macadam and his nut.

With the passing of literal horsepower passed also the
victoria, the stanhope, the clarence, and the hansom, but even
today, and for many days to come, we laugh with the tangletongued
Reverend William A. Spooner and his *isms* and
(though currently we bleep rather than bowdlerize) glower
from the safe retrospect of history at puritanical editor Thomas
Bowdler and his expurgations of &ldquo;indelicacies&rdquo; from the works
of Shakespeare and other plain speakers.  But one generation's
taboos may be transformed into succeeding generations' conversational
canap&eacute;s.  The &ldquo;Marquis&rdquo;—actually Comte—de Sade
has a perversion named for him; what of its counterpart,
masochism?  File it with the otherwise forgotten Austrian
novelist Leopold von Sacher-Masoch.  (The delectable sacher
torte is obviously unrelated to the petulant pursuer of pain;
credit Frau Sacher, owner of one of the most famous of old
Vienna's coffee houses.)  One explanation of hooker, 'prostitute,'
is that it derives from the camp followers recruited by the
inept Union general Joseph Hooker, who felt that debauchery
on post was preferable to dalliance out of range of his control.

Because language is a living organism, simultaneously
shedding and accreting, the individual fates of eponyms are as
insecure as those of any other noun.  Scientists and physicians
disappear into trade names: Kelvin(ator) and Lister(ine).  Slang
is dependent on the durability of its eponym's reputation; for
how many years in the future will swaggering, aloof young men
bogart a cigarette?  That arch attempt at an almost-eponym,
reaganomics, may not even outlast the administration responsible
for it.  Yet for every orrery, venturi, or vernier that endures
in recondite realms, some vigorous new eponym eventually will
shoulder its way into our daily vocabulary and ultimately be
confirmed as a legitimate part of the language by its appearance
in a dictionary.  The process will be complete: the person
will have disappeared into a definition.


#### EPISTOLA {Donald R. Morris}

Victor Lasseter's delightful article—&ldquo;John le Carr&eacute;'s Spy
Jargon: An Introduction and Lexicon&rdquo; [VIII, 4]—does indeed
garner most of the jargon terms, real and invented, which
appear in le Carr&eacute;'s work.  But, as an outsider who apparently
has never served in an agent-handling intelligence service, Mr.
Lasseter sadly confuses actual jargon terms, le Carr&eacute; coinages,
and a variety of slangy expressions, really ironic quips, which le
Carr&eacute; is using for literary effect and which—although a working
case officer might use them colloquially—are in no sense a part
of the actual jargon.

The endless fun poked at jargon, in which Mr. Lasseter
also indulges, stems from Webster's first definition, as strange,
outlandish, or barbarous language.  Intelligence jargon is
employed not for the argot sense of establishing a private
means of communication, but for accuracy; the terms have
precise and technical meanings and can be used to describe an
operational situation clearly and unambiguously.  They would,
for example, be used regularly in official dispatches and cable
traffic, which argot and slang would not.

There is, to this day, no clear understanding, by the public
or media, of the terminology; writers—including le Carr&eacute;, who
knows better—spatter their prose with gobbets of impressive-sounding
words.  Some of these actually gain currency, and in
due course the public is convinced that these words are the
actual jargon.

Until recent years, both fiction and the media relied on a
vocabulary of two terms: *spy*, and, if anyone were over forty
years of age, *master spy*.  Almost all dramatic works hung on a
single plot device.  An unfriendly nation was in possession of
several sheets of paper, or at least one sheet—the plans of the
Bruce-Partington submarine or that hackneyed substitute, the
formula for a new gas of exceptionally toxic merits.  (This had
the advantage of reducing the amount of paper involved to the
absolute minimum, permitting it to be concealed in fiendishly
ingenious places or even to be memorized and dispensed with.)

The protagonist, a clean-cut fellow at loose ends for the
nonce, is recruited either by a high-ranking military officer or
by a senior diplomatic official, whose precise position is murky
but who is invariably speaking for the nation's chief executive.
The hero gallantly sets out to recover the item, which he does
after much derring-do—climbing walls, crawling through windows,
swiping addresses out of locked desk drawers in the
Upper Slobbovian Foreign Ministry, or passing himself off as a
colonel in the Slobbovian Army to gain access to the secret
testing ground.  In his labors, he will be aided and abetted by a
mysterious and alluring female with no visible means of
support.  She generally turns out to be the daughter of the
professor who developed the poison gas formula.

The fact that people, even Upper Slobbovians, notice such
antics, was of no concern to the writers; the genre still enjoys a
lusty life—as a visit to *Firefox*, now playing in a theater near
you, will testify.

It was le Carr&eacute;'s *tour de force* to remove espionage fiction
forever from this rut, which he did by hanging his stories on
the actual framework.  Espionage operations are conducted by
large bureaucratic organizations, much like other official entities.
They operate through case officers stationed abroad, who
spot, develop, recruit, and handle the actual agents, who are
foreign nationals.  These agents do not &ldquo;steal&rdquo; information or
documents; they are carefully selected to have perfectly legitimate
access to what is wanted, so that their possession of it is
quite natural and causes no comment.  The illegal aspect of
espionage is not the acquisition of the material, but its passage
to an official of a foreign power, and the entire thrust of
secrecy in espionage is devoted to that critical act—the contact
between the agent and his case officer.  Since the word *spy* does
not even distinguish between agent and handler, it is never
used in the intelligence community.  Describing an espionage
case using the word *spy* is like writing about a strike with only
one word for both 'labor' and 'management': the result is
confusion.  (The FBI, however, uses *Special Agent* for its case
officers—usually abbreviated *SA*—and *source or informant* for
its agents.)

Le Carr&eacute;'s stories deal with the personnel of the sponsor
service and their opposite numbers in hostile services and
rarely involve actual &ldquo;agents,&rdquo; which accounts for the freshness
and impact of his approach.

There is indeed an official jargon—the CIA and other
services have from time to time issued glossaries.  This jargon,
however, bears little resemblance to that employed in fiction
and the media.  To comment on Mr. Lasseter's listings:

*mole*: &ldquo;A double agent who burrows to the top of the
enemy's secret service.&rdquo;  Mr. Lasseter is quite correct in
pointing out that this is a le Carr&eacute; coinage, previously unknown
in the intelligence community.  It appeared in 1974, and now
belongs to &ldquo;the vernacular of counterintelligence.&rdquo;  But a *mole*
is not a &ldquo;double agent&rdquo;; he is an official of one service who has
been recruited by another service and is a *penetration* agent.
He would not become a double agent unless his own service
discovered the recruitment and *turned*—or *doubled*—him.
Neither Kim Philby nor Oleg Penkovsky, neither George Blake
nor Guy Burgess was a &ldquo;double agent,&rdquo; despite the universal
use of this appellation by the media.

A Soviet KGB officer stationed in East Berlin who recruits
an East German citizen and sends him to West Germany is
running an agent.  If the West German service—the BND—
discovers him, breaks him, and runs him back, the agent
becomes a *double agent* for the BND.  If the KGB in turn
discovers this, the man does not become a &ldquo;triple agent&rdquo;—there
is no such animal.  No intelligence service in its right mind
plays such games: the agent is dropped.

The Soviets on rare occasions have been known to allow
such a double agent to continue—without letting him know
they have discovered his perfidy—sometimes because dropping
or chastising him would pinpoint the source from which they
learned it, but more often simply to tie up the opposition case
officer's limited capacity to handle multiple cases.  (Case officers
are relatively easy to spot; agents are not.  It is far better to
know than not to know which agents an opposition case officer
is handling.)  The Soviets refer to such cases as *screen operations*;
the term is not used in the West, but it is of course
highly significant if the Soviets refer to someone as a *screen
agent*.  It can be seen that precise terminology in referring to
agents is of some importance; the terms are never used loosely.

*disinformation*: Lasseter calls this &ldquo;heavily euphemistic&rdquo;
CIA jargon, and claims le Carr&eacute; &ldquo;detests such dishonesty.&rdquo;
This is nonsense.  *Disinformation* is the literal translation of the
Russian word *desinformatsiya*, and it is the official title of a
department (at various times numbered A, D, and 12) of the
First Chief Directorate of the KGB.  It plans, coordinates, and
supports sophisticated political deception and disruption operations
on a global basis, which are implemented by the KGB
field *rezidenturas*.  Many of these operations involve forgeries of
official foreign documents or media publications.  Although
Western services sporadically conduct such operations, they are
not nearly as extensive or intensively organized, and they are
never referred to as &ldquo;disinformation.&rdquo;  They come under *covert
action*, or *CA* programs, and the military, which conducts them
in wartime, refers to them as *black* propaganda (as opposed to
*white*, in which the actual sponsorship of the material is
acknowledged and not falsified, purporting to be from someone
else).

*agent potential*: An official term.  Once an agent has been
recruited for a specific task, it almost invariably develops that
he has access to a considerable range of other targets.  These
will be explored to make the most effective use of his services.

*exfiltration*: Also an official term, actually of military origin
and dating from about the turn of the century.  It is the natural
converse of *infiltration*.  An East German agent resident in
Leipzig would have to be &ldquo;exfiltrated&rdquo; to be brought out
permanently, as opposed to coming out for a short visit.

*fieldman*, *deskman*, *preliminary interrogation*, *surveillance*,
*case officer*, *operational subsistence*, *courier*, and *cryptonym* are
lumped together by Mr. Lasseter as &ldquo;literal and transparent
enough for the layman to understand.&rdquo;  I seriously doubt it.

*Preliminary interrogation*, *surveillance*, *case officer*, *courier*,
and *cryptonym* are official terms and transparent in the
sense that they might be used in any context.  But few laymen
would know the exact subjects required to be covered in a
&ldquo;preliminary&rdquo; interrogation, or the precise meanings of *cryptonym*,
*pseudonym*, and *alias*, which are three totally different
animals, with no overlap whatsover.  Neither Webster's nor any
other dictionary would serve to distinguish their exact meanings
in official intelligence jargon.

*Fieldman* and *deskman* are not official terms or intelligence
jargon but simple colloquial descriptions, which might be
understood in any field of endeavor.  In similar contexts,
American intelligence officials might use &ldquo;paper-pusher&rdquo; and
&ldquo;door-bell puncher,&rdquo; since almost all agent cases start with
someone somewhere in the field pushing a doorbell.  The terms
would be understood, but they are hardly in sufficient currency
to qualify as jargon.

I have no idea what *operational subsistence* is supposed to
mean; it is evidently a le Carr&eacute; coinage.

*tradecraft*: This is not really an &ldquo;interesting metaphorical
expression for existing jargon.&rdquo;  It is the official term for the
mechanics of espionage operations: agent communications,
security practices, and the like.  It has been in use since OSS
days and is unquestionably of even older British origin.  It is
taught in courses, and espionage novels are known as
&ldquo;tradecraft fiction.&rdquo;

*deception*: Lasseter claims the CIA uses this for &ldquo;double
agent,&rdquo; while le Carr&eacute; has invented the now-famous *mole*.  No
one, in the CIA or elsewhere, uses &ldquo;deception&rdquo; or &ldquo;deception
agent&rdquo; to refer to a double agent.  *Deception agent* does exist,
but the term is not transparent and does not mean what the
public and the media imagine.  Status as a deception agent is
quite incompatible with being doubled, since such an agent
was never formally recruited in the first place.

*nursery*: A le Carr&eacute; colloquialism for the British tradecraft
school for incoming intelligence officers, and, for all I know, in
common use in MI-6.  The CIA equivalent, long since disclosed,
is located on a World War II military base in rural Virginia.  It is
known colloquially as &ldquo;The Farm.&rdquo;

With only a couple of exceptions, the remainder of the
terms Lasseter has taken from le Carr&eacute; are not intelligence
terms or jargon but simply arch colloquial expressions which le
Carr&eacute; may have heard at one time or another, but which he is
using purely for literary effect—dramatic impact.  He uses many
of them as substitutes for concepts that do exist and for which
an official jargon term would be used; le Carr&eacute; substitutes
vernacular slang because the official jargon term is not transparent
and would not be understood by the layman.

Many of le Carr&eacute;'s terms refer to violent functions and
functionaries: *baby-sitter*, *gorilla*, *hood*, *bloodhound*, *reptile
fund*, *leash dog*, *scalphunter*, *duck dive*, *hard-man* and the like.
All of these, alas, are pure le Carr&eacute; coinages, invented of
necessity because le Carr&eacute; introduces into his fiction violence
and potential violence which simply don't exist in real
life.

This is hard to get across to a public raised on James Bond
novels and the &ldquo;Mission Impossible&rdquo; series; people are willing
to believe absolutely anything about an intelligence service.  It
is true that there are paramilitary operations, but these are the
province of military personnel; the intelligence services are
used for administration and logistic support, because they don't
clank as loudly as the military when they have to lay something
on.  But expecting an intelligence service to conduct a war
without anyone noticing is like asking an elephant to hide
behind a lamppost.

I spent seventeen years in Soviet counterespionage operations
with the CIA, with eleven years overseas, in Europe,
Africa, and Asia.  For stretches I was in almost daily personal
contact with KGB and GRU officers and Soviet agents.  I was
never trained in karate, nor did I ever carry a gun in
connection with my work.  (In Vietnam, however, I was issued
a revolver and two hand grenades for the defense of my
apartment in case the need arose.  I kept them in my freezer
and had a devil of a job finding and defrosting them when I
left.)

In all that time, I knew of three instances of violence.  An
officer had a glass of beer thrown in his face by a Soviet in a
bar in Vienna, and—by a wild coincidence—twenty years later
the same man was hit over the head on a Tokyo streetcorner in
broad daylight by a Soviet who took umbrage at something he
had said.  Another officer got into a fistfight with a Soviet at a
diplomatic reception in Teheran; they were separated by their
scandalized ambassadors.

In the last sixty years, the Soviets have murdered at least
four hundred people, but these have invariably been those they
regarded as &ldquo;their own&rdquo; —defecting officials and potential
defectors, emigr&eacute;s who made major nuisances of themselves,
Soviets who failed to report their doubling, and the like.

Western case officers have nothing to fear (although they might
well be detained if they entered denied areas).

The Soviets conduct such operations exclusively through
the Thirteenth (Executive Action) Department of the First
Chief Directorate of the KGB, using only officers from this
department, never case officers from the field *rezidenturas*.  The
KGB jargon term for this group is the *mokryye dela* section;
this is Russian criminal argot translated literally as 'wet affairs.'
There is no equivalent in any major Western intelligence
service; a common colloquial expression for such Soviet activities
is *cowboy stuff*.

This might be the time to try to lay to rest three other
expressions the public fondly believes are intelligence jargon.
Two of them stem from *Time* magazine, far and away the most
prolific source of intelligence coinages in sight.  Their &ldquo;Yes, yes,
we know all about it&rdquo; approach to espionage operations has
produced more intelligence pseudo-jargon than le Carr&eacute; ever
dreamt of.

*black-bag job*: About 1970 *Time* ran a cover story on &ldquo;The
New Spy,&rdquo; with a side-bar box listing a glossary of about thirty
&ldquo;Intelligence Terms.&rdquo;  I circulated it to some twenty intelligence
officers representing decades of experience; none of us
had ever heard most of the terms, and all but two that we had
heard were incorrectly defined.

One of the terms was *black-bag job*, which *Time*
announced was used for intelligence burglaries, as in the case
of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist.  The correct term for such
operations (which were quite common in World War II) is
*surreptitious entry*, or *SE*.  *Time* was so smitten with its own
phrase that it used it by actual count no fewer than six times in
the very next issue; it has been part of its editors' working
vocabulary ever since, although it has yet to appear in the
intelligence community.  (They also delight in slinging about
phrases like &ldquo;the NKVD man in Havana&rdquo;; the Soviets have not
used &ldquo;NKVD&rdquo; since 1943.)

*terminate with extreme prejudice*.  This is now firmly
planted in the public ethos as intelligence jargon for 'to
murder,' again thanks to *Time*.  I have terminated at least four
agents with extreme prejudice myself, without ever infringing
on the Sixth Commandment.  To *terminate* simply means to
'sever contact' with an agent on friendly terms, usually because
he is no longer needed or because he has lost his access to the
target for which he was recruited.  He is usually given contact
instructions in case he ever needs to get in touch again, and his
file is retired to Registry.

To *terminate with prejudice* means that a note will be put
in his file strongly recommending that no future contact be
initiated (nor will he be be given the means to establish it).  He
has been a handling headache, whether insecure, inaccurate (or
worse) in his reporting, unreliable, cheating on his expense
account, or found to be engaged in criminal activities on the
side.

To *terminate with extreme prejudice*, a *burn notice* is
circulated to friendly liaison intelligence services, informing
them that while he did indeed work for us, his conduct was so
bad—outright fabrication of information or an attempt to
perpetrate a major fraud—that we are warning them to have
nothing to do with him if he appears on their doorstep, as he
probably will.

*SmerSh*: The late Ian Fleming is responsible for the misuse
of this acronym.  Yes, Virginia, there was indeed a *SmerSh*, and
it did indeed shoot people—lots of them.  But what it shot was
Russians, not foreigners.  It was a military unit under the
Ministry of Defense and not connected to the intelligence
service.  It was formed in 1943, shortly after the German
invasion, and it roamed the areas immediately behind the
Russian lines, locating and executing partisans fighting for the
Germans and Soviet soldiers suspected of desertion.  It went out
of business in 1946, and it has never been resurrected.

Its offical title was *GUKR NKO* 'Chief Counterintelligence
Directorate of the People's Commissariat of the Armed Forces,'
and the official acronym *SmerSh* was derived from the Russian
*Smert Shpionam!*  'Death to Spies!'

Pyotr Deryabin, a KGB officer who defected in Vienna in
the early 1950s, was an officer in the Guards Directorate during
the war and was present when Stalin signed the GUKR NKO
order.  The original acronym proposed was *SmerInSh* 'Smert
*Inostrannikh* Shpionam,' or 'Death to *Foreign* Spies,' but Stalin
smiled sweetly and crossed out the &ldquo;Inostrannikh,&rdquo; murmuring
&ldquo;No, no, death to *all* spies!&rdquo;

The proper term is *SmerSh* (*Sh* being one letter in
Russian), and &ldquo;Smersh&rdquo; is probably acceptable.  But any article
or book that refers to SMERSH or, worse yet, S.M.E.R.S.H.—
*Time* has done both—stands self-convicted of not knowing what
it is talking about.

But le Carr&eacute; is damned good reading.

*[Donald R. Morris, The Houston Post]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Connoisseur's Collection of Old and New, Weird and Wonderful, Useful and Outlandish Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/kw/paul-dickson-words-a-connoisseurs-collection-of-old-and-new-weird-and-wonderful-useful-and-outlandish-words/)
Paul Dickson, illus. (in part) by Paul Dickson, (Delacorte Press, 1982), xi + 366pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

...And that is just what the book is.  Like any similarly
compiled book, Dickson's reflects his personal tastes and biases,
though, even allowing for prejudices, it is difficult to see how
one can accumulate so much divers material on the English
language without pleasing some of the people all of the time.
[Yet, as a personal aside, one wonders how Dickson could have
avoided VERBATIM, which has been about for more than eight
years.]

Divided into 52 sections, or chapters, the book is organized,
more or less, as a collection of specialized glossaries,
beginning with Acronyms, passing through Burgessisms, Junk
Words, Sexy Words, and Travel Words to end with, appropriately,
The Last Word.  It is indeed a fascinating collection and
worthy to be on the shelf of any logophile's library.  It is amply
illustrated to show items that are not readily described in a
meaningful way.  The mini-glossaries are not exhaustive—thank
heaven!—which means that one can read through them painlessly
and without being bored.

If you collect word books, you must have this one.  It
would be superfluous to point out omissions like *strickle*, which
would have helped explain *struck measure* (described under
*heaped measure*, p. 165), or stylistic slips like *sawed* for *sawn*,
so I shall control myself.  I cannot, however, refrain from
criticizing the absence of a useful index—unforgivable in a
book arranged into 52 alphabetic sets—or from execrating the
plainly bad practice of capitalizing every entry word: How can
one tell whether a word is normally capitalized or not?  But
those failings must be laid in the lap of the publisher's editor.
To Mr. Dickson we must be grateful for a most pleasurable
romp through the nether reaches of the English lexicon.

*—Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Morrow Book of New Words*](https://www.amazon.com/Morrow-Book-New-Words-Dictionaries/dp/0688009271)
N.H., and S.K. Mager, (William Morrow and Company, 1982), iv + 284pp.

Dictionaries of &ldquo;new words&rdquo; seem to be appearing at a
rate only slightly less than new words themselves.  Their
proliferation reflects our awareness of linguistic fashion and
desire not to let the public vocabulary get ahead of us.  We read
them, in other words, to satisfy our *neophilia*—a new word for
an old concept, defined in *The Morrow Book of New Words* as
'strong interest in new things.'  That definition may not capture
the appeal of this book as nicely as its definition of *neophilism*:
'morbid or undue desire for the new.'  If the distinction
imposed by these definitions can be trusted, it is neophilia that
makes a book like this one pleasurable, but it is neophilism that
seems to create it.

Among the pleasures of a dictionary of new words is the
discovery of new things: our language is a mirror held up to
our reality.  I learned from this book, for instance, that
*kamagraph* is a name for a 'special printing press that faithfully
duplicates up to 250 copies of a painting, including raised
brush strokes, destroying the original in the process.'  I think I
will use the word from now on as a metaphor for all of the
ways we have invented of destroying the things we want to
reproduce faithfully.  This book is something of a kamagraph.

The pressure on compilers of dictionaries of this sort to be
up-to-date no doubt accounts for the errors and inconsistencies
they contain.  A book as up to the minute as this one, with
definitions for Reagan's *safety net*, *toxic shock syndrome*, and
*ultimate frisbee*, cannot have benefited from much time to
ponder, to research, or even, unfortunately, to proofread.  The
book has too many inconsistencies, too many flawed definitions
and too many typos to be a dependable reference for anyone
whose neophilia goes beyond the pleasure stage.  In short, the
book is a *kludge*—another new word I think I learned by
reading this book, defined as a 'term of endearment for a pet
computer, esp. one with undesirable characteristics.'  It is an
endearing book for the pleasure of discovery that it holds, but
its odd inconsistencies make it less than useful as a creditable
guide to the linguistic creations and follies of our time.

I was struck, for instance, by the irregularity of the
application of the terms *abbreviation* and *acronym*.  The introduction
explains that the distinction will be made &ldquo;principally
on the basis of verbalization,&rdquo; according to which *COMSAT* is
designated *acronym* and *LPN* is designated *abbr*.  The distinction
is not only arbitrary, it is inconsistently applied.  For
instance, *CBW* and *CD* are called acronyms.  Similarly confused
is the distinction, unexplained in the introduction, between
colloquialism and slang.  Entries are designated one or the other
in almost random fashion (*luck out*, for instance, is called
*slang*, *hang loose* is *colloq*), and in many instances (e.g., *ticky-tacky*)
the problem is surmounted blithely by designating
entries *slang or colloq*; others are not designated at all.  The
term *jargon* is infrequently applied.  *Interface* is designated
*jargon*, but *input*, isn't.  *Input*, in fact, is labeled *substandard*, as
is the barbarous *messaging*, but many other jargon and substandard
usages go unlabeled.  The same inconsistency applies to
the labeling of entries that are metaphorical usages.  Coinages
or etymologies are also included willy-nilly.  Origins are cited
for *benign neglect*, *E-prime, flak, gork, home free* and
*weatherman*, for instance, but not for *doublespeak, eightfold
way, FOSDIC, honcho, HO scale, wimp, Age of Aquarius,
Clifford trust*, and numerous other terms as interesting for their
derivation as for their usage.  Such relatively minor inconsistencies
serve only to frustrate the user.

Major inconsistencies confuse as well.  The definitions of
terms sometimes shift when they are found both abbreviated
and spelled in full.  For instance, *artificial intelligence* is defined
as 'capability of a machine to reason and improve itself, esp.
involving verbal comprehension,' while *AI* is defined as '*abbr*
for artificial intelligence, the capability of computers to create
new knowledge.'  These definitions are sufficiently different to
suggest that not enough work was done to discover what
people who use the term actually mean by it.

The authors' choice of terms to include is also inconsistent.
The introduction tells us that many &ldquo;words of earlier
conception and long acceptance&rdquo; are included because they do
not appear in *Webster's III*, but the explanation hardly suffices
to tell us why *mechanical bank* (for the 19th-century toy) or
*method acting* should be considered &ldquo;new words.&rdquo;  The book's
subtitle promises &ldquo;8500 Words Not Yet in Standard Dictionaries,&rdquo;
but the claim is somewhat inflated considering the
presence in the book of *axiology, charisma, disposable, dissonance,
dyslexia, ethnic, face* (as a verb), *guru, hit* (to mean 'a
theatrical success') *ionosphere, karate, maternity* (as an adjective),
*mole* (in chemistry), *Nematoda* (in biology), *ontology* and
*welfare state*, to name but a few.  Some of the &ldquo;old words&rdquo;
contained are justified by new usages, but the criterion for
selecting &ldquo;new words&rdquo; is a bit hazy, even with a restricted
view of what a &ldquo;standard dictionary&rdquo; is.

The book makes no claim for completeness, but it frequently
reminds me to look for words that I do not find.  It
omits *intentional fallacy, pathetic fallacy; WASP; butt out;
dike; diaphragm; shock treatment; video games; CREP, deep
six, deep throat, Gemstone, plumbers, post-Watergate morality;
agitprop; twist; bubble chamber; into* (&ldquo;I'm into jogging&rdquo;);
*black out; puka shells; Me Generation; new money; rolfing;
hemisphericity; high tech; tofu; ESL; gypsy moth; over
achiever; waivers;* and *zip* (&ldquo;The score was one-zip&rdquo;).  Despite
numerous terms from sports, it omits *PB* (as an acronym—or
abbreviation—for *personal best*, also not included) and *PAR
course*.  Some other obvious usages not included: *no growth,
nuke, nose job, no nonsense, overbuilt, perks,* and *vanity press*.
And, despite the presence of a good deal of it, this dictionary
does not define *alphabet soup*.

Among the definitions themselves are many that seem to
me to be wrong or to miss by enough to make them uninformative.
*Disneyesque* is defined as 'resembling Disneyland,' *dyad*
as 'serious dialogue or relationship,' *false negative* as 'an
incorrect diagnosis that the patient does not have a disease or
condition,' *found poem* as 'prose with unintended poetic
content,' *hands on* as 'using the hands,' *housebroken* as 'suitable
for polite company, esp. of a pet,' *five* as 'phony,' *Ms* as
'form of address for a woman whose matital status is unknown
or irrelevant' and *performative* as *linguistics* of a statement of
performance; e.g. &ldquo;I go.&rdquo; '

Though we may excuse lapses in editors and compilers
who are in an obvious hurry to catch the language as it flies,
badly written definitions are inexcusable.  Consider, for
instance, that the authors define *convesation pit* as 'dropped
living with seating arranged to promote conversation.'  *Duck
pins*, they tell us, is a kind of bowling 'using three small balls
without finger holes for each game.'  Is that &ldquo;for each game&rdquo;
redundant or is duck pins a short game?  Are the authors being
euphemistic or just careless when they tell us that *dum dum*
refers to 'a bullet that expands on impact, causing greater
pain?'  For *entelechy*, we get this mouthful: 'the study of
elements of a phenomenon that essentially affect the actualization
of its potential.'  The definition of *pixel* is said to be 'the
picture element in a television image,' as if there were any
other kind.

The authors are not above bad grammar, unfortunately, as
in the definitions of *kinetic art* as 'an art form in which
portions of the structure moves' and of *late bloomer* as 'one
that matures later than normally.'  Faulty parallelism intrudes
on this definition of *xenon lamp*: 'high-intensity lamp used in
projectors and testing textile fading.'

Books of new words have their place in our lives, if we
want to keep up with ourselves.  Books rushed into print to
satisfy our neophilism—or our neophilistinism—we can live
comfortably without.  On the bright side, one kludge is worth a
thousand pixels.

*[John T. Gage, Eugene Oregon]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Dictionary of Anagrams*](https://www.amazon.com/Dictionary-Anagrams-Samuel-C-Hunter/dp/0710208626)
Samuel C. Hunter, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1981), 267 pp.

*Je n'en vois pas le n&eacute;c&eacute;ssit&eacute; de ce livre*.  Surely the point
about anagrams, like playing Patience or doing crosswords
generally, is that one does them for oneself.  A dictionary of
anagrams is cheating, like a pianola that makes one look as
though one is playing, let us say, Mozart's Piano Sonata No. 11
in A as delicately as Solomon, when everybody knows that one
is pumping it out mechanically.

There are many of us whose genius calls us not to
purchase fame in keen iambics, but mild anagram, notably
those of us who do not consider that the day is satisfactorily
concluded until we have done the *Times* crossword.  Clues that
are anagrams are indicated by some coded hint like
&ldquo;embroiled&rdquo; or &ldquo;broken up&rdquo; or &ldquo;resorted.&rdquo;

Digression: I once asked Edmund Akenhead, who has
been crossword editor of *The Times* for many years, which of
the many thousands of clues he has set he enjoyed most.
Impossible to decide, he replied.  But he remembered with
pleasure the clue which was a total blank (7 letters), to which
the solution was &ldquo;missing.&rdquo;  I remember with rage the clue that
was simply a capital letter 0 (8, 6); solution: &ldquo;circular letter.&rdquo;

I am afraid that it is a legend that he once set: &ldquo;Listen
carefully for an aural perversion&rdquo; (5, 2, 4, 4); solution: &ldquo;Prick
up your ears.&rdquo;

To have to resort to a dictionary of anagrams to solve the
crossword is as lowering as to have to look the quotation clues
up in a dictionary of quotations.  I confess that I have on
occasion committed the latter, but I have always felt dirty
afterwards.

Samuel Hunter retired two years ago from working for
British Rail.  To mitigate the tedium of that employment he has
been compiling crosswords for more than thirty years.  No
wonder the trains never run on time.  He has now compiled this
majestic folly, listing about 20,000 anagrams grouped alphabetically
in sections by length from words of five to thirteen letters.
His collection is confined to single-word anagrams, which spoils
the fun: the best anagrams are ones scrambled out of many
words.  For example, &ldquo;The Dictionary of Anagrams by Samuel
C. Hunter&rdquo; can be anagrammatized into (3, 10, 2, 8, 2, 6, 1, 6)
&ldquo;Racy tome useful in broaching many a hard test.&rdquo;

Much of the information in this dictionary, particularly
about the longer words, is obvious.  I need no crossword
compiler come from British Rail to tell me that &ldquo;versification&rdquo;
is an anagram of &ldquo;verifications,&rdquo; or that &ldquo;rumel-gumption&rdquo;
(whatever that may be) makes &ldquo;rumle-gumption.&rdquo;  Akenhead
would never put so stupid a word in his crossword.

I suppose that this dictionary may be useful to compilers
of crosswords, poor harmless drudges.  But I should have
thought that they would prefer to concoct their own anagrams,
and in any case would be cribbed by the restriction to single
words.  We seldom have anything as simple as a single-word
anagram in Akenhead's daily examination.  Solvers of crosswords
who surreptitiously turn to it in desperation are frauds
and poor fishes, as solvers of crosswords by definition are on
occasions.

Anagrammania is an old affliction.  I could give you
examples from Classical Greek, except that my typewriter does
not have the Greek alphabet, and it might cause grief to
VERBATIM's compositors.  Wordy wits have been transposing
letters for want of anything better to do for centuries.  &ldquo;Dame
Eleanor Davies&rdquo; (a prophetess from the Moral Majority in the
reign of King Charles I) was appropriately turned into &ldquo;Never
so mad a ladie.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Marie Touchet&rdquo; (mistress of Charles IX of
France) was anagrammatized by Henry IV as &ldquo;*Je charme tout*.&rdquo;
And in case this suggests an unduly royalist bias in anagrams,
&ldquo;Voltaire&rdquo; is accepted as an anagram of &ldquo;Arouet l(e) j(eune)&rdquo;;
well, OK, with a bit of fudging around the u's and j's.
&ldquo;Florence Nightingale&rdquo; makes &ldquo;Flit on cheering angel.&rdquo; &ldquo;Horatio
Nelson&rdquo; makes &ldquo;Honor est a Nilo.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Queen Victoria's
Jubilee&rdquo; makes &ldquo;I require love in a subject.&rdquo;  &ldquo;*Quid est Veritas*&rdquo;
(Jesting Pilate, John xviii: 38) makes &ldquo;*Vir est qui adest*.&rdquo;

I am a greedy collector of reference books of all sorts.  I
think that my trade makes me need the security blanket of
knowing that I can look up the answer to anything somewhere.
But I think that a dictionary of anagrams may be taking things
too far.  If I find myself using it, I may have to give up the
crossword.

*—Philip Howard*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Police show improvement; man dies from wound&rdquo; [Headline
in *Dominion Post*, Morgantown, West Virginia.  Submitted
by Stephen D. Tanner, Morgantown.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Dictionary of Euphemisms &amp; Other Doubletalk*](https://www.amazon.ca/Rawsons-Dictionary-Euphemisms-Other-Doubletalk/dp/0785816933) and [*Slang and Euphemism*](https://www.amazon.com/Slang-Euphemism-3rd-revised-ed/dp/0451203712) 
Hugh Rawson, (Crown Publishers, New York, 1981), viii + 312pp. and Richard A. Spears, (Jonathan David Publishers, Middle Village, 1981), xxviii + 448pp.

Rawson's *Euphemisms* and Spears's *Slang* basically deal
with the same subject matter but are diametrically opposed in
approach.  Rawson, a professional journalist, presents some
1,500 entries of positive and negative euphemisms, mostly well
explained, precisely dated, and amply illustrated by anecdotes
or citations from literature and the media.  Spears, a professional
linguist, lists some 17,500 entries, tersely defined,
vaguely dated, and poorly cross-referenced.  Both books are
useful for anyone dealing with language.  Rawson's main value
is the extensive treatment of most entries, thereby greatly
increasing one's repertoire of word stories and histories, and he
provides an excellent introduction to euphemisms, or &ldquo;linguistic
fig leaves,&rdquo; used in daily life and particularly by the notorious
euphemizers: business, education, and government.  His 11-page
introduction to euphemisms is among the best I have seen.  In
short, this book is an amusing, intelligent, well documented,
informative, and readable reference work.

Spears's *Slang* is useful, too, but for other reasons: the far
greater number of entries, the valuable lists of synonyms, and
the broader historical and geographic coverage.  While Rawson
broadly discusses some 70 synonyms for &ldquo;prostitute,&rdquo; Spears
lists some 560 euphemisms and dysphemisms.  Spears's book is,
however, a most frustrating, vexing product of a professional
linguist who created a skeletal data base with his computer
(limiting most entries to 254 bytes) and then inexplicably hid
the best parts of his corpus—the synonym lists—under silly key
words.  Subtitled *A Dictionary of Oaths, Curses, Insults, Sexual
Slang and Metaphor, Racial Slurs, Drug Talk, Homosexual
Lingo, and Related Matter*, it has three major flaws: the
definitions and explanations are too brief, the cross references
are poor, and one can't find the extensive synonym lists.
Farmer and Henley, in their monumental *Slang and Its
Analogues* (1890—1904), had reasons to hide their sexual
material under inconspicuous entries.  In 1981, Professor Spears
has no censureship-caused reasons to ape Farmer and Henley
by camouflaging his dirty-word lists.

For example, if I want to find all the synonyms for *fuck*
(which he coyly defines as 'to coit'), I look under *fuck*.  No luck.
Let's try *to copulate*, his sense 1 definition.  Nothing.  Try *to
coit*.  Nix, but references to *screw* and *phallicize*, neither of
which helps.  *To lay?*  Again no help.  Frustrated, I turn to
Farmer and Henley, Spears's major source of material, to see
where they hid the synonyms: under *greens* and *to ride*.  Back
to Spears, but no luck.  Now vexed, I leaf through the book,
inspecting every long list of small-caps synonyms.  Finally, on
page 278, I find all the synonyms for *fuck*, listed under the key
word *occupy*.  *Occupy*!?  Well, *occupy* such silly games!

The extensive lists of synonyms are very useful: one does
not have to cull them from the dozens of reference works
consulted by Spears (American, British, some Canadian, Australian
and Caribbean terms, from the 1800s to the 1970s)—but
try to find them.  One has to make one's own list of references;
don't look at the obvious places, and don't bother with the
cross references.

The following is a Guide to Spears's Synonym Lists, which
the publishers should incorporate in their next printing, as a
minimal courtesy to the readers.  A few synonym lists are
actually where they are supposed to be listed: *anus, cunnilingus,
deflower, erection, genitals* (a few), *god, gonorrhea, group
sex, lecher, lewd, pederast, pimp*, and *stupid*.  Most of the
second group are harder to find: alcohol &gt; [= listed under]
*booze*; black woman &gt; *raven beauty*; breasts &gt; bosom;
chamber pot &gt; *pot*; cocaine &gt; *nose-candy*; coward &gt; *yellow-dog*;
devil &gt; *fiend*; diarrhea &gt; *quickstep*; die &gt; *depart*;
drunkard &gt; *alchy*; fellation &gt; *penilingus*; fool &gt; *oaf*; horny > *humpy* and *lust*; intoxicated with marijuana &gt; *tall*; marijuana > *mari*; masturbate &gt; *waste time*; mulatto &gt; *mahogany*;
Negro &gt; *ebony* and *nigger*; oaths &gt; '*Zounds*; pederast >
*sodomite*; policeman &gt; *flatfoot*; posteriors &gt; *duff*; prostitute > *harlot*; sanitary napkin &gt; *manhole cover*; toilet paper >
*T.P.*; urinate &gt; *retire* and *whiz*; venereal disease &gt; *social
disease*; whorehouse &gt; *brothel* and *house*; woman, girl &gt; *bird*
and *quail*; woman as a sexual object &gt; *lay* and *tail*.

The final group of synonym lists is what I call the
&ldquo;crazies&rdquo; —who in his or her right mind would list, look up, or
expect these words listed as synonyms under the words
following the arrow?  Condom &gt; *eel-skin*; copulation &gt; *smockage*;
defecate &gt; *ease oneself*; delirium tremens &gt; *ork-orks*;
drunk &gt; *woofled*; fart &gt; *gurk*; ejaculate &gt; *melt*; female
genitals &gt; *monosyllable* (F&amp;H); female public hair &gt; *Downshire*;
ghost &gt; *revenant*; gin &gt; *ruin*; homosexual male,
hermaphrodite &gt; *epicene, fribble,* and *queen*; Jew &gt; *five* and
*two*; kill &gt; *scrag*; lesbian &gt; *lesbyterian*; male genitals >
*virilia*; menstruation &gt; *floods*; mistress &gt; *spare rib*; naked >
*starkers*; nonsense &gt; *animal* and *bullshit*; penis &gt; *gadget* and
*yard*; preacher &gt; *sky-pilot*; pregnant &gt; *fragrant*; rascal, sneak
&gt; *snoke-horn*; semen &gt; *mettle*; sexual play &gt; *firkytoodle*;
slovenly woman &gt; *trollymog*; syphilis &gt; *specific stomach*;
testes &gt; *whirlygigs*; toilet &gt; *ajax* and *W.C.*; trousers >
*galligaskins*; vagina &gt; *passage*; vomit &gt; *york*.

Sort of makes you york, really.  Just what got into this
Indiana-University-educated doctor, now teaching at Northwestern
University?  And what about his dozen helpers and the
publishers' editors?  Are they all bananas (sense 2)?  Incidentally,
there are dozens of synonyms for *crazy*, but I could not find
such a list.

If you are able to find the synonym lists you want without
the preceding Guide, you speak no doubt a strange, Spearsian
English, to wit: *My spare rib, a five and two, is no trollymog.
When she's woofled, she presses her monosyllable against my
virilia.  Then, after some good smockage, I ejaculate verbally,
&ldquo;I'm melting!  I'm melting!&rdquo;*  'Zounds!  Sounds just like the
wicked witch.

Spears's introductory short essays, pp. vii-xix, on Slang,
Euphemism, Taboo, Distancing, Verbal Aggression, etc., are
perfunctory; one gets the impression that computer operator
Spears was not interested in (or knowledgeable of) these topics
but had to whip out a few pages.  The extensive bibliography is
useful but also flawed; e.g., Legman's volume II of *Rationale*
was not consulted; Read's *Graffiti* are *Classic*, not *Classical*;
the 1979 reprint of Roback's *Dictionary* by Maledicta Press is
not listed; and the source for &ldquo;bad words&rdquo; since 1977,
*Maledicta*, was (apparently intentionally) ignored.  Still, with
the preceding Guide of where to find what, every user can
benefit from this tome, compiled during five years of selfless
labor.  We have to be grateful to Jonathan David Publishers for
making this reference work available, but their editors deserve
a kick in their whirlygigs.  The $12.95 paperback is a steal.

Reviewing *Slang* for the *Library Journal*, a linguistics
professor at the University of Chicago snidely condemned
Spears's work as &ldquo;not recommended.&rdquo;  That young professor is
full of *clart*: Spears's *Slang* is indeed very much recommended,
despite its flaws, for in most cases it provides one with
rudimentary information that one would have to hunt up by
consulting dozens of dictionaries.  As an editor, philologist, and
lexicographer specializing in slang and &ldquo;bad&rdquo; words, I am
appalled by the book's avoidable flaws.  Yet, for all its faults and
bizarre organization, one can live with Spears's *Slang*.

*[Reinhold Aman, Waukesha, Wisconsin]*


### OBITER DICTA
*Mildred D. Berkowitz, New Bedford, Massachusetts*

Cleverness *could* get you... in trouble.

*American Heritage Dictionary:*

>nonce word...A word invented for a particular occasion,
or for the nonce.

During the Nixon administration, the White House staff
invented the nonce word &ldquo;nissim&rdquo; for National Security Study
Memorandum.  When Carter came in, the title of these missives
was changed to Presidential Security Study Memorandum.
After a bit of thought, it was wisely decided to pass up the
corresponding nonce word.

An acronym is a word often formed by combining the
initial letters of words.  During the 1982 Memorial Day weekend,
a concerted effort was made by the Massachusetts authorities
to keep the highways safe for vacationing motorists.  To this
end, they put on the roads what they entitled Fatal Accident
Reducation Teams.  The acronym they prudently chose was
FARE.


#### EPISTOLA {Prof. A.C. Rose-Innes}

I was amused to see in your Winter 1982 issue an epistola
from an American, Otto Jansen, complaining about the use of
*bake up* instead of just *bake* on the back panel of a cereal
packet.  In my experience, Americans always *back up* a car;
they never just *back* it!

*[Prof. A.C. Rose-Innes, Wilmslow, Cheshire]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dr. H.H. Macey}

I was born and grew up in Plymouth (England), very close
to the Devonport Naval Dockyards; I came of a naval family.
The word for anything &ldquo;liberated&rdquo; from those dockyards was
*rabbits*.  It might have been essentially a naval term (perhaps it
was used only in Portsmouth), but it was common and widely
recognized.  At the age of about twelve, just after World War I,
I was taken by my father to a football match.  The man next to
me in the crowd asked his companion, &ldquo;Did you get those
rabbits out all right?&rdquo;  The reply was &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; but his small son
piped up very loudly, &ldquo;Twudden rabbits, Dad, twus paint,&rdquo; a
comment greatly appreciated by all those within earshot.  I
have never seen this meaning of *rabbits* in print, only that of
the custom of saying it for luck before any other word on the
first of any month: origin *orabitis*.  In my experience, neither
*cabbage* nor *rabbits* is known in Australia in any of these ways.

*[Dr. H.H. Macey, Floreat Park, Western Australia]*


#### EPISTOLA {Mary Patterson}

I read with interest Philip Howard's article on *halcyon*
[VIII, 3], especially the section in which he mentioned the use
of the word as a brand name.  When I first encountered
Halcyon waterbeds, I thought this was a highly appropriate
brand name, since I had always used the word in the sense of
&ldquo;relaxed, carefree.&rdquo;  Discovering the word's avian origins made
me realize just how appropriate the name really is!

For some time I have been pondering the words *clockwise*
and *anticlockwise*.  As digital timepieces become more common,
I can foresee these descriptions of the direction of
circular motion becoming meaningless and dying out.  Can any
of your readers suggest other English words or phrases that will
describe this motion as concisely?

*[Mary Patterson, Toronto, Ontario]*


#### EPISTOLA {Norman R. Shapiro}

Marjorie Sykes's observations on the English *budget*
[VIII, 1] are illuminating, but they shed light on only part
of the story.  As a bit of *etymologica*, the word isn't really one
of the more *obscura*, being only a not uncommon kind of
metonymy—the container for the contained—though less usual
than most examples, in that the figurative meaning has completely
supplanted the literal.

No more obscure is the origin of the word itself, concerning
which, however, Ms. Sykes chooses to leave us in the dark.
Authorities agree that *budget* is from the archaic French
*bougette*, diminutive of *bouge*, 'pocket, purse' (< Old French
*bolge*, diminutive *bolgete*).  I have long assumed a connection
with a turn-of-the-century English (or American) noun *budge*,
possibly a regionalism, indicating the cleavage of a woman's
bosom, a natural pocket for secreting (usually) small objects,
with the Victorian assurance of inviolability.  (I fail to find the
meaning attested in print, the closest—differences of gender
and anatomy aside—being 'a front trouser pocket,' given in Berry and Van den Bark's *The American Thesaurus of Slang*.
But I have it on the authority of several elderly female
informants that it was a common usage in their youth, in and
around Boston.

At any rate, English, ignoring the injunction to &ldquo;neither a
borrower nor a lender be,&rdquo; has been both, profligately.  And the
word *budget*, borrowed from the French, was loaned back in
its new form as early as the 1760s.  Today, appropriately
pronounced, it is thoroughly naturalized.  It is only one of a
spate of such &ldquo;shuttle words&rdquo;—lent, transformed, and subsequently
returned and reincorporated.  One thinks of many
traditional examples: Fr. *fleurette* &gt; Eng *flirt* &gt; Fr *le flirt*; Fr
*r&ocirc;ti de boeuf* &gt; Eng *roast beef* &gt; Fr *le rosbif*; Fr *tenez!* >
Eng *tennis* (not undisputed) &gt; Fr *le tennis*; et al.  And today,
especially, one thinks of those &ldquo;designer&rdquo; *blue jeans* (< Fr
*bleu de G&ecirc;nes*, i.e., 'Genoa blue,' jocularly renaturalized as
Parisian *bloudjinnes*), designed on both sides of the Atlantic to
put a crimp in anybody's budget.

*[Norman R. Shapiro, Wesleyan University]*


#### EPISTOLA {Lester Saferstein}

The article by Byran Garner on &ldquo;Meretricious Words&rdquo; is
one of the most interesting you have ever published.

I don't know how many other meretricious appellations
are missing from his well-researched list, but at least one
designation, *round-heels*, came to my attention when, in a
recent *Time* Magazine article, appeared, &ldquo;the round-heeled bar
girl.&rdquo;

A definition for *round-heel* can be found in the Supplement
of Partridge's *Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional
English*, 5th Edition, 1961: &ldquo;sexually compliant; a girl with
heels so round that the least push will put her on her back.&rdquo;

Wentworth and Flexner's *Dictionary of American Slang*,
2nd Edition, 1965, indicates that *round-heel* was first used in
1920 to mean a 'prize fighter who either developed round heels
from spending so much time on his back, or was an easy
pushover because he had round-heeled shoes.'  According to
these authorities, the definition 'a women of easy virtue'
appeared in 1943.  They note that Raymond Chandler's *Lady
in Lake*, 1951, contains the following, &ldquo;I've just sort of been
resenting your idea I would be an easy conquest.  I'm not a
round-heeled like Livy.&rdquo;

*[Lester Saferstein, M.D., Prairie Village, Kansas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Dr. H.H. Macey}

I was most interested in Gerald Cohen's discussion of the
word *cabbage* in the sense of 'appropriating surreptitiously,
pilfering' [VIII, 1].  I lived in England for fifty years before
coming here and becoming a Bloody Pommie, but this use of
*cabbage* is new to me.

I was born and grew up in Plymouth (England), very close
to the Devonport Naval Dockyards; I came of a naval family.
The word for anything &ldquo;liberated&rdquo; from those dockyards was
*rabbits*.  It might have been essentially a naval term (perhaps it
was used only in Portsmouth), but it was common and widely
recognized.  At the age of about twelve, just after World War I,
I was taken by my father to a football match.  The man next to
me in the crowd asked his companion, &ldquo;Did you get those
rabbits out all right?&rdquo;  The reply was &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; but his small son
piped up very loudly, &ldquo;Twudden rabbits, Dad, twus paint,&rdquo; a
comment greatly appreciated by all those within earshot.  I
have never seen this meaning of *rabbits* in print, only that of
the custom of saying it for luck before any other word on the
first of any month: origin *orabitis*.  In my experience, neither
*cabbage* nor *rabbits* is known in Australia in any of these ways.

*[Dr. H.H. Macey, Floreat Park, Western Australia]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Please Smoke in Grand Foyer.&rdquo; [Sign at the Opera House
entrance doors, Kennedy Center, Washington, D.C. Submitted
by Eric Ostergaard, who observes, &ldquo;...as a nonsmoking
supporter of the opera, ...in order to comply with their latest
request, I must now participate in the smoking habit.&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The [Northwest Power Planning] Council is required
under the 1980 Northwest Power Act to develop a program to
'protect, mitigate, and enhance' the salmon and steelhead runs
along the Columbia and its tributaries along with developing a
20-year master energy plan.  The fish program is aimed at
making up for some of the loses [sic] caused by the dams along
the river.&rdquo;  [From *Northwest Energy News*, March (?) 1982, p.
3. Submitted by Sandra Kirschenbaum, San Francisco.  We are
at a lose to know how one protects, mitigates, and enhances all
at once.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo; 'We are a little angry,' Moss said.  'We were never able to
have a discussion, but that's all water over the damn.  I think
it's important that there not be a lot of negativity between
Fernando and the Dodgers.'  'Has this thing left scars?' &rdquo; [From
the *Los Angeles Times*, 24 March 1982.  Submitted by Jean
MacAllister, Beverly Hills, California.  &ldquo;Scars&rdquo; may not be the
right word, but we're damn sure that &ldquo;damn&rdquo; isn't!]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Place Your Order and Get Out of the Way.&rdquo;  [Sign in
Mexican restaurant in Chicago.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;All Peoples Welcome for the Gifts.&rdquo;  [Sign in Turkish shop
next door.  Both submitted by Jerry B. Jenkins, Deerfield,
Illinois.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the wheres and the whyfors.&rdquo;  [From interview with
Susan Alter, Council of City of New York, 32nd Dist., Brooklyn,
WOR, 24 March 1981, 7:30 a.m.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I consider myself a very sophisticated human being—
you know, beneath this sort of thing.&rdquo;  [Woman giving opening
testimonial on phone to Bernard Meltzer, WOR, 16 December
1979, 11:27 a.m.]

## Some Interesting Characteristics of Non-Indo-European Languages
*Laurence Urdang, Editor,* VERBATIM

Some time ago (I cannot say exactly when: some of the
third-class mail I receive remains unopened for months), I
received promotional brochure from the Summer Institute of
Linguistics Museum of Anthropology, in Dallas.  On the outside
is printed, &ldquo;What difference does it make whether or not a
man plays soccer soon after his wife gives birth?&rdquo;  Below this
appears the following:

>A lot—if he is a Shipibo man of Peru.  For about two
weeks after his baby's birth a Shipibo man can do no
heavy labor, use no heavy tools, nor hunt, according to
tribal teachings, lest such work cause the new baby
some harm.  With the addition of soccer to the Shipibo
culture, another taboo was added—a new father must
not play ball for a time lest his baby's abdomen swell
up like the ball....

Very sound practice, indeed.  Most VERBATIM readers are
aware of cultural differences, real or rumored, between most
western societies and others—differences like the eating of
sheep's eyes by Arabs, insects by some African peoples, and,
&ldquo;long pig&rdquo; in New Guinea (if not elsewhere).  But with
extended communication and exposure to western civilization,
many such cultural anomalies (or what we westerners regard as
such) disappear: Would that African really prefer insects if he
could choose between them and a roast turkey?  Wouldn't the
New Guinea native find a prime rib roast more appetizing than
even the tenderest missionary?  Perhaps not, but with acculturation,
such old habits tend to die, albeit hard.

Cultural habits, rules, and taboos survive only till that
culture is replaced by another, a process that may never
happen (religious Jews still refuse pork and scaleless seafood),
may take centuries to happen (Eskimos now use rifles for
hunting), or may happen virtually overnight (the Japanese
assimilation to western ways is a good example).

Certain demands made by languages on their speakers,
however, change so imperceptibly as to seem static.  From even
the most rudimentary knowledge of French, for instance, we
know that nouns have a grammatical gender that is either
masculine or feminine; in German, grammatical gender allows
for a neuter as well; but English speakers, who tolerate
feminine pronouns of reference for things like automobiles (*She
runs like a top*), whales of either sex (*Thar she blows*), and
vessels (*I sailed her in the Bermuda race this year*), enjoy what
they regard as the most sensible system, namely, natural gender
and regard German *das M&auml;dchen* as exceedingly odd—though
possibly the oddness is a function of the particular *M&auml;dchen* in
question.

Less familiar languages make of their speakers quite
different sorts of demands.  There is the apocryphal tale of the
missionary who was delivering himself of a rip-roaring sermon
before the natives of an African village.

&ldquo;You are all sinners,&rdquo; he intoned, addressing them in their
own language.  The natives cheered wildly.

&ldquo;None of you will go to heaven unless you mend your
ways,&rdquo; he warned.  Again the natives applauded.

By the end of the sermon, the missionary, who had never
experienced such an enthusiastic reaction in his career, was
elated.  To an old trader who had observed the goings-on he
said excitedly.  &ldquo;The natives really responded to my sermon
with great enthusiasm, didn't they!&rdquo;

&ldquo;Well, yes,&rdquo; replied the other.  &ldquo;But you have to understand
that in their language there exists the 'inclusive' *you*,
which means 'all of you here,' and the 'exclusive' *you*, which
means 'everyone except those present,' and you kept telling
them that everyone was a sinner except them.&rdquo;

If there is such a language, I do not know what it is
(though I daresay some reader will enlighten me).  But I do
know about some characteristics of other languages that may
strike the native English speaker as interesting if not peculiar
or, in some cases, poetic.

Maninka is an important social and trading language of
Upper Volta, Gambia, Guinea, Mali, Senegal, and Ivory Coast.
Proverbs are an important cultural feature of Maninka speakers.
They vary their utterances of proverbs for the sake of
elegance.  Thus, &ldquo;Rome wasn't built in a day&rdquo; might come out
in Maninka as &ldquo;It took longer than a day to build the city of
Rome&rdquo; on one occasion and, for stylistic variation on another
occasion, &ldquo;More than one day was needed to construct Rome,&rdquo;
and so forth.  In other words, it is the idea of the proverb that is
important in Maninka, not the ability to quote it *verbatim*.
Moreover, the ability to vary the expression is a virtue.

Let us take the example of a learner of Maninka who can
make his way through the language, but not without a lot of
mistakes.  He is talking with an old Maninka man who engages
in a bit of ironic humor:

>OLD MAN: Ah, you are becoming a Maninka.  You speak
the language just like one of us.
>
>NEWCOMER: Gee, do you really think so?  Thank you
very much.
>
>The newcomer will have fallen into the old man's trap
and come out looking close to a total fool in a society
where insults are taboo, one becomes very sensitive to
levels of praise.  Given the context, what the old man
has said would best be interpreted as the opposite of
its literal meaning and, by implication, a criticism.  If
the newcomer accepts what has been said to him at
face value, then he in effect accepts the criticism.  With
more sophistication on the part of the newcomer, the
dialogue might go something like this:
>
>OLD MAN: Ah, you are becoming a Maninka.  You speak
the language just like one of us.
>
>NEWCOMER: No matter how long a log lies in the
water, it never becomes a crocodile.
>
>This is really the kind of response the old man is looking
for.  As an ingratiating way of expressing his admiration
for the newcomer's knowledge of Maninka
culture, the old man might respond with another
proverb:
>
>OLD MAN: Ah, my son, a log lying in the water is still
the cause of fear.

The only exposure most of us have had with this sort of
cultural-linguistic technique is from Charley Chan movies or
from watching *Kung Fu* on TV, where the wizened philosopher
imparts gems of wisdom to &ldquo;Cricket.&rdquo;

Too much of that sort of thing, though it may sound
terrifyingly profound, is often transparent nonsense:

>When the moon is above the horizon, the dreamer will
find his way home.
>
>He who can see into the future shall never tell what he
knows.
>
>When the nightingale sings, all listen but the crow.
>
>Criticize not the sloth of the snail nor the swiftness of
the eagle.
>
>May the candle at the top of the mountain light your
way through the tunnel.
>
>The sea does not yield up its mysteries to those who
do not believe in it.
>
>An old slipper is more comfortable than a new
handkerchief.
>
>A crumb of bread for a beggar may not be a pearl
without price.
>
>The moss on the tree does not ask forgiveness.
>
>Seek not riches lest you become wealthy.
>
>The fish that swims in the pond knows not his brother.
>
>Look not into the mirror of life lest you see time
passing.
>
>Beauty shall not be known to those who sing alone in
the forest.
>
>She who loves butterflies loves you.

(Maybe this will win me a job in a Chinese fortune-cookie
factory.)

In Jacaltec, spoken in Jacaltenango, northwest of Guatemala
City, In Guatemala, speakers are required by the grammar
of the language to use &ldquo;directionals,&rdquo; adverbial particles
attached to verbs to indicate the precise movement of a person
or object.  That feature, which is shared by many Mayan
languages, is similar to the use of the particles *out, in, off, on*,
etc., in English, e.g., *go out, come in, take off, jump on*.  The
particles in Jacaltec are reduced forms of intransitive verbs: -*toj*
'away from' is 'to go'; -*pax* 'back, again' is from *paxi* 'to return';
-*can* 'remaining still' is from *cani* 'to remain.'

Jacaltec also has a system of noun classifiers, similar in
principle to gender in Indo-European languages, but consisting
of 25 classes.  Only concrete nouns are classified, with few
exceptions.  People, for example, are classified on the basis of
sex, relative age, and kinship.  Objects are classified into
categories based, generally, on their physical characteristics:
*atz'am* 'salt'; *Ch'en* 'rock' (for objects of stone, glass, metal,
etc.); *k'ap* 'cloth'; *metx* 'dog' (only); *no*' 'non-dog' (for all
animals except dogs), etc.  There are of course, other features of
Jacaltec that distinguish it from the Indo-European languages,
but the focus of this article is too narrow to include them.

Although in German and in Latin, the finite verb of a
sentence usually appears at the end and, in English, it appears
between the subject and the object, in Malagasy, a Western
Austronesian language spoken in Madagascar (Malagasy Republic),
the verb appears invariably at the beginning of the
sentence and the noun at the end:

>*menasa my lamba ity Rasoa*  
wash the clothes this Rasoa  
'Rasoa is washing the clothes.'

Chinese differs form English in far too many respects to
detail here, but we can examine, however briefly, two commonly
known characteristics, tones and classifiers.  Stressed
syllables in Chinese carry a relative tone, identified by pitch,
duration, and contour.  Depending on the features of tone, the
&ldquo;same&rdquo; syllable may have different meanings.  For example, in
the Mandarin of Beijing, the following pattern can be
distinguished:

| SYLLABLE | PITCH                  | MEANING    |
| -------- | ---------------------- | ---------- |
| *ma*     | high level             | 'mother'   |
| *ma*     | high rising            | 'hemp'     |
| *ma*     | dipping/falling rising | 'house'    |
| *ma*     | high falling           | 'to scold' |

Other dialects, like Cantonese, for instance, may have many
more tones, and the entire pattern is complicated considerably
by the changes that occur when the language is spoken, for
combinations of words produce different tones.  When a Chinese
noun is combined with a demonstrative (*this, which*) or a
numeral (*one, two*), a classifier must be present.  For example,
in Beijing Mandarin, the classifier *ti&aacute;o* is used with a noun for a
long, thin object like a *snake, rope, street, river, pole,* etc., but
may also be used for cattle, law, and rhinoceros.  The classifier
*b&abreve;* is used with nouns for *chair, fan, knife,* and *rifle*.  Thus, the
learner of Chinese must learn each noun's classifier individually.
Chinese, in one or another of its dialects, is spoken by
more than twice as many people as speak English—900 million
compared with 400 million—so it is evidently a language that
can be learned, though it is said that, although the relatively
uniform writing system can be understood by those who speak
the myriad of dialects, the spoken forms are in many cases
unintelligible to speakers of different dialects.

In this brief exposition, only a minuscule number of the
main features of languages that are unlike English have been
touched upon.  Those who are intrigued are invited to dig
further.

[Much of the information in this article was drawn from
*Languages and Their Speakers*, Timothy Shopen, Little, Brown,
1979, and *Languages and Their Status*, Timothy Shopen, Little,
Brown, 1979, to which my debt is gratefully acknowledged.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Household Accidents Kill Most Children Each Year&rdquo;
[Headline from *The Suburban News*, Westfield, New Jersey.
Submitted by Keith MacLellan, Piscataway, New Jersey.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;HONDA '82 PRELUDE.  Fully loaded, electric sunroof,
radial tires, hurry this won't last long.&rdquo;  [From *The Los Angeles
Times*, 21 February 1982.  Submitted by Julie May, Los Angeles,
who comments, I'd hate to buy a car that won't last long!]

## A Visit to the Language Zoo
*Richard Lederer*

In many children's magazines appear pictures in which
the young readers are asked to identify a number of hidden
animals.  In a cloud may lurk a cow, in the leaves of a tree may
be concealed a fish, and on the side of a house may be soaring
an eagle.

The English language is like those children's pictures.  Take
a gander at the following passage, and you will discover over
200 creatures from the animal world hidden in its sentences, a
veritable menagerie of zoological metaphors.  (Did you catch
one of them in the last sentence?)

&ldquo;Man,&rdquo; proclaims the dictionary, is distinguished from the
other animals &ldquo;by a notable development of the brain, with a
resultant capacity for speech and abstract reasoning.&rdquo;  Perhaps
so, but how truly different are we human beings from our
fellow organisms that walk and fly and swim and creep upon
the face of the planet?

I mean, holy cow, holy cats, and holy mackerel—the
human race is filled with congressional hawks and doves who
fight like cats and dogs, Wall Street bulls and bears who make a
beeline for the goose that lays the golden egg, cold fish and hot
doggers, early birds and night owls, lone wolves and social
butterflies, and lame ducks, sitting ducks, and dead ducks.

Some people are horny studs on the prowl, strutting
peacocks who preen and fish for compliments, clothes horses
who put on the dog with their turtlenecks and hushpuppies,
young bucks and foxy chicks in puppy love, or cool cats and
kittenish lovebirds who avoid stag parties to bill and coo in
their love nests.

Other people have a whale of an appetite that compels
them to eat like pigs, drink like fishes, hog the lion's share, and
wolf their elephantine portions until they become plump as
partridges.

Still others are mad as March hares and crazy as coots,
loons, or bedbugs—batty, squirrelly, bugeyed, cockeyed cuckoos
who drive us buggy with their horsing around and
monkeyshines.

As we continue to pigeonhole the human race and separate
the sheep from the goats, we encounter catnapping,
slothful sluggards; clumsy oxen who are bulls in china shops;
cocky bullies and top dogs who rule the roost; birdbrained
dodos who are easily gulled, buffaloed, and outfoxed; harebrained
jackasses who, like fish out of water, think at a snail's
pace; and asinine silly geese who lay an egg whenever they
parrot or ape every turkey they see.

Leapin' lizards, we can scarcely get through a day without
meeting pussyfooting chickens who stick their heads in the
sand, henpecked underdogs who get goose pimples and butterflies,
scared rabbits who play possum and cry crocodile tears,
spineless jellyfish who clam up with a frog in their throats
whenever the cat gets their tongue, mousy worms who quail
and flounder and then turn tail, and shrimpy pipsqueaks who
fawn like toadies.

Let's face it.  It's a dog-eat-dog world we live in—one
unbridled rat race.  And, doggone it, I do not wish to duck or
leapfrog over this subject.  It's time to fish or cut bait, to take
the bull by the horns and to give you a bird's-eye view of
animal metaphors in our language.

Dog my cats, it's a bear of a task to avoid meeting catty,
shrewish, bitchy vixens with bees in their bonnets, who think
that men are swine and male chauvinist pigs and in the
doghouse.  Others who get my goat are antsy, crabby, pigheaded
old buzzards, coots, and goats (no spring chickens) who
are stubborn as mules and who grouse, bug, badger, and hound
you like droning, waspish gadflies who stir up a hornets' nest.

And speaking of beastly characters, watch out for the
leeches who worm their way into your confidence and make
you their scapegoats; the ratfinks and stool pigeons who ferret
out your deepest secrets and then squeal on you, let the cat out
of the bag, and fly the coop without so much as a &ldquo;See you
later, alligator&rdquo;; the snakes-in-the-grass who open a can of
worms and then throw you a red herring; the serpentine
quacks who make you their gullible guinea pigs and cat's-paws;
the low-down curs and dirty dogs who sling the bull and then
send you on a wild goose chase, barking up the wrong tree; the
card sharks who hawk their fishy games, monkey with your
nest egg, put the sting on you, and then fleece you; the vultures
who hang like albatrosses around your neck, who feather their
own nests, and then—the straw that breaks the camel's back—
crow about it; the black sheep who make a monkey out of you
with their shaggy-dog stories; the flies in the ointment who are
slippery as eels and put a flea in your ear; and the lousy
polecats and skunks who sell you a pig in a poke or a white
elephant and then weasel their way out of the deal and leave
you with a fine kettle of fish.

It's just not cricket.  In fact, it's for the birds.

But let's talk turkey and horse sense.  Don't we also know
bright-eyed and bushy-tailed tigers who are always loaded for
bear, eager beavers who go whole hog to hit the bull's-eye, and
loosey-goosey rare birds who are as happy as a lark or a clam
and wise as an owl?  People like these are the cat's pajamas and
the cat's meow, and the world is their oyster.

So before you buzz off, I hope you'll agree that this article
has been no bull session, no fluke, no hogwash, no humbug.  I
really give a hoot about the animals hiding in our language, so,
for my swan song, I want you to know that this has been no
cock-and-bull story.

It really is a zoo out there.


#### EPISTOLA {Brian A. Garner}

One of the perennial snares in writing about usage and
language generally is that one's own prose must be irreproachable.
And, alas, this ideal is unrealizable.  Thus Sir Ernest
Gowers, in the first paragraph to the preface to his revised
edition of Fowler's *Modern English Usage*(1965), wrote: &ldquo;This
was indeed an epoch-making book in the strict sense of that
overworked phrase,&rdquo; thereby violating warnings against &ldquo;Word-patronage&rdquo;
in the text.  Thus Wilson Follett spelled *ensure*
(same sense) inconsistently in the introductory materials to
*Modern American Usage*.  Thus Laurence Urdang wrote, in a
review of *Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable*: &ldquo;To have
been fortunate enough to have grown up with this fascinating
book at hand...,&rdquo; in violation of the correct sequence of
tenses.  And thus our very best writers on language have their
momentary slips of the pen.  Priscian himself no doubt once
slipped and broke his own head.  But one who espies these
linguistic peccadilloes should not gloat over the discovery, nor
can one really use such lapses to discredit exemplary writers,
unless the mistakes become either flagrant or frequent enough
not to be considered rarities.

A less common snare for writers on language—not quite
perennial, but perhaps quinquennial—is that a less than perspicacious
reader will find momentary lapses where there is none
and precognize them.  Thus Mrs. Lillian Mermin Feinsilver's
article, &ldquo;When Paragons Nod&rdquo; VERBATIM [VIII, 4], assailing
John Simon and Christopher Ricks, among others.  To be sure,
some of Mrs. Feinsilver's criticisms are justified: for example,
her pointing out the incorrectness of Simon's *etc*. for *et al., like*
for *as*, and *wouldn't* for *doesn't* where the latter is required by
the sequence of tenses.  Likewise, she rightly signals errors in
the writing of Randolph Quirk, Edmund White, Frances
Ferguson, David Lodge, and Kathryn Hellerstein.  But the
majority of her criticisms of Simon are subtle miscorrections of
illusory falls from grace.

One must imagine that any true paragon of language (or
even a mere epigone) had begun, not nodding, but violently
shaking his head by the time he had gotten halfway through
Mrs. Feinsilver's article.  Her emended punctuation of this
perfectly lucid sentence of Simon's is based on misunderstanding:
&ldquo;Vidal's intelligence, *pace* Wolcott, does not 'curdle' on
television and his quick mind—prejudiced in many ways but
still quick and clear—buttressed by a delightfully ironic wit, is
just what the American public needs.&rdquo;  *Buttressed by* is not, as
Mrs. Feinsilver assumes, intended to begin a participial phrase
parallel to &ldquo;prejudiced....&rdquo;  One can see this by substituting
*tendentious* for *prejudiced*.

Furthermore, the following sentence is strictly correct
with the singular verb: &ldquo;What good is correct speech and
writing, you may ask, in an age in which hardly anyone seems
to know and no one seems to care?&rdquo;  *What*, as subject, takes the
singular verb, whether the noun that follows is singular or
plural.  Here the subject happens to be the noun phrase *what
good* rather than *what* alone, but that makes no difference.

Mrs. Feinsilver betrays an ignorance of compound subjects
in deprecating subject-verb agreement in this sentence: &ldquo;Why,
you may ask, is correct speech and writing important, as long
as the meaning is clear?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Correct speech and writing&rdquo;
expresses a single idea—correct use of language—and therefore
may take a singular verb.  &ldquo;Two and two is four&rdquo; and &ldquo;Two
and two are four&rdquo; are both correct.  It's up to the writer to
decide whether to emphasize collectivity or separateness.

To write, as Mrs. Feinsilver suggests Simon should have:
&ldquo;Two readers, no fewer, have sent me...&rdquo; would be unidiomatic
and ludicrous.  *No less*, as used by Simon, falls into the
realm of cast-iron idioms, treated so well by Fowler.  Such
literal-mindedness as Mrs. Feinsilver displays is what leads to
ridiculous pomposities like &ldquo;A number of people is at the
party.&rdquo;  Only a latter-day Holofernes would talk or write this
way, and be it remembered that Shakespeare had this pedant
mouth many a solecism.  I might also point out that Simon is
defensibly colloquial in writing &ldquo;I just returned...from
France&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;I have just returned...from France.&rdquo;
And, at best, Mrs. Feinsilver's difficulties with Ricks' punctuation
are mere quodlibets.

Equally bad is that Mrs. Feinsilver herself is guilty of
several verbal malfeasances.  For instance, she writes: &ldquo;*Paradigms
Lost*...somehow never received the kind of detailed
criticism that Simon had given the prose of others.&rdquo;  The
sequence of tenses is wrong here: the pluperfect *had* has no
sense of being further removed than another time in the past,
though the preterite *received* creates the illusion of a specific
time in the past; the logical suggestion is that Simon is no
longer living.  Furthermore, *Paradigms Lost* is too recent a book
for one to say that it &ldquo;never received (detailed criticism)&rdquo;
instead of &ldquo;has not received&rdquo; or even &ldquo;has not yet received.&rdquo;
The sentence reads better thus: &ldquo;*PL*...somehow has not
received the kind of detailed criticism that Simon has given the
prose of others.&rdquo;

In the *American Mercury* article to which Mrs. Feinsilver
refers, &ldquo;Overruling Grammatical Don'ts&rdquo; (June 1946), she
wrote: &ldquo;The preposition can go afterward or beforehand,
wherever it reads better.&rdquo;  Before or after *what* we are not told,
nor does the context inform us.  *Afterward* and *beforehand* are
both temporal rather than locative; equally important, they
suggest precious avoidance of the simpler terms.  (Perhaps this
poor phrasing, however, was intended as mimetic support for
her thesis.)  Moreover, *it* should here probably refer to the
sentence as a whole, and not merely to the preposition.  The
sentence might advantageously be recast thus: &ldquo;The preposition
can go before or after the relative clause to which it
belongs, whichever placement makes the sentence read better.&rdquo;
Or, if we take Feinsilver's message to heart, &ldquo;which it belongs
to....&rdquo;  In reference again to her VERBATIM article, I might
note that punctilious writers eschew *viable* and *viability*
nowadays, these words being suggestive of voguish
bureaucratese.

We all, however inevitably or embarrassingly, make mistakes.
But as Simon has so persuasively argued, that everyone
errs should not lead to general approval and encouragement of
erring.  Yet Mrs. Feinsilver's tone is iconoclastic, as if by
wrangling over Simon's punctuation and phraseology we can
dispose of Simon forever and invalidate all his linguistic
notions.  There is a strong case to be made for Simon as one of
the foremost stylists active today.  Not only are his insights into
language more erudite and provocative than those of Edwin
Newman or William Safire, our two other popular writers on
language, but also his weekly columns on film and theater are
consistently of a very high stylistic caliber.  It would be difficult
indeed to name many other writers whose style so well
exemplifies F.W. Bateson's defining characteristics of good
prose: 1) a preference for short sentences diversified by an
occasional very long one; 2) a tone that is relaxed and almost
colloquial; 3) a large vocabulary that enjoys exploiting the
different social and etymological levels of words; and 4) an
insistence on verbal and logical precision [*Essays in Criticism*,
January 1966].

No matter how disturbing it may be to some, we *need* an
articulate spokesman for prescriptivism.  At one point our chief
grammatical moralizer was Fowler; then came Partridge and
Gowers; we Americans had Follett; and now we have and need
John Simon.  The idea that some writing is graceful and some
graceless, some usages elegant and others boorish, some words
preferable to others will never become defunct, no matter how
furiously the descriptive linguists (or tarnished carpers) flail
about.

*[Brian A. Garner, Austin, Texas]*

## &ldquo;by Golley, J.W.&rdquo;
*John E. Guilday, Carnegie Museum of Natural History*

Do you suffer from &ldquo;on-the-job ennui&rdquo;?  The paragraphs
swim before your eyes, your head nods, then you suddenly jerk
back at the bottom of the page.  Although your eyes have
followed every line, your mind has shifted to neutral or
Acapulco, and there is nothing for it but to start again at the
point of departure, wherever that is.  All who survive by the
printed word recognize the syndrome.  But take heart: there is a
cure.

Some of us are doomed, apparently for the rest of our
working careers, to pore over endless lists of newly published
books, pamphlets, papers, catalogues, whatever, in a vain and
valiant effort to keep afloat.  But the lists grow longer and we
grow older.  Each entry tends to look like the one before it,
with the insidious effect that the eye darts down the page
looking for key words that it may or may not pick up.  What
lies between is not only lost but may as well never have been
published.  This pathetic attempt at efficiency gives rise to two
other consequences, neither of them desirable.  You slowly and
inevitably fall behind and find yourself scanning fewer potential
topics in categorized lists.  Your horizons narrow, if that is
what horizons do.

Be of good cheer, for soon you will be awaiting each new
bibliographic list with eagerness, avidly reading each and every
selection with a quantum leap in interest, efficiency, and all-around
*joie de vivre*.

Consider &ldquo;The Sexual Connection.  Mating the Wild Way,&rdquo;
by John Sparks, McGraw-Hill, 1978.  That title happened to be
where I was when I snapped back to consciousness one
particularly dull day.  I was amused.  My imagination was
sparked, and I drifted a little beyond Acapulco into fields
where I was certainly not being paid to be.  But Sparks and his
wild ways had planted a seed.  I continued down the list of
titles and encountered, with a little shiver, &ldquo;Effects of Off-road
Vehicles on Vertebrates in the California Desert,&rdquo; by Bury *et
al.,* and by the time I got to &ldquo;Wetting, Spreading and
Adhesion,&rdquo; by Padday, I was off!

Here is a list of titles culled without too much difficulty
within the past year.  Surely you can do as well.  I have even
been inspired to write a novel as a result.  The subject matter
will be of little relevance.  The title: *The Verdict*.  Here comes
the mailman.

Acha, P.N. and B. Szyfres.  &ldquo;Zoonoses and Communicable
Diseases Common to Man and Animals.&rdquo;  Pan American
Health Organization.  1980.

Ahlgren, C. E. &ldquo;Small Mammals and Reforestation Following
Prescribed Burning.&rdquo;  Journal of Forestry.  1966.

Angel, J. L. &ldquo;Early Skeletons from Tranquillity, California.&rdquo;

Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology.  1966.

Baylor, E. R. *et al*.  &ldquo;Water-to-air Transfer of Virus.&rdquo;  Science.
1977.

Beer, J. R. &ldquo;Bait Preference of Some Small Mammals.&rdquo;  Journal
of Mammalogy.  1965.

Behrends, P. R. &ldquo;Copulatory Behavior of *Dipodomys microps*
(Heteromyidae).&rdquo;  Southwestern Naturalist.  1981.

Biting, K. G. &ldquo;Gastronomic Bibliography.&rdquo;  1939.

Brainerd, C. J. &ldquo;Piaget's Theory of Intelligence.&rdquo;  Prentice-Hall.
1978.

Breder, C. M. Jr. *et al*. &ldquo;Modes of Reproduction in Fishes.&rdquo; Natural History Press. 1966.

Callender, C. &ldquo;Social Organization of the Central Algonkian
Indians.&rdquo;  Milwaukee Public Museum Publications in
Anthropology. 1962.

Cannon, P. J. &ldquo;Meteorite Impact Crater Discovered in Central
Alaska with Landsat Imagery.&rdquo;  Science. 1977.

Chew, R. M. &ldquo;Mammalian Predation on Honey Ants,
*Myrmecocystus* (Formicidae).&rdquo;  Southwestern Naturalist.
1979.

Cleveland, A. G. &ldquo;The Current Geographic Distribution of
the Armadillo in the United States.&rdquo;  Texas Journal of Science.
1970.

Clough, G. C. &ldquo;Local Distribution of Two Voles: Evidence
for Interspecific Interaction.&rdquo;  Canadian Field Naturalist.
1964.

Cook, R. J. *et al*.  &ldquo;Impact on Agriculture of the Mount St.
Helens Eruptions.&rdquo;  Science. 1981.

Doutt, J. K. &ldquo;Mountain Lions in Pennsylvania?&rdquo;  American
Midland Naturalist. 1969.

Eddy, S. &ldquo;How to Know the Fresh-water Fishes.&rdquo; 1969.

Fox, M. W. &ldquo;The Wild Canids, Their Systematics,
Behavorial Ecology and Evolution.&rdquo;  n.d.

Fox, R. and L. Tiger.  &ldquo;The Imperial Animal.&rdquo;  Natural History.
1977.

Gash, S. P. &ldquo;A Study of Surface Features Relating to Brittle
and Semi-brittle Fracture.&rdquo;  Tectonophysics.  1971.

Harms, W. R. *et al*.  &ldquo;The Effects of Flooding on the
Swamp Forest in Lake Ocklawaha, Florida.&rdquo;  Ecology.
1980.

Hatt, G. &ldquo;Moccasins and Their Relation to Arctic Footwear.&rdquo;
1916.

Keyfitz, N. &ldquo;Linkages of Intrinsic to Age-specific Rates.&rdquo;

Journal of the American Statistical Association.  1971.

Lovejoy, C. O. &ldquo;The Origin of Man.&rdquo;  Science. 1981.

Lusty, J. A. *et al*.  &ldquo;Oestrus and Ovulation in the Casiragua
*Proechimys quairae* (Rodentia, Hystricomorpha).&rdquo;  Journal
of Zoology. 1978.

Moller, E. &ldquo;The Chewing Apparatus.&rdquo; Acta Physiologica
Scandinavica. 1966.

Netboy, A. &ldquo;The Columbia River Salmon and Steelhead
Trout: Their Fight for Survival.&rdquo; University of Washington
Press. 1980.

Peek, J. M. *et al*. &ldquo;Elk Behavior Studied on Logging, Wildlife
Sites.&rdquo; Focus. 1976.

Pitt, D. C. (ed.). &ldquo;Development from Below.&rdquo; Aldine Publishing
Co. 1976.

Spinage, C. A. *et al*. &ldquo;Food Selection by the Grant's
Gazelle.&rdquo; African Journal of Ecology. 1980.

Starling, A. &ldquo;Enjoying Indiana Birds.&rdquo; Indiana University
Press. 1978.

Stern, J. T. *et al*. &ldquo;Electromyography of the Gluteal Muscles
in *Hylobates, Pongo*, and *Pan:* Implications for the Evolution
of Hominid Bipedality.&rdquo;  Americal Journal of Physical
Anthropology.  1981.

Stone, R. W. and E.M. Starr. &ldquo;Meteorites Found in Pennsylvania.&rdquo;
Pennsylvania Geological Survey.  1967.

Tester, J. R. &ldquo;Effects of a Controlled Burn on Small Mammals
in a Minnesota Oak-savanna.&rdquo;  American Midland
Naturalist. 1965.

Turnbull, K. E. *et al*. &ldquo;Testicular Descent in the Marsupial
*Trichosurus vulpecula* (Kerr).&rdquo;  Australian Journal of Zoology.
1981.

Waage, J. K. &ldquo;Dual Function of the Damselfly Penis: Sperm
Removal and Transfer.&rdquo; Science. 1979.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;5.  SEXUAL ASSAULT CLASSES FOR 7 &amp; 8 GRADE BOYS ON
APRIL 6 WITH MR. PLEDL IN MULTI-PURPOSE ROOM&rdquo; [From
*Teacher Bulletin*, March 30, 1982, Thomas Jefferson Middle
School, Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin.  Submitted by Robert F.
Perkins, who observes, &ldquo;It's important for the public schools to
give all students a solid foundation for the basics...&rdquo;]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard*

I was gassing away in *The Times* the other day about a
three-letter word in British English that is fraught with powerful
magical and negative connotations.  The word is not *God*,
but *gas*.  I rambled on about the sinister atmosphere of *gas* and
its derivatives and suggested that it was probably derived from
the use of gas, mostly chlorine, in the First World War.

Now, you cannot lay down the law about such vexed
scientific matters, particularly in *The Times*, without tempting
out of their laboratories some of the choice and master
scientists of our age.  Their correspondence has made me revise
my gassy opinions in some respects, which I here report for
VERBATIM.  I made the mistake of writing that the only poem to
gas that I knew of was one to the birth of KNO&#92;?&#92;3, written by
Erasmus Darwin, the grandfather and precursor of Evolution
Darwin, beginning: &ldquo;Hence orient Nitre owes its sparkling
birth.&rdquo;  One should never write &ldquo;only&rdquo; or use superlatives in
journalism.  They are red rags to bull-shitting correspondents.
Of the large and highly scented selection of *gas* poems I was
sent, I print the shortest and jolliest:

>Johnny, finding life a bore,  
Drank some H&#92;?&#92;2SO&#92;?&#92;4.  
Johnny's father, an M.D.,  
Gave him CaCO&#92;?&#92;3.  
Now he's neutralized, it's true,  
But he's full of CO&#92;?&#92;2.

I was put right about my etymology of *gas*.  I had followed
the conventional opinion that the word was invented by van
Helmont in the seventeenth century as the name for the occult
principle that he supposed to be present in all bodies.  He took
it from the Ancient Greek *chaos*: &ldquo;Halitum illum Gas vocavi,
non longe a Chao veterum secretum.&rdquo;  I am informed by an
eminent scientist that it was in fact the Swiss physician
Paracelsus (1493-1541) who first had the inspiration of adopting
the Ancient Greek *chaos* to mean 'atmospheric air.'  What
van Helmont did was to change the meaning to kinds of air
other than the air we breathe; and his stroke of genius was to
spell the Greek word phonetically, i.e., as he and other
southern Dutch-speakers would have spelled it, if, knowing no
Greek, they had heard it, and had had to write it down in
Dutch.

In the *Times* article I had mused that only in North
America did *gas* have positive connotations, mainly because of
your odd use of *gas* to mean the juice that makes cars go.  *To
step on the gas* is, I take it, a pretty cheerful act.  *What a gas!*,
meaning 'What larks, What fun,' may have come from laughing
*gas*, I supposed.  I have been sent a marvelously learned and
curious alternative etymology.  This suggests that the *gas* in
*What a gas!* is Old French taken to North America and
fossilized there.  *Gas* appears in Old French as the nominative
form of *gab*, with a meaning broadly similar to *jape*.  The *OED*
points out that it is not easy to make any phonetic connection
between the two words.  There was also the verb *gaber*.

If you look at that early exercise in vernacular parody &ldquo;Le
voyage de Charlemagne &agrave; J&eacute;rusalem et &agrave; Constantinople,&rdquo;
described as an Anglo-Norman poem of the twelfth century,
you will find: &ldquo;Par Dieu,&rdquo; &ccedil;o dist l'escolte, &ldquo;cist *gas* est bels et
bons....&rdquo;  The adjectives retained the nominative form also at
that date.  If you buy this learned and engaging etymology, you
are going to have to explain how they retained the nominative
form *gas* until after Columbus crossed the ocean blue, unless
we are going off on a loony voyage after previously unknown
Old French explorers who discovered America three centuries
before Columbus, in company with St. Brendan, the Vikings,
the Ancient Egyptians, and the rest of the splendid company
who have brought fame and fortune to their sponsors.

An American correspondent pointed out that *gas* in the
States—in addition to meaning petrol and occuring in &ldquo;What a
gas!&rdquo;—means what Brits refer to genteelly as *wind*.  He quoted
at me a sentence from *Be Young with Yoga*: &ldquo;Indiscriminate
combinations of foods make digestion very difficult and will
produce gas, bloating, and other discomforts.&rdquo;  I have met this
American *gas*, but have never been sure if it meant a fart, a
burp, or both.  Do not write.  I will look it up for myself.

I received charming and persuasive letters arguing that *gas*
has a kindlier ring for elderly Scots than for modern English.
Gas-lamps were lit by the &ldquo;leerie&rdquo; with his tall magic wand, as
the children followed him respectfully down the street.  &ldquo;The
gas,&rdquo; even if in a fish-tail burner, made reading possible after
parents had gone to bed; candles were considered dangerous
and damaging to eyesight.  &ldquo;Gassing&rdquo; was cheerful and harmless
gossiping.  And what parents disparagingly called &ldquo;that
*gassy* stuff&rdquo; was that most delicious of drinks, the American ice
cream soda.

I was reminded that in Peacock's *Nightmare Abbey* (1818)
Scythrop is &ldquo;that author of a treatise, called *Philosophical Gas;
or, a Project for a General Illumination of the Human Mind*.&rdquo;  I
agree that it is impossible to believe that Peacock was unaware
of and did not intend the ludicrous nature of this title.
Therefore it is impossible to believe that the ludicrous (as
distinct from the sinister) associations of the word *gas* only
date from the First World War.

I was sent a jolly story of the present chairman, originally
from Vienna, of Israel's broadcasting authority.  He was puzzled,
on receiving back his first essay while pursuing his legal
studies at Oxford, to find the word *gas* frequently penned in
the margins.  Requesting an explanation, he was told that it
stood for 'German Academic Style.'

All gas and gaiters, I dare say.  But it's good fun and, in its
quiet way, extending our knowledge of our infinitely arguable
language.

## Pairing Pairs No. 9

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Shoes that give some young girls a real lift.  
(b). Hearty contingent from New York City?  
(c). He gets only the sweet he merits.  
(d). Dame Sheep has it all together.  
(e). Shadow boxing?  
(f). Okay—he has the price of a ticket.  
(g). Is *The Birds* treacherous?  
(h). Play bridge to become aroused?  
(i). Special device for watching Persian fairies  
(j). Defendant opposed to ordinary squabble.  
(k). Doubly contemptible musical instrument.  
(l). Slippery scene.  
(m). Naval person.  
(n). Alley's just dessert.  
(o). Forget to put out the cat.  
(p). Where they wait for the flowers to grow.  
(q). Marcel reported heavily Zeus had it with Leda.  
(r). Impressionable leather pendulum.  
(s). Flagg or nut?  
(t). Taxi queue at night club.  
(u). Did Porter know film director?  
(v). Cockney camp follower to ask for a fight.  
(w). Patch.  
(x). Has it rung up for him?  
(y). Order of the day.  
(z). Swindler leads broker a merry dance.  
(1). Apple.  
(2). Array.  
(3). Baba.  
(4). Base.  
(5). Belly.  
(6). Cab.  
(7). Combat.  
(8). Con.  
(9). Corps.  
(10). Dancer.  
(11). Dessert.  
(12). Dutch.   
(13). Easily.  
(14). Enough.  
(15). Ewe.  
(16). Fare.  
(17). Feinting.  
(18). File.  
(19). Four.  
(20). Fowl.  
(21). Gardens.  
(22). Hazel.  
(23). Jacob's.  
(24). Jane.  
(25). Just.  
(26). Knighted:  
(27). Ladder.  
(28). Man.  
(29). Mary.  
(30). Nocturnal.  
(31). Omission.  
(32). Ophuls.  
(33). Order.  
(34). Peri.  
(35). Pie.  
(36). Plain.  
(37). Play.  
(38). Queue.  
(39). Rum.  
(40). Scope.  
(41). Ship.  
(42). Show.  
(43). Slide.  
(44). Spell.  
(45). Suede.  
(46). Swans.  
(47). Tango.  
(48). Tiff.  
(49). Vile.  
(50). Weigh.  
(51). Which.  

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or 18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the follwing: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market
Square, Aylesbury, Bucks, England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer*.

*N.B.:* To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either office,
we shall arrange to collect correct answers for 21 days, starting
with the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw
one winner from each office.

## Pairing Pairs No. 8

(a). No specific truck inspired Scottish song. (5, 37) Any Lorry.  
(b). Was spring drink kept in composer's catafalque?  (6, 9) Bach Bier.  
(c). WW II (U.S.) agency dimly sited. (43, 19) O.P.A. City.  
(d). Where secrecy reigns.  (44, 50) Queue Tea.  
(e). Bilabial flowers.  (52, 36) Two Lips.  
(f). Male mythological bird.  (10, 23) Bull Finch.  
(g). Uneven member of society or on third wheel?  (41, 22) Odd Felloe.  
(h). Celtic power from the wind.  (28, 25) Gael Force.  
(i). Giant steps evoke emotionless look.  (49, 48) Stony Stair.  
(j). A suitcase or influenza in California?  (33, 29) L.A. Grippe.  
(k). From the horse's mouth?  Negative!  (46, 40) Say Nay.  
(l). Carthusian potato cooker.  (26, 27) French Friar.  
(m). Top-ranking a.d.c. (24, 1) First Aide.  
(n). Change the acolyte—he gets a lift from church.  (2, 11) Altar Buoy.  
(o). Scapegoat ruins the picnic.  (3, 45) Ant Sally.  
(p). Musicians form a circle at forbidden nupitials.  (53, 7) Wedding Banned.  
(q). Damage from entering the wrong accommodation in the Pullman.  (8, 38) Berth Mark.  
(r). Kiss your relatives, or give them the boot?  (12, 32) Buss Kin.  
(s). Rules made by the R.C. bigshots.  (13, 35) Cannon Law.  
(t). Major L'Enfant had it.  (14, 31) Capital Idea.  
(u). Shoemaker takes final opportunity to intone incantations over his models.  (34, 15) Last Chants.  
(v). Tick off the playwright.  (16, 42) Check Off.  
(w). Saudi Arabian elegance (*U.S.*) (4, 17) Arab Chic.  
(x). Exploit the soda fountain beverage (*Br.*) (39, 47) Milk Sheik.  
(y). What the Trojans should have done before the Greeks entered.  (20, 30) Close Hoarse.  
(z). Tudor car used by cowards.  (18, 21) Chicken Coop.

The correct answer is (51) Thrown.  The solutions are given
below.  The winners of No. 8 will be announced in the next
issue.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;When James D. Watkins was growing up in Alhambra,
Calif., his mother would take him and his brother to nearby
Navy ports to watch the ships come in like cows at milking
time.&rdquo;  [From a &ldquo;Man in the News&rdquo;
profile by Phil Gailey, *N.Y. Times*, March 19, 1982,
p. B5.  Submitted by Daniel James, Ivoryton,
Connecticut, who suggests a solid lead medal for the
most inept simile of the year.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Chicago Manual of Style*](https://www.abebooks.com/Chicago-Manual-Style-13th-Edition-Revised/1289885675/bd)
13th Edition, (University of Chicago Press, 1969, 1982), ix + 738pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection.]

I am not entirely sure that what follows is properly in the
province of a style manual, but it is a source of confusion for
many writers and has given me pause on occasion, too.  The
problem is whether one uses *a* or *an* preceding certain
abbreviations, not knowing whether the reader is going to read
the abbreviation as an abbreviation or in its full form.  Certain
abbreviations are so well established as such that few people
will be likely to read them as full forms:

>FTD    —    Florists Telegraphic Delivery  
H.E.W.   —  (Department of) Health, Education and Welfare  
H.O.L.C.  — Home Owners Loan Corporation  
M.P.     —  Military Police (or Military Policeman)  
N.R.A.   —  National Recovery Act  
R and R  —  Relaxation and Rehabilitation (or Rest and Relaxation)  
S.O.P.   —  Standard Operating Procedure  

The only abbreviations pertinent to the problem are those that
start with the letters *f, h, l, m, n, r, s,* and *x*—that is, those that
would, when word-initial, require *a* but, when their names are
pronounced, require *an*.  Those listed above are probably more
often uttered as abbreviations—&ldquo;eff tee dee,&rdquo; &ldquo;aitch ee double-u,&rdquo;
&ldquo;aitch oh ell see,&rdquo; and so on.  But what about abbreviations
that are not quite so familiar?  It seems to me that the
abbreviation *s.a.s.e.,* for instance, is not yet widely established
for people to know whether to read it as &ldquo;self-addressed
stamped envelope&rdquo; or &ldquo;ess ay ess ee.&rdquo;  Do you write &ldquo;Please
enclose a s.a.s.e.&rdquo; or &ldquo;...an s.a.s.e.&rdquo;?  *The Chicago Manual of
Style* is not forthcoming on this subject, though it does take a
sensible position regarding such Cockneylike usages as &ldquo;an
hotel,&rdquo; &ldquo;an historical romance,&rdquo; etc., which it says are not good
form.

Anyone writing any matter for publication should have a
copy of this indispensable volume.  Even those who write for
scholarly publications and are exhorted to use the *MLA Style
Sheet* or some other, specialized guide should have a copy of
the *CMS*.  Among some of the valuable pieces of information
are conversion tables for the Wade-Giles system of transliterating
Chinese to the Pinyin system and vice versa (pp. 272,
273), and transliteration of Cyrillic and Greek (pp. 266 and
276—showing variations that occur for the former).  There is
scarcely any aspect of preparing a manuscript for printing—
including indexing, proofreading, etc.—that is not covered and
covered well.

Inevitably, I have found another omission; though it is not
particularly heinous, it should be noted by the editors for
inclusion in the 14th Edition.  It concerns indexing, which is
accorded ample space for the description of traditional procedures.
Despite the fact that there is a (new) section in the 13th
Edition dealing with automatic typesetting, its content is a
little sparse, and the materials are relatively naive.  What is
omitted in the indexing section is any mention of automated
indexing, which can be accomplished more or less completely
automatically form text in machine-readable form.  [See my
article, &ldquo;The Human Use of Human Indexers,&rdquo; *The Indexer*,
April 1980; a free copy will be sent on request to anyone
sending a (an?) s.a.s.e. to me at VERBATIM.]

The information contained in the paragraphs dealing with
computer-driven composing machines and keyboards is slightly
misleading.  For example, section 20.120 contains comments
about OCR (optical character recognition) devices but fails to
point out their high error factor and the extreme slowness of
their operation.  The more sophisticated (and expensive) devices
are said to be capable of &ldquo;learning&rdquo; any typeface and of
converting its character images into bytes, but, again, it
depends on whether one believes the advertisements or the
performance.

There is a great deal more to be said about automatic
typesetting than is even suggested in the *Chicago Manual*.  Lest
it be assumed that all that technical nonsense has no bearing
on styling a manuscript for the printer, I hasten to point out
that with the proliferation of word-processing equipment these
days, the typewriter may well be obsolescent, and, with the
cost of professional compositors' keyboarding bound to increase
in the coming years, it may not be long before publishers will
insist on submission of manuscript for publication in machine-readable
form, probably on 5&frac14;&rdquo; or 8&rdquo; diskettes (or on the high-density
micro-diskettes predicted for the near future as standard).
A 5&frac14;&rdquo; double-sided double-density diskette, costing only
about $4, can accommodate 360,000 characters of storage
(nominally)—that is, about 50,000 words.  It is not surprising,
then, that ten diskettes could contain a healthy novel in a form
that allows for fast, cheap duplication, easy storage, and, using
conversion apparatus already available and in use, the means
for rapid typesetting (including automatic page make-up) at
speeds of tens of thousands of characters per minute.

It is not my intention to write that segment of the *Style
Manual* here, only to point out that the coverage given is
niggardly, especially when one considers that many of those
functions formerly the province of the compositor are now
becoming the responsibility of the editor and often of the
author.

This is not to detract from what is in the *Manual*; it must
be conceded to be the most useful editorial tool available.
Every editor, every writer should have a good dictionary, a
good grammar of English, a good synonym dictionary (or
thesaurus), and a copy of the essential *Chicago Manual of
Style*.  A selection of the first three can be found in the Book
Club Catalogue; there is only one *Chicago Manual of Style*,
which we are now pleased to offer there as well.

*—Laurence Urdang*

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. BUNGALOW (Anagram A BLOWGUN)
5\. STAT-us
9\. ACID TEST (DICTATES)
10\. WEIGHT (THE WIG)
12\. SPIKE
13\. U-nused-TO
15\. OVER-spent-budge-T
17\. EASIER OPPONENTS (Anagram SO INEPT AS NO PEER)
20\. Debunker
22\. Twist
24\. Lolita
25\. Re-marker
26\. PA-rod-Y
27\. ASTERISK (STAR TYPE)

**Down**

1\. Bram Stoker
2\. IN SESSION (NOISINESS)
3\. Artless
4\. Obscure works
6\. The-me-NU
7\. Tight
8\. Sit (cite)
11\. Quit-E perfect
14\. IT ISN'T FREE (Anagram IF INTEREST)
16\. Gin rickey
18\. exul-T-ed
19\. Not fair
21\. eeL-E. R.
23\. Flap

## A Memorable Agreement
*Bernard L. Witlieb, Bronx Community College, CUNY*

Although mnemonic devices have existed since time immemorial,
none has been absolutely successful.

HOMES for the Great Lakes, Huron, Ontario, Michigan,
Erie, and Superior, is a popular but partial mnemonic success.
The acronymic aspect works, but the word *homes* has no
semantic connection to lakes.

>On Old Olympus' Tiny Tops,  
A Finn and German Viewed Some Hops.

is a couplet familiar to many medical students.  The first letters
of the words stand for the cranial nerves: olfactory, optic,
oculomotor, trochlear, trigeminal, abducens, facial, auditory,
glossopharyngeal, vagus, spinal accessory, and hypoglossal.
Again a partial sucess—the rhyme has no connection to what it
encodes.  In addition, the verse may strike some as being
nonsensical and lengthy, therefore hardly an aid to memory.

PALE GAS may suggest the miasma which envelops the
seven deadly sins: pride, avarice, lust, envy, gluttony, anger,
sloth, but the mnemonic has no direct semantic relationship to
the sins themselves.  And woe to the theologians or students
who substitute greed for avarice and ire for anger.  They must
sneer LIP EGGS or admire PIGS LEGS or some other nonce
variation, with an even greater distance between sound and
sense.

The ideal mnemonic device, then, should be acronymic,
concise, admitting of no significant variable, and revelatory of
what it represents.  Imagine what such a saying would do for
the teacher of grammar—the rule becoming clear and imprinting
itself on the students' minds.  Well, I've molded such a key
to knowledge which, alas, cannot appear in any &ldquo;publishable&rdquo;
grammar textbook.

Teachers of writing acknowledge that one truly significant,
hard to remedy problem is lack of subject-verb agreement, not
the *Neither my uncle, fourteen cousins, nor I (is, are, am) at
the picnic* exemplum, but a lack of agreement of a more basic
kind: if the subject is third person singular, the present tense
verb ends in -*s*.  For whatever reason, dialectal, poor auditory
discrimination, etc., often the final -*s* for some students does
not appear consistently in the spoken or written language.

The mnemonic device which leads to mastery of this
deficiency is simplicity itself:

>*HE SHITS.*

The sentence is short, memorable, and memorizable.  Furthermore,
it is an acronym for the third person singular and the
conjugated verb—*he, sh(e), it,* final -*s*.  And obviously HE
SHITS embodies subject-verb agreement.  The mnemonic
admits one significant variable: SHE HITS, which similarly
reinforces the agreement pattern.

This modest mnemonic has the directness Jonathan Swift
would have appreciated and exalted to poetic status.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Word Watcher's Handbook: A Deletionary of the Most Abused and Misused Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780595150694/Word-Watchers-Handbook-Deletionary-Abused-0595150691/plp)
Phyllis Martin, (St. Martin's Press, 1977, 1982), xi + 129pp.

We do not often review paperback books in these pages,
but enough copies of the first edition of this book have been&mdash;
sold to warrant a &ldquo;Revised and Enlarged Edition,&rdquo; so it&mdash;
appears to be of sufficient importance on that ground alone to
pay it some attention.  Despite encomiastic comments by
various newspaper reviewers and William Safire, as well as a
BIG BLURB from Ann Landers, I find the contents a mixed bag
of good and questionable advice, of straightforward and confusing
information, and of doubtful value.

Plunging, with epic convention, *in medias res*, we find
Pronunciation Pitfalls, a list of 300-odd words that are frequently
&ldquo;mispronounced.&rdquo;  I put that into quotation marks
because some of the pronunciations given are
mispronunciations:

>*bullion bul'. yun (u* as in *alumni*)
>
>*bouillion boo'. yun* (Who *says that?*  It is not even
an accurate French pronunciation.)
>
>*&aacute;* *[sic]* *la mode*,...
>
>*envelope en'.vah .l&omacr;p* if a noun; *en .vel'.up* if a
verb (The pronunciation is fine, but that is a misspelling
for the verb, if case you hadn't noticed.)
>
>*fianc&eacute;e fee.ahn'.s&amacr;.* (But *f&emacr;.&auml;n.s&amacr;'* is given on
page 110.)
>
>*foyer fwah.y&amacr;* was the original pronunciation,
although most dictionaries accept *foy'.ur.* (And,
indeed, Mrs.  Martin should have learned by now that
good dictionaries neither &ldquo;accept&rdquo; nor &ldquo;reject&rdquo;: they
report what people say.)
>
>*hors d'oeuvre awr'.durv'*.  Please note that you do
not pronounce the *s*.  [The French do not pronounce
the final *s* when they use the plural form.]  (Presumably,
the *s* referred to is that of *hors*, which, being a
preposition, has no plural.)

...and so on through the horrors.

Preceding these Pitfalls, which seem to be traps into
which the author has fallen as often as her prospective reader,
is a chapter on Usage.  Here we encounter what might be
termed the &ldquo;traditional&rdquo; approach to among (for three or more;
use *between* for two) which, it has been shown, simply doesn't
work when a set of three (or more) may have a relation
affecting only two at a time, reciprocally, as in the Triple
Alliance.  There are more:

>*A criterion* is a standard test by which something is
compared or measured.  (A quick check in a good dictionary
would have revealed its correct meaning.  And
does one *compare... by?*)
>
>*decimate* This is from the Latin *decem*, &ldquo;ten.&rdquo;  It
means, literally, to &ldquo;select by lot and kill one in
every ten.&rdquo;  Many people use it incorrectly to mean
&ldquo;the killing of a large number,&rdquo; or &ldquo;total destruction.&rdquo;
(They would certainly be incorrect if they did
*that*, for *decimate* is a verb, not a noun, and cannot
mean &ldquo;the killing....&rdquo;  That aside, there is no rule
that we have to use words in English in their literal
Latin sense, and a review of *decimate* in the *OED*
will reveal some very respectable citations for the
sense 'destroy' that antedate this bit of parroted pedantry.
And why not object to the spelling, too?  Latin
had *decem*; we have *decim-*.
>
>*draught* Chiefly British.  Pronunciation and meaning
identical to *draft*.  (Much more complicated than that
as to meanings.  As for &ldquo;identical&rdquo; pronunciation, the
British are likely to revolt.)
>
>*hung* A picture is *hung*.  A man is hanged.  (First,
how about giving women equal time on this one.
Second, a man can be *well hung*, which is more
than can be said about a woman.)
>
>*lit* The latest dictionaries sanction this usage as a
past tense form of to *light*.  (I would not characterize
the *OED* as one of the &ldquo;latest&rdquo; dictionaries, and its
editors found a citation in Shelley, which is good
enough for most people.)

...and so on.

Following Pitfalls is a chapter called Beyond the Basics, in
which the author has combined with her own list a list
published in William Safire's column in *The New York Times* of
&ldquo;Out-of-it Words&rdquo; and &ldquo;On-top-of-it Words.&rdquo;  The former are
ordinary words for ordinary things, the latter the terms used by
those who, presumably, are &ldquo;with it.&rdquo;  Accountably, the On-top-of-it
Words reek with jargon, euphemistic turns of phrase, and
what might best be called tomorrow's clich&eacute;s.  Here is a
sampling:

| OUT-OF-IT-WORDS        | ON-TOP-OF-IT WORDS              |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| bathrobe (for a woman) | *hostess gown or robe*          |
| butcher                | *meat cutter*                   |
| cleaning woman         | *domestic*                      |
| divorced               | *newly single*                  |
| idiot                  | *developmentally disadvantaged* |

...and so on.  Some of them are merely corrections or sensible
modernizations:

| OUT-OF-IT-WORDS       | ON-TOP-OF-IT WORDS                        |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |
| icebox                | *refrigerator* (I thought it was fridge.) |
| machine               | *automobile, car* (Does anyone say that?) |
| porch                 | *deck* (Not the same thing)               |
| Smithsonian Institute | *Smithsonian Institution* (Wrong name)    |
| Wimpleton             | *Wimbledon* (Pronunciation)               |

This is just plain silly—or should that be *ridiculous*?

By far the least useful part of the book is Reviewing
Foreign Menu Terms, in which Mrs.  Martin has adopted the
rather complicated, narrow system of phonetic transcription
used in the *Larousse French/English-English/French Modern
Dictionary*.  There follows a ten-page listing of items culled
from the menus of restaurants where the author doubtless
whiled away many happy hours with the editor of St. Martin's
Press, restaurants serving a *choix of coq au [sic] vin, biscuits*
[pronounced biskyi], *hu&icirc;tres* [pronounced yi:tr], and *boudin*.
The purpose of such a section, with its elaborate pronunciations,
is not clear till one learns from its introduction that its
idea comes from *Executive Etiquette*, another book published
by St. Martin's and offering, one must assume, security to those
taken to a French restaurant in the course of a job interview.
Presumably, the candidate is also taught the proper uses of
knife, fork, and spoon.

Well, you get the idea.  What else could you expect from
someone who writes:

>*Calvary* Place near Jerusalem where Christ was crucified.
I always remember the distinction between *Cal
vary* and *cavalry* by associationg *Calvin* (the great
Christian) with *Calvary* and the *cavalier* (which
comes from the word *horseman*) with *cavalry*.  The
sequence of letters does it for me.
>
>*cavalry* Has to do with horses.  See above.

Using that and other mnemonics, this could become the most
forgettable book of the year.  Perhaps it helps explain why we
ignore many of the books about language that are published
these days.

*—Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Muvver Tongue*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/muvver-tongue_robert-barltrop/821953/#edition=2564686&idiq=12531914)
Robert Barltrop and Jim Wolveridge, (The Journeyman Press, London, England, and West Nyack, N.Y., U.S.A.). 

This is a splendid book.  It is not only an in-depth study of
the eccentric idiom (linguistic freak?) known as Cockney
rhyming slang, but, much more than that, an illuminating
treatment of the social background of those who speak that
idiom, the working-class society which inhabits the East End of
London.  Cockney is not only a patois, but, say the authors, &ldquo;an
attitude of mind.&rdquo;  Rhyming slang is only an incidental.  A
glance at the index of any respectable library will reveal the
multiplicity of books about Cockney rhyming slang.  In most
cases, the subject is given light-hearted treatment, as though
this jargon were little more than food for variety turns (i.e.,
vaudeville acts).  This is the only book I have seen that goes
beyond the usually over-romanticized and too often parodied
idiom, to explore its social background.

To define some terms: *muvver* is Cockney for *mother* (just
as *bovver*, for instance, is Cockney for *bother*, and so on).  The
*v* sound for *th* as in *mother* and the *f* sound for *th* as in *thing*
are among the Cockney variations.  (After all, the Germans
pronounce their *v* as our *f* and their *w* as our *v*, and the French
don't bother to pronounce a great many of their letters of the
alphabet at all, so what's so funny about *v* or *f* for *th*?)

Next: rhyming slang.  This consists of a large number of
two- or three-word concoctions, the last word of which rhymes
with the word intended to be conveyed.  Thus: *boat race 'face';
daisy roots 'boots'; German bands 'hands'; loaf of bread 'head';
mince pies 'eyes'; plates of meat 'feet'; tit for tat 'hat'; trouble
and strife 'wife.'* But—and this is a very big but—to confuse the
issue, the rhyming word is almost invariably *omitted*, so that
we wind up with *daisies* for *boots, Germans for hands, loaf*
'head,' *minces* 'eyes', *plates* 'feet', *titfer (tit for)* 'hat'; the list
goes on and on and on.  For an exhaustive compilation, see *A
Load of Cockney Cobblers*, by Bob Alwin (Johnston &amp; Bacon
Publishers, London, 1971).  As a passing note, did you know
that the origin of *raspberry* for a derisive sound was Cockney
*raspberry tart?  Brewer* says: &ldquo; 'Raspberry' is *heart*, contracted
from 'raspberry-tart,' &rdquo; so *raspberry tart* apparently served
more than one purpose.

*The Muvver Tongue*, in scholarly depth and with affection,
explores many aspects of Cockney life: the family, manners
and moods, the proprieties, money matters, hospitality, vulgarity.
As only one example of the social approach, the authors
point out toilet humor and imagery as a recognizable aspect of
Cockney talk, not because Cockneys are innately coarse, but
because their living conditions have put the subject &ldquo;under
their noses,&rdquo; literally as well as figuratively.

The authors are products of the Cockney homeland of
East London, and the book is full of fun, vulgarity, and pride
of that part of the world.  In writing about its language, which
is their own, they destroy myths and misconceptions about
Cockney rhyming slang and demonstrate that it is not &ldquo;bad
English,&rdquo; but the idiom of a special working-class culture with
roots that go back more than 150 years.  It is a credit to the
authors, now in their sixties, that working-class bias is never
allowed to get in the way of scholarly, objective treatment,
which provides much of interest to the layman and invaluable
information for the specialist.

Norman W. Schur  
*Hawkhurst, Kent*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Einstein is wrong in his general theory of relativity, if
calculations by University of Arizona physicists are right.&rdquo;
[From' *The Los Angeles Times*, April 6, 1982.
Submitted by S. Jackson, Brisbane, Australia,
who comments, I thought he was dead!]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Enjoy the lady's wine and get a bag on.  (9)  
6\. Cycle when out of shape.  (5)  
9\. Contest for those who are in a wet pool.  (5, 4)  
10\. Gird for war; alternatively, put on a strong defense.  (5)  
11\. Finesse and skill needed for a drink in an explosive setup.  (6)  
12\. Shootin' irons appear when there's rage in the granges.  (8)  
14\. A vile mark for such a dire fate.  (4, 5)  
16\. Crossties on the tracks, all the ways out.  (5)  
19\. How do you feel? (5)  
20\. Badly and sadly shrunk. (9)  
21\. Spouse, though separated, is about to turn the tide and think it over.  (8)  
23\. Write on?  Right on, for the flag (6)  
26\. Let me return help given by various means. (5)  
27\. An old sex manual.  (4, 5.)  
28\. Barefaced gall.  (5)  
29\. It takes a firm step for mixed-up New York City to face the noise.  (9)

**Down**

1\. Weapons of a size worth firing.  (9)  
2\. Vigilant's the word if the Emergency Room team can detect this spark of life.  (5, 4)  
3\. Jog on, jog on, we've seen it all before.  (5)  
4\. Off base?  Keep a low profile.  (4)  
5\. Lackwits heard about everything so they can't be told anything.  (10)  
5\. Topsy-turvy peak to glue down into position.  (9)  
7\. Gunner who zeroes in on 'em, up in the air. (5)  
8\. Works for pots and pots, so I hear.  (5)  
13\. Food wagers may be financial assistance for new firms.  (10)  
15\. Maintain equipment and don't go off the rails.  (4, 5)  
17\. Being from London I throw a lot of weight around.  (9)  
18\. Type that sits, looking popeyed around the garden.  (9)  
21\. Opera heroine hits low C.  Not very original, is it?  (5)  
22\. Duck, or your goose is cooked!  (5)  
24\. Led on and coaxed to be relaxed after a social gathering.  (5)  
25\. Love damage suffered by poet.  (4)  

Answer will appear in the next issue.  Answer to No. 20 is on page 21.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v9n2_Autumn_1982)