--- 
title: "VOL IX, No 3 [Winter, 1983]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Southern Amerind Lexical Contributions
*Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia*

A very productive, albeit little known, source of loanwords
in English has been the Southern Amerind languages, i.e.,
languages spoken by the Indian tribes living south of the Rio
Grande and in the Caribbean area.  By some rather extensive
scanning of the word entries in *Webster's Third New International
Dictionary (MW3)*, I turned up 547 such loanwords.  A
scrutiny of every *MW3* word entry would almost certainly
increase that figure considerably.  However, I think that observations
about this sample of 547 words should be valid for the
totality of the Southern Amerind lexical contributions to English.
I should probably mention at this point that my exemplars
do not include the names of the literally hundreds of tribes
listed by *MW3* or any place names based on Southern Amerind
words.

Perhaps the most striking fact about these loanwords is
that, although there are or were literally hundreds of different
Indian tribes south of the Rio Grande and in the Caribbean,
only ten different languages account for 484 (88.5%) of my
examples.  These languages are

*Tup&iacute;-Guaran&iacute;:* A language spoken over an area from far
eastern Brazil to the Peruvian Andes and from the Guianas to
Uruguay.  The Tup&iacute; are a people of Brazil, especially of the
valleys of the Amazon, Araguaia and Xingu Rivers; the Guarani
inhabit Bolivia, Paraguay (Guaran&iacute; is one of Paraguay's two
official languages) and southern Brazil.  Of my 547 exemplars,
162 (29.6%) come from Tup&iacute;-Guaran&iacute; (133 from Tup&iacute;, 18 from
Guaran&iacute;, and 11 attributed by *MW3* to both).  *MW3* says that
91 of the Tup&iacute; loanwords entered English via Portuguese, 4 via
Spanish, 5 via both Spanish and Portuguese, 16 via French, 11
via New Latin, and 6 directly.  Of the Guaran&iacute; loanwords, 3
entered via Portuguese, 13 via Spanish, 1 via French, and 1
directly.  Tup&iacute; loanwords include such relatively familiar words
as *ai, ani, buccaneer, cashew, cayenne, cougar, manioc,
maraca, paca, petunia, tanager, tapioca, tapir*, and *toucan*.
Guaran&iacute; contributions include *agouti, cay*, and *jaguar*.

*Nahuatl:* the language of a group of peoples of Mexico and
Central America, including the Aztecs.  This language accounts
for 97 (17.7%) of my exemplars.  All but *ocelot*, which entered
via French, came to English via Spanish.  Among the best
known Nahuatl loanwords are *avocado, cacao, chicle, chocolate,
coyote, guacamole, istle, mescal, mesquite, peyote, pulque,
tamale*, and *tomato*.

*Taino:* an extinct language of a people that lived in the
Greater Antilles and the Bahamas, especially in Hispaniola.
Taino accounts for 62 (11.3%) of my exemplars, of which 55
entered English via Spanish, 2 via French, 1 via Portuguese, 3
via New Latin, and 1 directly.  The best-known Taino loanwords
include *barbecue, cassava, hammock, hurricane, mangrove,
potato, savanna*, and *tobacco*.

*Quechua-Aymara:* Quechua is a language spoken by the
people of central Peru, believed to be originally Aymara, and
by Amerinds in Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, and Argentina;
Aymara is spoken in Bolivia and Peru.  Quechua-Aymara
accounts for 63 (11.5%) of my exemplars (Quechua 59 and
Aymara 4).  Among the well-known Quechua loanwords are
*condor, gaucho, guano, jerky, llama, oca, puma, quinine*, and
*vicuna*.  Aymara has contributed *alpaca, chinchilla* and *pampa*.

*Cariban:* spoken by a group of peoples of northern South
America, the Lesser Antilles and the Caribbean coast of
Honduras, Guatemala, and British Honduras.  It accounts for 19
(3.4%) of my exemplars, of which 9 entered English via
Spanish, 3 via French, 1 via New Latin, and 6 directly.  The
best known include *canoe, manatee, peccary, pirogue* and
*yaws*.

*Araucanian:* spoken by an Indian people of north central
Chile and adjacent regions of Argentina.  It accounts for 17
(3.1%) of my exemplars, of which 15 entered English via
Spanish, 1 via Portuguese, and 1 via New Latin.  The only
relatively familiar loanword is *poncho*.

*Mayan:* spoken by a group of peoples of Yucat&aacute;n, British
Honduras, northern Guatemala, and the Mexican state of
Tabasco.  It accounts for 21 (3.8%) of my exemplars, of which 8
entered English via Spanish and the rest directly.  *Cenote* and
*cigar* (whence also, of course, *cigarillo* and *cigarette*) are the
best known Mayan loanwords.

*Arawakan:* spoken by a people formerly occupying most of
the Greater Antilles but now scattered in small numbers along
the coast of Guyana.  It accounts for 15 (2.7%) of my exemplars,
of which 6 entered English via Spanish, 1 via New Latin,
and the remainder directly.  Arawakan loanwords include
*cacique, cannibal, guava*, and *iguana*.

*Galibi:* spoken by a Carib people of French Guiana.  It
accounts for 15 (2.7%) of my exemplars, of which 5 entered
English via French, 4 via New Latin, 2 via Dutch, 1 via
Portuguese, and the other 3 directly.  None of the Galibi
loanwords is what could be termed widely known, even to
crossword puzzle fans, e.g., *cabassou, carapa, courlan, parinari,
peai, pipa, pirai, querimana, tamarin*, and *tinamou*.

*Carib:* spoken in northern Brazil, the Guianas, Venezuela,
Colombia, the Lesser Antilles and the Caribbean coast of
Honduras, Guatemala, and British Honduras.  It accounts for 12
(2.1%) of my exemplars, of which 6 entered English via
Spanish, 1 via French, 1 via New Latin, and the other 4
directly.  *Cayman* (or *caiman*) is the only Galibi loanword that
may be readily recognizable to an educated English-speaker.

Fourteen other Southern Amerind languages account for a
total of 18 (3.2%) of my exemplars.  *Mapuche*, spoken by an
Araucanian people of southern Chile, is the ultimate source of
5 of them: *maqui, peumas, pudu, quillai*, and *rauli*.  The other
13 languages have provided: *Allentiac*, *pichiciago*; *Calinago*,
*manjak*; *Cuna,* *chicha*; *Haitian Creole,* *bocor;* *Huichol,* *hikuli;*
*Kekchi,* *kelep;* *Maipure,* *arrau;* *Mom,* *chiman;* *Miskito* or
*Mosquito,* *dory;* *Opata,* *saguaro;* *Quiche,* *tala;* *Tarahumara,*
*rutuburi;* and *Yaqui,* *pascola*.

The remaining 45 of my exemplars are attributed by *MW3*
simply to &ldquo;a native name in &mdash;&rdquo; (13 in the Guianas, 7 in the
West Indies, 6 in South America, and 4 in Central America) or
to &ldquo;an Indian word&rdquo; without reference to the precise area
involved.  The only words in this group that are readily
recognizable are *grouper, papaw* (or *papaya, papaia, pawpaw*),
and *yucca*.  Even crossword puzzle fans are unlikely ever to
have encountered such words as *manbarlak, morabukia,
yetapa, yariyari, haiari, kakarali*, and *calolu*, to cite only a few.

The largest number of my 547 exemplars entered English
via Spanish, namely 302 (55.2%), followed by 103 (18.8%) via
Portuguese.  French was the channel for 37 (6.7%), New Latin
for 32 (5.8%), and Dutch for 3 (.5%).  Although Spaniards,
Portuguese, and to a much lesser extent, Frenchmen were the
primary explorers and colonizers of the regions inhabited by
the Southern Amerinds, a surprisingly large number—70
(12.7%)—of my exemplars entered English directly.

In some cases, the Southern Amerind loanwords acquired
by English through the filter of Spanish, Portuguese, French,
and New Latin had already passed through another language.
For example, of the words acquired from Spanish, the latter
had previously borrowed two of them from Portuguese and one
from French.  The same phenomenon (if I may call it that)
applies to the other languages involved.  Portuguese had earlier
borrowed two of its words from Spanish; French, seven from
Spanish and six from Portuguese; and New Latin, eight from
Spanish, six from Portuguese, and three from French (in the
case of one word, *caretta*—a genus of marine turtles—French
had already adapted it from the Spanish *carey*, based on a
Taino word).

As is perhaps not too surprising, not all of the Southern
Amerind loanwords on my list are totally Amerind.  *Pulqueria*,
for example, consists of a Spanish ending added to *pulque*,
derived from Nahuatl *poluihqui* or *puluihqui* 'decomposed or
spoiled' (a not inappropriate designation, since pulque spoils 24
to 36 hours after its preparation).  The Spanish diminutive suffix
*-illo* (or *-illa*) also appears in a number of my exemplars, for
example, *chinchilla, coyotillo, huajillo, mamoncillo, ocotillo*,
and *popotillo*, as well as *cigarillo*, based on *cigar*, which is the
Spanish version of the Mayan *si'c* 'tobacco' (the French
diminutive suffix *-ette* added to *cigar* gives us, of course,
*cigarette*).  Another Spanish suffix, *-ero*, appears in *pampero*,
based on the Quechua-Aymara loanword *pampa*.  A French
suffix accounts for part of *buccaneer*, which derives from
*buccan* (or *bucan* or *boucan*), a French version of the Tup&iacute;
*makem*, meaning a wooden frame for roasting, smoking, or
drying meat over a fire.  In French, a *boucanier* was a person
who so prepared meat; eventually the word, which became
*buccaneer* in English, came to mean a freebooter or pirate
because of the habit of such persons to use a *buccan* to cure
their meat.

English words and suffixes also form part of some of my
exemplars.  *Wood* and *grove*, for example, are found in
*macawood* and *mangrove*, based on, respectively Tup&iacute; and
Taino words.  English adjectival suffixes appear in *papayaceous*
and *guaniferous*.  New Latin or International Scientific Vocabulary
(ISV) elements appear in such words as *guanidine, guanine,
guanisine, guanyl, guaiacol, papainase, papayotin,
papayaceae*, and *quinine*.

The European (Spanish, Portuguese, French, Dutch) versions
of the Southern Amerind words that were borrowed are,
in the main, very close to their Amerind originals, although
allowance must be made, of course, for the phonetic demands
of the various languages involved.  Nahuatl words ending in *-atl,
-itl*, and *-otl*, for example, generally ended up in Spanish as
words ending in *-ate, -ite*, and *-ote*, e.g., *coyote* from *coyotl,
otate* from *ottatl, camachile* from *cuauh-mochitl*.  The Tup&iacute;
*acaju* became the Portuguese *caju*, which English borrowed as
*cashew*.  Other words that underwent changes include, to cite
only a few:

>*agouti* from *acuti* Tup&iacute;)                 
*ipecac* from *ipeksaguene* (Tup&iacute;)  
*burgao* from *perigoa* (Tup&iacute;)              
*abussu* from *cacahuatl*)                         
*istle* from *ichtli* (Nahuatl)  
*cacao* from *cacahuatl* (Nahuatl)                          
*jacamar* from *jacama-ari* (Tup&iacute;)                            
*cass&aacute;va* from *ca&ccedil;abi* (Taino)       
*jararacussu* from *jararaca-*  (Tup&iacute;)
*cayenne* from *kyinha* (Tup&iacute;)               
*wassu* (Tup&iacute;)  
*chicle* from *chictli* or *tzictli*  (Nahuatl)    
*petunia* from *petyn* or *petyna* (Tup&iacute;)                          
*chocolate* from *xocatl* (Nahuatl)                          
*pisote* from *pitzotl* (Nahuatl)  
*rauli* from *ruylin* or *ruili* (Mapuche)  
*condor* from *kuntur*  (Quechua)                                                                   
*gravata* from *carawata* or *Curuwata* (Tup&iacute;)                     
*tule* from *tollin* or *tullin* (Nahuatl)  
                                    
These are only some of the examples that could be cited.
Perhaps the best illustration of the changes undergone by a
Southern Amerind loanword in its voyage into English began as
the Tup&iacute; *suasuarana* or *&ccedil;u&ccedil;uarana* 'false deer,' from *suasu* or
*suusa* 'deer' and *rana* 'false' (from its color).  In Portuguese it
became, variously, *cuguardo, cuguacuara*, and *cuguacano*.
French borrowed it as *couguar*, probably influenced by *jaguar*.
In English it became *cougar*.

Of the 477 Southern Amerind loanwords on my list that
English acquired through a European language, most entered
English in the same form they had in the contributing European
language.  The keyword here is *most*, for there are
exceptions.  *Avocado*, for example, is the English version of the
Spanish *aguacate*, derived from the Nahuatl *ahuacatl*, a short-ended
form of *ahuacacuahuitl* meaning, literally, 'testicle tree,'
from *ahuacatl* 'testicle,' and *cahuitl* 'tree,' so called from its
use as an aphrodisiac.  Another good example is *sacahuiste,
sacahuista*, or *sacaguista*, the English version of the Spanish
*zacahuiscle*, derived from Nahuatl *zacatl*.

In many cases (at least three dozen of my exemplars),
English recognizes variant spellings of the Southern Amerind
loanwords.  The top spot is taken by *tania*, a plant name which
entered English via French (the origin is obscure; it may be
Arawakan, Cariban, or Tup&iacute;, for which *MW3* also gives the
variants *tanier, tannier, tannia, tanya*, and *tanyah*.  Loanwords
with four recognized variant spellings include *guacimo,
guasima, guacima, huasima* (Taino); *manioc, manioca,
mandioc, mandioca* (Tup&iacute;); *papaw, pawpaw, papaya, papaia*
(precise Amerind language unknown); *piassava, piasaba, pias-saba,
piasawa* (Tup&iacute;); and *tacamahac, tacamahaca, tacama-hack,
takamake* (Nahuatl).  A number of others have three
recognized variant spellings, for example:

>*bacuri, bacury, bakuri* (Tup&iacute;)      
*ouricuy, ouricuri, aricuri* (Tup&iacute;)  
*burgao, burgo, borgo* (Tup&iacute;)     
*cabuja, cabuya, cabulla* (Taino)                  
*peccary, pecari, pecary* (Cariban)  
*calpulli, calpolli, calpul* (Nahuatl)                
*posol, posole, pozole* (Nahuatl)  
*charqui, charquy, jerky*  (Quechua)                 
*quetzal, quetzal, quesol* (Nahuatl)  
*cherimoya, cherimoyo*, *cherimoja* (Nahuatl)                    
*sapucaia, sapucaja*, *sapucaya* (Tup&iacute;)  
*guaiacum, guajacum*, *guayacan* (Taino)                       
*vizcacha, viscacha, viscache* (Quechua)  
*hicatee, hicotee, hicotea* (Taino)

Those with two variant spellings are too numerous to list.

When European explorers and colonists first arrived in the
Western Hemisphere, what they needed most, in the linguistic
field, were words for the unknown species of plant and animal
life they encountered.  No doubt many existing words of their
respective languages were pressed into service, but many new
words were borrowed or adapted from native Amerind
tongues.  This is certainly reflected by the meanings of my 547
exemplars: 169 (30.8%) denote various species of trees, shrubs,
and vines; 40 (7.3%), various mammals; 40 (7.3%), various
species of birds; 34 (6.2%), various kinds of fruits, vegetables,
and condiments; 18 (3.2%), various fish and shellfish; 16 (2.9%),
various reptilian species, including snakes, crocodiles, and
turtles; 9 (1.6%), various insects; and 12 (2.1%), various beverages,
alcoholic and otherwise.  These eight categories account
for 367, or roughly 67%, of my exemplars.  Admittedly, they are
mostly words that the average English-speaker is unlikely ever
to have encountered in any context, even though they all do
rate an entry in *MW3*.  Some individual words in most,
although not necessarily all, of the categories have already been
cited in this article, but most of the loanwords concerned must
be considered exotic by any standard.  I can illustrate the point
best, perhaps, by citing three loanwords in each category (the
Amerind language source of each word is shown in
parentheses):

trees, shrubs, vines: *bakupari* (Tup&iacute;), *caraipai* (Tup&iacute;),
*parinari* (Galibi)

mammals: *cacajao* (Tup&iacute;), *guariba* (Tup&iacute;), *saimiri* (Guarani)

birds: *anhinga* (Tup&iacute;), *guanay* (Quechua), *mitu* (Guarani)

fruits, vegetables, condiments: *chayote* (Nahuatl), *jagua*
(Taino), *tallote* (Nahuatl)

fish, shellfish: *arapaima* (Tup&iacute;), *guavina* (Tup&iacute;), *querimana*
(Galibi)

reptiles: *arrau* (Maipure), *jacare* (Tup&iacute;), *matamata* (Tup&iacute;)

insects: *chigoe* (Cariban), *sauba* (Tupi), *pinacate* (Nahuatl)

beverages: *cassiri* (Carib), *guarana* (Tup&iacute;), *sotol* (Nahuatl)

The remaining exemplars fall into various categories,
including the following (two representative loanwords are given
for each category):

boats: *cayuco* (indefinite), *pirogue* (Cariban)

buildings: *jacal* (Nahuatl), *chullpa* (Aymara)

colors, dyestuffs: *annatto* (Cariban), *chili* (Nahuatl)

drugs, chemicals: *caroba* (Tup&iacute;), *oorali* (Carib)

fibers: *cabuja* (Taino), *caroa* (Tup&iacute;)

garments: *huipil* (Nahuatl), *llautu* (Quechua)

gums, saps: *balata* (Cariban), *copaiba* (Tup&iacute;)

household items: *cacaxte* (Nahuatl), *jicara* (Nahuatl)

musical instruments: *huehuetl* (Nahuatl), *maraca* (Tup&iacute;)

persons: *caboclo* (Tup&iacute;), *kalina* (Carib)

topographic terms: *pongo* (Quechua), *talpatete* (Nahuatl)

weapons: *atlatl* (Nahuatl), *macana* (Taino)

miscellaneous: *nanduti* (Guarani), *quipu* (Quechua)

The &ldquo;persons&rdquo; category merits a few special comments.  It
includes, among others, seven words derived from Quechua
which reflect the structured, hierarchical society that existed
among the Incans.  There are, first of all, *curaco* (Indian noble)
and *palla* (Indian princess), followed by *guaso* (agricultural
laborer) and *yanacona* (serf).  The other three words all have a
somewhat deprecatory meaning: *chino* (woman of mixed
blood), *mitimae* (member of a race conquered by the Incans),
and *chuncho* (an &ldquo;uncivilized&rdquo; jungle native).

I did not include religious terms in the secondary categories
listed above, but that does not mean such Southern
Amerind loanwords do not exist.  Rather, I decided they
merited more specific discussion.  My 547 exemplars include 15
such words.  Although none is comparable to or as well known
as the Northern Amerind *manitou*, they do include *balam*
(Mayan), a supernatural being; *chaac* (Mayan), a native god;
*chacmol, chacmool* (Mayan), a native god; *kanaima* (Nahuatl),
an evil spirit; *zemi* (Taino), 'spirit or fetish'; and *zip* (Mayan), a
god.  They also include 4 words for a 'medicine man, shaman,
witch doctor,' or call him what you will: *bocor* (Haitian Creole),
*chairman* (Mom), *machi* (Araucanian), and *peai* (Galibi).  As for
the other religious terms, 2 are Nahuatl: *teocalli* 'temple' and
*teopan* 'temple grounds'; 2 are Quechua: *huaca* or *guaca* 'an
ancient Peruvian sacred object, such as a mountain, animal,
shrine, or artifact, inhabited by a god or spirit' and *huaco* or
*guaco* 'a pre-Columbian relic of Peru,' as an object discovered
in a tomb; and one is Mayan: *cenote* 'a natural well or sinkhole
into which sacrificial offerings were thrown during ceremonies.'
(The *cenote* at Chichen-Itza in the Yucat&aacute;n is world-renowned.)

Finally, mention must be made of the loanwords having
what may be called a technical connotation.  The Mayans,
noted for their calendrical skills, have contributed *haab* 'year'
and *tun* 'a year of 360 days composed of 18 months *(uinal)* of
20 days each, to which was added a period of five nameless
days *(uayeb)* to make a 365-day year'; *katun* '20 years'; *baktun*
'400 years'; and *pictun* '8000 years.'  Another Mayan calendrical
term to be found in the *MW3* is *tzolkin* 'a period of 260
days.'

The fields to which the other Southern Amerind technical
terms apply are varied.  *Pian* (Tup&iacute;-Guaran&iacute;) and *yaws* (Cariban)
are names of diseases; *mitote* (Nahuatl), *paixtle* (Nahuatl),
and *rutuburi* (Tarahumara) are names of dances; and *hurricane*
(Taino), *pampero* (Quechua-Aymara), and *puna* (Quechua) are
meteorological terms.  *Sambaqui* (Tup&iacute;-Guaran&iacute;) is a term for a
certain type of archaeological refuse heap.  *Tepetate* (Nahuatl) is
a synonym for caliche, the nitrate-bearing gravel or rock of the
sodium nitrate deposits of Peru and Chile, while *manjak*
(Calinago) is a type of asphalt found in Barbados.  *Guano* (from
the Quechua *huanu* 'dung') is well known as a type of
fertilizer, rich in phosphates and nitrogen, that is simply bird
dung.  Finally, I will cite *jaborandi* (Tup&iacute;), 'the dried leaves of a
rutaceous shrub, *Pilocarpus jaborandi*, that are a source of
philocarpine,' and *pataua* (Tup&iacute;) 'a fatty oil similar to olive oil
obtained from the fruit of a Brazilian palm.'

As this discussion clearly illustrates, the lexical contributions
of the Southern Amerind languages have been primarily
to Spanish and Portuguese and only secondarily to English.  I
can only speculate on how many Southern Amerind loanwords
are to be found in Spanish and Portuguese, at least in the
versions spoken in Spanish America and Brazil.  They undoubtedly
include a large number of loanwords that have never
found their way into English.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/SUPPLEMENT-OXFORD-ENGLISH-DICTIONARY-VOLUMES-Volume/30663200790/bd)
R.W. Burchfield, ed., (Volume III O-Scz, Oxford University Press), 1579pp.

The logophiles and wordsmiths who are the readers of
VERBATIM are likely to find this the most entertaining as well as
the most important book published this year.  We have now
reached the three-quarter stage of one of this century's great
works of lexicographical scholarship, proportionately as far as
Sir James Murray reached in the original *OED* before he died
in 1915.  Murray himself was responsible for the installments
covering words beginning with *O*, which appeared between
1902 and 1909.  Meanwhile Henry Bradley was working on *S,*
the most productive initial letter of the alphabet.  He reached
the words beginning with *Sc* in 1911.  This penultimate volume
of Burchfield's *Supplement* treats 18,750 words, divided into
28,000 senses, which have come into the language since the
founding fathers toiled in their scriptorium or which (e.g.,
*Peisitratid*) slipped through their net at the time.  More than
142,500 illustrative quotations map the growth of the words
throughout the century, starting from their first appearance in
a printed source.  As always, the Oxford lexicographers have
hunted for their quotations among the best writers of the
century as well as the technical innovators on the Wild West
frontiers of the language, so browsing is like reading an
anthology of great and witty writers of the twentieth century.

To attack such a majestic Establishment exercise may
seem a bit like piling Pelion on Ossa, or Ossa on Pelion if you
prefer Virgil's order, to turf the gods out of Olympus.  But it
has been done.  There was arcane Structuralist criticism in *The
Times Literary Supplement*, which got at not just Burchfield
but Murray himself for arranging their dictionary in alphabetical
order rather than by categories and deep structures.  The
trouble with some Structuralists who specialize in linguistics in
the United Kingdom is that they have retreated into a private
ivory tower impenetrable by outsiders.  So have some academics
in philosophy, which used to be and ought to be the queen of
the sciences.  Of all scholars, philosophers and linguists ought to
be able to express their important and often difficult ideas in
English accessible to the intelligent layman.  What sort of
&ldquo;ought&rdquo; is that, pray, Philip?  Why, the intelligent layman's, I
hope.

I have heard more damaging criticism of the *OED* than
that expressed by the silly Structuralists.  This is that by
concentrating on printed sources, the *Oxford Dictionary* misses
the most vigorous and volatile part of the language in the
second half of the twentieth century: the spoken word.  Randolph
Quirk's monumental Survey of the English Language at
University College, London, spends a lot of time and money
recording speaking at different levels and in different contexts,
to get at the spoken as well as the written word.

I believe that the criticism of the *OED* for neglecting
spoken English is largely mistaken.  It seems to me that a new
word or new use is written down somewhere almost as soon as
it is coined.  Even in *The Times*, which is linguistically though
not politically conservative, I observe reporters and reviewers
trying to sneak into their copy the latest slang or vogue word
from the disco or the university junior common room.  Journalists,
even on *The Times*, are neophiliacs.  Think how much more
receptive to the latest trend in spoken English must be the
mass-circulation newspapers and the top music and cinema
magazines, which sell themselves by pretending to be more up
to date than tomorrow.  I can detect no evidence that this
volume of the *Supplement* is starved of the spoken word.  It
deals learnedly with such demotic spoken words as *Oo-er*, an
English expression of surprise, *Orl right, outasight*, and *polis*,
the Glaswegian pronunciation of *police*.  Lexicographers have to
make a judgment about what slang is so ephemeral that they
can leave it out.  Maybe they are sometimes mistaken, but not
often.  Nor can we get at them, I think, for neglecting other
mansions of the English house than the British.  It is true that
the dictionary is edited and published from Oxford, but the
editor in chief is a New Zealander, and his staff consists of a
mixed team from all round the English-speaking world.  This
volume is rightly strong on black English, originating mainly
from the United States, from *Oreo* to *righteous moss* and the
slow sexy dance called a *scronch*.  Black English is a growth
area.  But it also includes new Eskimo English, new Hawaiian
English, and accretions to the language from all over the world.

On the other hand, I have seen criticism that the dictionary
errs by recording literary nonce words from writers like
Joyce, words that are never going to grow into regular use in
the language.  They are at it again in this volume, with
everything from Beckett's *prosticiutto* 'a female prostitute
regarded metaphorically as an item on a menu' to *ringround-about*
to 'surround,' from *Ulysses:* &ldquo;The faithful hermetists
*ringroundabout* him.&rdquo;  The *OED* is surely right to record even
absurd nonesuch words in our great writers, because they are
going to be of interest to the coming centuries.  Deciding who
is a great writer is one of the creative but ticklish functions of a
historical lexicographer.  But I do not think that any substantial
critic is going to object to the selection of Joyce.

It is unkind to draw attention to this.  But I have found
one misprint, a &ldquo;*Finegans Wake*&rdquo; in the illustrative quotation
for *quark*.  The same entry prints the correct spelling twice.
Enough.  I wish we had space to go into the treasury of slang,
from *pants rabbit*, insouciant American army slang for a 'body
louse,' to *parp*, invented by Enid Blyton as the voice of
Noddy's car, a word that has caught on.  I am astonished by the
age of some trendy slang.  The first citation of *preppy* is in 1900.     George Eliot's publisher wrote to her in 1877 about &ldquo;a
steady ongoing thing.&rdquo;  The dictionary is as usual magisterially
dismissive of folk etymologies.  I am afraid that *posh* does not
come from 'port outward, starboard home,' the derivation
approved by a hundred radio programs.  No documentation
acceptable to the *OED* editors has been found for the mirage
that *O.K.* represents an American Indian word *oke* meaning 'it
is,' or French *au quai*, or a West African word brought to
America by slaves, or an abbreviation of &ldquo;Old Kinderhook.&rdquo;  I
am afraid that it is not more complicated than the first letters
of the jocular &ldquo;orl korrect.&rdquo;  In this as in everything else,
Oxford rules, O.K.?

*Philip Howard*

## Of Chuffs, Topers, and Queans
*Barbara Sarkesian, North Scituate, Rhode Island*

>&ldquo;*Nothing, surely, is more alive than a word*.&rdquo;
>
>—J. Donald Adams

With all due respect to Mr. Adams, there are a number of
words that could be considered no longer among the living.
These are both words that have gone completely out of fashion
over the years and those whose original meanings have
changed.  Perhaps it's only nostalgia for the &ldquo;good old days,&rdquo;
but we must admit that these obsolete words and meanings did
have a certain straightforward charm.

From an early (1829) *Speller and Definer* (&ldquo;Or, Class-Book
No. 2, Designed to Answer the Purposes of a Spelling-Book,
and to Supersede the Necessity of the Use of a Dictionary as a
Class-Book&rdquo;) here are some colorful words and definitions of
another day:

*abortion*—miscarriage

*alcohol*—rectified spirits

*backfriend*—a secret enemy

*bewilder*—to lose in pathless places

*blinkard*—one who has weak eyes

*brunette*—woman with brown skin (Says nothing about hair)

*chuff*—a blunt clown

*chum*—a chamber fellow

*crime*—a great fault

*dandruff*—scurf of the head

*devil*—a fallen angel

*ding*—to dash with violence

*dirge*—a mournful ditty (Ditty?)

*emotion*—a disturbance of mind

*errand*—a message (Note: The message itself)

*exist*—death

*fabulous*—full of fable

*flavour*—odour

*gloom*—imperfect darkness

*housewife*—a female economist

*hunk*—a miser

*imp*—a puny devil

*infant*—a child under seven

*jade*—a bad woman

*jangle*—to quarrel

*jole*—the cheek

*kimbo*—crooked

*kiss*—to salute with the lips

*lubber*—a sturdy drone

*luncheon*—a handful of food

*melancholy*—a kind of madness (A bit strong?)

*morals*—the practice of the duties of life

*nickname*—a name given in contempt

*oakum*—ropes untwisted

*obscene*—disgusting

*passion*—a violent commotion of the mind

*pickthank*—an officious person

*pie*—a crust baked with something in it

*pill*—a small ball of medicine

*quean*—a low, worthless woman

*reverie*—loose musing

*romp*—a rude girl

*schedule*—a small scroll

*scull*—the brainpan

*stingo*—old strong beer

*toper*—a drunkard

*town*—a large collection of houses

*usher*—an assistant teacher

*uxorious*—dotingly fond of a wife

*valetudinarian*—one very careful of his health

*villain*—a wicked wretch

*wafer*—a paste to close letters with

*yelk*—the yellow part of an egg

*you*—the plural of thou

*youth*—the third stage of life

The author of this *Speller and Definer* notes that his
purpose is to provide a &ldquo;valuable assistant in acquiring knowledge
of the English language.&rdquo;  However, he takes pains to
point out that where he is wrong in his endeavor, he &ldquo;has been
misled by acknowledged authorities...&rdquo;

Source: E. Hazen, *The Speller and Definer*, New York: 1829


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

*&ldquo;Teachers Only—Comedy.*  Diana (Lynn Redgrave) is in
hot water over an interview in the school literary magazine in
which she revealed her candid views on premartial sex.&rdquo;  [From
*TV Guide*, Springfield-Chicopee-Holyoke Edition, 23 September
1983, p. A-96.  *Is that what is engaged in by the opposite of
a camp follower?*]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;[The Duke of Edinburgh] criticized the importuning of
more than 300,000 parrots into the United States every year,
asking: 'Are there really quite so many people who see
themselves as Long John Silver?' &rdquo;  [From *The Times*, 23
September 1982, p. 6.  *Perhaps they beg to differ*...]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

The name of a computer products company in England
reflects—at least metaphorically—the growth of that industry: it
is called *Fungus*.  One of its representatives is Andy Trollope.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

For American Readers Only: &ldquo;New Life for British Ass&rdquo;
[Headline on editorial in *The Times*, 11 September 1982, p.7.
*The reference is neither to the Rump Parliament nor to Britons'
sexual proclivities but to the British Association for the
Advancement of Science*.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: *Benedicta*
Reinhold Aman, ed., 12pp, qtrly, 1982. By Dr. Reinhold Aman, 331 South Greenfield Avenue, Waukesha, Wisconsin 53186, U.S.A.

>What is rude, ribald, scurrilous, raunchy, funny, uninhibited,
iconoclastic, dirty, and the best sociolinguistic catharsis
in print?
>
>*Benedicta!*

Reinhold Aman, who could probably qualify as the linguist's
Archie Bunker (but might deplore the label), has now
arrived with *Benedicta*, Son of *Maledicta*.  *Benedicta* is a
quarterly newsletter intended to curb the frustrations of the
semiannual *Maledicta* addicts who cannot wait for six months
between issues.  J.P. Donleavy looks like a milquetoast in
comparison with Aman's forthrightness, though some may
think &ldquo;forthwrongness&rdquo; the more appropriate term.  It takes
balls to publish this sort of thing, and some of *Maledicta's*
testimonials come from people whose language used to be
somewhat strained because of their inability to utter four-letter
words—until they exposed themselves to the unutterably ineffable
articles published by its editor.  No dashes or asterisks in
*Benedicta*, either; not a dash is to be seen.  Aman sells it like it
is: all out in the open.

I know someone whose ancient grandmother, when she
became senile, merely scrunched down among the shawls in
the armchair alongside her bed and, with the most benign
expression on her face, uttered a never-ending litany of foul
language.  When I first learned of this phenomenon, I was
shocked—you know, sweet old ladies simply don't *know* such
language!  But later on, reminded of the Paul Bunyan tale of
the winter of the blue snow, I concluded that the old lady's
brain had finally thawed, releasing all those pent-up, frozen
words and expressions she had been storing in her mind all
those years.

Well, between *Maledicta* and *Benedicta*, the winter of the
blue snow has passed, and, with the thaw, it can now be
revealed what turned the snow blue.  The slur, especially the
ethnic slur, seems to find its most popular expression in what
are called Polish jokes in America and Irish jokes in England.
That is where the Archie Bunker in all of us comes out.
Watching Carroll O'Connor on TV is not very different from
reading parts of *Maledicta*.  The main difference is that Dr.
Aman is an observer, a collector, and a reporter.  (If he isn't, he
is worse than Father Coughlin and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn
rolled into one.)

The line he walks is a thin one: on the one side, humor (in
which, they say, there is always a smattering of truth); on the
other, genuine, deep-rooted hate-mongering prejudice.  Aman,
the linguist, treads the catwalk of scholar, describing it all but
removed from it, as a scholar ought to be.  That doesn't mean
he doesn't enjoy his work and go at it with gusto.  Whether you
will rejoice and delight in his researches is a matter for you to
decide...

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I have had ... surgery to cut the vegas nerve in my
stomach.&rdquo;  [From a written statement by a claimant applying
for disability benefits, New York State Department of Social
Services.  Submitted by Edward Buckler, Brooklyn, New York:
Who says there's no quick cure for gambling addiction?]

## RhoDislan Says It Different
*Frank J. Jones, Flagstaff Arizona*

A while ago—in the nineteen-fifties—I made a study of
Providence, Rhode Island, which attributed to the population
at that time no less than 78 different national origins.

Half a dozen of these origins, besides those of the
indigenes, whose families had been around town since the
original settlement in 1636, were British—represented by soft-spoken
Devonshire folk, incomprehensible cockneys, equally
incomprehensible Scots, and soccer enthusiasts from Yorkshire
and Lancashire cheering on their teams: &ldquo;Ee, bah goom!
Chompion!  Chompion!&rdquo;

Irish manned the police and fire departments; Portuguese
supplied and tended fish markets; Chinese, Japanese, and other
Orientals provided chop suey and exquisite manners; Italians
mended the roads.

Yankees naturally controlled the economy and all branches
of government.  In the absence of bilingual instruction, the
children of everybody else spoke the family tongue at home
and learned enough English in the public schools to make a
living at salesmanship or factory work or school teaching; *their*
children, often as not, studied to enter the more remunerative
professions and ran for Congress.

To me it was obvious that in another generation Providence
would be as polyglot as Paris.  But now comes a report
from Dr. Elaine Chaika, Professor of Linguistics at Providence
College, called &ldquo;A Guide to Understanding and Speaking
Rhode Island English.&rdquo;[^a1]

Dr. Chaika cites her qualifications for this task: &ldquo;I was
born in Milford, Massachusetts, and moved to Rhode Island
when I was three.  I have lived in southern California and
Maine, but the bulk of my years have been spent in Rhode
Island.&rdquo;  Her project was carried out under a grant by the
National Endowment for the Humanities to the Providence
Public Libraries for the programs entitled &ldquo;A Lively
Experiment.&rdquo;

In flawless RhoDislan English, Dr. Chaika's foreword
explains: &ldquo;Most East Coast speech, like British and Australian,
is called ah-less.  Actually, this is a misnoma, as speakas from
these eahvias do pronounce ah except as noted in Rules
(1)—(4), below.  The RhoDislan rules for ah dropping are
identical to those used by Queen Elizabeth, the Beatles,
Dudley Maw, and speaks of Brooklynese.  As you can see,
these rules ah very complex.  Although we admit the difficulty
of achieving true competence in RhoDislan English, with
practice and perseverance it can be done by those who were
not to the manna bawn.

&ldquo;This Guide is divided into two pots: pronounciation and
word choice.  Just as the ah pronouncing rules ah sheahed with
otha dialects, British and American, so ah some of the words.
Whereva there ah different words for an item or activity in the
United States, the one prevalent in RhoDislan is given, even if
it is heard in otha places.

&ldquo;IMPAWTANT!!&rdquo;  she stresses.  &ldquo;Wawning: although outsidas
get the impression that RhoDislandas stick rs in and leave them
out chaotically, actually this is not so.  As the following rules
show, the rules for r pronouncing are of an unusual delicacy
and intricacy.  The autha knows of no rules of simila complexity
in any of the so-called r pronouncing dialects of American
English.  To pronounce r aw not to pronounce ah, these ah the
rules:

>&ldquo;Rule 1:  r is neva pronounced before a consonant[^a2].  For
instance, say 'four o'clock,' but 'faw boys' and 'Fawth
of July.'  It's 'the fahmer in the dell,' but 'fahma Jones.'
>
>&ldquo;Rule 2:  (a) if a word ends in r do not pronounce it if
the word is said alone or in lists, or if it comes at the
end of an utterance... For instance, 'what a great
dance flaw,' or 'one, two, three, faw, five...'
>
>&ldquo;Rule 3:  If a word ends in the sounds 'h,' 'uh,' or 'aw'
and the next word stahts with a vowel, put in an r
even if it isn't spelled that way, as in: 'Ma-r ate,'
'umbrella-r is,' 'thaw-r it out.'
>
>&ldquo;Rule 4:  The r sound heard in words like *bird*, *her*,
*word, heard*, and *hurt* is quite different from that used
by most otha Americans.  Since we sheah that sound
with many British speakas, if you cahn't find a RhoDis-landa
to say it faw you, you can hear it on the Beatles
recawding of *Yaw Gonna Lose That Girl*....  It is not
at all certain that outsidas can eva learn to pronounce
it right; but to approximate it, lift the center of the
tongue to the palate as if you ah gawna say 'eee' and,
at the same time, make yaw lips round.

Then Dr. Chaika proceeds to the meat of her report, her
actual Glossary of 166 essential words, from &ldquo;ah—belonging to
you 'n' me; letter after q; third-person present plural of verb *be*
(e.g., *am, is, ah*)&rdquo; to &ldquo;wondaful—real great.&rdquo;  Included are
much-used place names like &ldquo;CAHventry—Coventry, R.I.,&rdquo;
&ldquo;Creeyanston—city in RhoDislan reputed (undeservedly) to
have a funny accent (the Brooklyn of RhoDislan),&rdquo; &ldquo;Eas'
Greenwich—reputedly the true native pronounciation of Eas'
Grenich, Eas' Grinwich,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Newpawt—chahming seaside
city, a must faw tourists.&rdquo;

RhoDislan English, in spite of the incursion of patois,
lingoes, and dialects from around the world, obviously has
triumphed.  From the Glossary, Mark Patinkin, a columnist of
the Providence *Journal*, assembled a typical RhoDislan conversation
published in the *Evening Bulletin*, March 10, 1982:

>&ldquo;Be keaful, Mawgrit, yaw gonna teea that map.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Lemeelone, Ma.  I'm jus trine to figya how ta get to
Newpawt on Saddaday.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Weah not going anyweah on Saddaday, young lady.
Weah stain right heah in Creeanston.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Cmon.  I'm sicka Creeanston.  Can I at least go to
Prawvidence—sleepova Judy's?  We could go to the Hill,
wawk on Thaya Street.  Please, please, please.  Cou'int
ya let me?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Why not oscar if she wants ta sleepova heah?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;I'd ratha go ta hers.  Or to Newpawt.  It's so
chahmin.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;We'll see, Mawgrit—now go down cella and play with
yaw bruther Mock.  Mrs. Cawllins is at the daw faw
cawfee....  Dahris!  HowAHya?&rdquo;

For the non-native, especially from outlying parts of the
United States between Bawston and Organ, proper RhoDislan
speech may prove formidable.  Study of Dr. Chaika's Glossary
is recommended for any outlander tourist whose heart is set on
an afternoon gamboling in the surf at Newpawt Beach.

***

[^a1]: *A Guide to Understanding and Speaking Rhode Island English&copy;*
copyright by The National Endowment of the Humanities and by
Yankee Magazine.

[^a2]: The glaring exception to this occurs when Rule 3
applies.  If a plural ending must be used, but the r
glide would apply if the word were being said in the
singular, then it is stuck before the plural—as in 'His
idears ah good,' or 'Those umbrellers ah handy' ...
This does not happen with words that are spelled with
r as the final sound.  No true RhoDislan speaka would
eva say 'fahmers,' for instance—only 'fahmas.' &rdquo;


#### EPISTOLA {M.M. Kreeger}

Your article on the slang of other languages reminded me
of an incident that caused considerable merriment in Havana
in the fall of 1947, while I was chief correspondent there for
The Associated Press.

A flier from Lynchburg, Virginia, flew from Washington to
Havana to set a new capital-to-capital speed record—something
that seemed important to some people in those days.  His
sponsor, a Lynchburg packing company, gave him a Virginia
ham to take along, purportedly as a present from the governor
of Virginia to the president of Cuba.  Nobody in Lynchburg
could have been expected to know that *jamon* 'ham' meant
'graft' in Cuban slang—and the Cubans were quite cynical
about the part *jamon* played in the careers of their leading
politicians.

The flier took the ham to the palace and presented it to
President Ram&oacute;n Grau San Martin.  The palace photographer
took a shot of the event, and—why, I have never understood—
prints were made available to the press.  Nearly all the Havana
dailies, and there were a slew of them, were opposed to the
administration.  The picture was played with such cutlines as
&ldquo;the first official photograph of a president of Cuba taking
ham.&rdquo;  Cartoonists had a field day.  A month later, a cartoon
would sometimes have a tiny ham in one corner, even though it
had nothing to do with the subject of the cartoon.  I don't know
if Grau ever ate his present.  Personally, I've always found
Virginia hams too salty.

While international misunderstanding of a slang term
seldom has such an impact as that, every year many thousands
of *norteamericanos* would make a booboo by ordering papaya
in Cuban restaurants.  The fruit was very popular, but it was
always called *fruta bomba*.  In Cuba, *papaya* was something
you got in a whorehouse, not a restaurant.

*[M.M. Kreeger, Metairie, Louisiana]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Pears Book of Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/the-word-book/author/gyles-brandreth/)
Gyles Brandeth, (Pelham Books, 1979), 204pp., index. 

As Robert Burchfield points out in the foreword, &ldquo;the
book is divided into two sections, Word Work (the serious half)
and Word Play (the rest).&rdquo;  As it turns out, the first section is a
tiresome rehash of subjects covered much better in several of
the books in the bibliography.  It also contains an unbelievable
amount of padding, in the form of long lists of what are
supposed to be examples.  In one place, for instance, there is a
three-page list of words and expressions P.G. Wodehouse
contributed to the English language.  In another section,
Brandeth provides a seventeen-and-a-half-page list of various
suffixes to illustrate how &ldquo;elements appended to words, usually
to change the part of speech, make a noun into a verb, an
adjective into an adverb, etc.&rdquo;  Brandeth says, &ldquo;I think they
(i.e., the examples) will give you an idea of how this word
formation works.&rdquo;  After seventeen and a half pages of examples,
if I didn't have an idea of how it worked, I doubt I ever
will.

If you can wade through the first half of the book without
flinging it down in disgust, you might find the second half
somewhat more interesting: it is composed of word games,
puzzles and quizzes.  Even many of these, however, are hackneyed.
In the section under palindromes, for instance,
Brandeth included the following:

>Able was I ere I saw Elba.  
A man, a plan, a canal-Panama.  
Lewd did I live &amp; evil did I dwel.  

As most students of language will undoubtedly recognize, these
palindromes are so commonly used that they are hardly worth
commenting on.

In short, this book is not worth the money that is being
asked for it.  To use a colloquial but apt expression to describe
it, it is a rip-off.

*[Carl Withey, Elbridge, New York]*

## A Harvest of Heteronyms
*Donald Drury, Long Beach, California*

Try these out on the first ten people you meet: (1)
homonym, (2) homograph, (3) heteronym.  My guess is that
all ten of them will know *homonym*, fewer than half will be
familiar with *homograph*, and possibly one or two may recognize
*heteronym*.  If you get a higher ratio of correct responses to
(2) and (3), you were cheating—that is, you took your survey at
a Mensa meeting or during a lexicographers' convention.

*Heteronym* is not even recognized by *Webster's Third New
International Dictionary of the English Language (Unabridged)*,
though the supposedly definitive &ldquo;Webster 3&rdquo; really
ought to be ashamed.  One does find the term defined with
reasonable accuracy in two less compendious desk dictionaries:
*Webster's New World Dictionary (Second College Edition)* and
the *American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language*.
The former gives *heteronym* as &ldquo;a word with the same spelling
as another but with a different meaning and pronunciation (Ex:
*tear*, drop of water from the eye, *tear*, to rip)&rdquo;; the latter says,
&ldquo;one of two or more words that have identical spellings but
different meanings and pronunciations; for example, *row* (a
line) and *row* (a fight).&rdquo;  What is lacking in both definitions is
the further requirement that &ldquo;pure&rdquo; heteronyms be words of
differing origin.

I first became aware of heteronyms in 1969 when I wrote
an article on &ldquo;Homographs and Pseudo-Homographs&rdquo; for
WORD WAYS: *The Journal of Recreational Linguistics*.  At that
time I had &ldquo;discovered&rdquo; a grand total of ten heteronymous
pairs of words.  Since then—with valuable assistance from my
wife, especially, and from colleagues at Long Beach City
College—I have added substantially to my lists in all three
word-categories: homonyms, homographs, and heteronyms.
Doubtless the following augmented list of heteronyms (along
with some pairs I have arbitrarily designated as &ldquo;quasi-heteronyms&rdquo;)
is still far from complete:

*I.  Pure Heteronyms*

>(1)  *agape* (a) AG-a-pee 'a primitive Christian love-feast';
(b) a-GAPE 'full of wonder; amazed.'
>
>(2)  *acedia* (a) a-SEE-dee-ya 'spiritual ennui; apathy'; (b)
ASS-uh-dee-ya 'kind of fish.'
>
>(3)  *bass* (a) 'kind of fish'; rhymes with *lass*; (b) 'singer,
bass viol, etc.'; rhymes with *face*.
>
>(4)  *bow* (a) 'rainbow, weapon for propelling arrows,
etc.'; (b) 'front end of a ship'; rhymes with *now*.
>
>(5)  *buffet* (a) BUFF-et 'bang about'; (b) buf-FAY 'sideboard,
refreshment table, etc.'
>
>(6)  *bustier* (a) BUST-ee-yer 'more bosomy'; (b) BUST-ee-YAY
'garment.'
>
>(7)  *cave* (a) 'cavern'; rhymes with *rave*; (b) CAY-vee;
CAH-vay; from Latin 'beware.'
>
>(8)  *console* (a) CON-sole 'cabinet'; (b) con-SOLE 'offer
sympathy.'
>
>(9)  *desert* (a) DEZ-ert 'barren place'; (b) duh-ZERT 'merited
reward or punishment'—usually plural.  Also see
under *Quasi-heteronyms*.
>
>(10)  *does* (a) third-person singular of *do*; rhymes with
*fuzz*; (b) DOZE 'female deer, rabbits, etc.'
>
>(11)  *dove* (a) a bird related to the pigeon; rhymes with
*love*; (b) a past tense of *dive*; rhymes with *cove*.
>
>(12)  *entrance* (a) en-TRANCE 'enchant, beguile'; (b) EN-trance
'doorway.'  (13)  *excise* (a) EX-cize 'tax'; (b) ex-CIZE
'cut out, remove.'
>
>(14)  *felly* (a) 'part of a wheel'; rhymes with *belly*; (b)
FELL-ly in a fell or sinister manner.'
>
>(15)  *gill* (a) with hard *g* 'fish's breathing organ'; (b)
JILL quarter-pint measure.'
>
>(16)  *hinder* (a) HIN-der 'impede'; (b) 'pertaining to rear
or hind part of'; rhymes with *binder*.
>
>(17)  *incense* (a) In-cense 'perfumed substance'; (b) in-CENSE
'anger; outrage.'
>
>(18)  *invalid* (a) IN-va-lid 'person suffering from illness
or incapacity'; (b) in-VAL-id 'not valid.'
>
>(19)  *lather* (a) TH pronounced as in *then* 'foam from
soap, shaving cream, etc.'; (b) TH as in *thin* 'workman
who applies laths as a base for plaster.'
>
>(20)  *lead* (a) 'metal'; (b) 'guide, conduct, act as leader.'
>
>(21)  *lower* (a) rhymes with *mower*; (b) 'scowl'; rhymes
with *power*.
>
>(22)  *manes* (a) 'neck hair of horses'; rhymes with
*canes*; (b) MAY-neeze; MAH-nays 'ancestral gods or
spirits.'
>
>(23)  *moped* (a) 'brooded, sorrowed'; rhymes with
SLOPED; (b) MOE-ped 'kind of motorized bicycle.'
>
>(24)  *number* (a) NUM-mer; comparative of *numb*; (b)
NUM-ber 'a quantity or figure.'
>
>(25)  *pace* (a) 'step or rate of travel, etc.'; (b) PAY-see;
PAH-chee; Latin 'peace.'
>
>(26)  *palsy* (a) PAWL-zee 'affliction producing tremors';
(b) with *a* as in &ldquo;palsy-walsy.&rdquo;
>
>(27)  *proceeds* (a) pro-CEEDS 'goes forward'; (b) PRO-ceeds
'net or gross revenues.'
>
>(28)  *putting* (a) participle of *put*; rhymes with *footing*;
(b) golf term; rhymes with *cutting*.
>
>(29)  *ragged* (a) RAG-ged 'tattered, torn'; (b) RAGG'd
'teased, bantered.'
>
>(30)  *raven* (a) RAY-ven 'black bird'; (b) RAV-ven 'devour
greedily.'
>
>(31)  *router* (a) ROO-ter 'one who plans delivery or transportation
routes'; (b) ROW-ter 'carpentry tool.'
>
>(32)  *row* (a) 'line of objects'; rhymes with *toe*; (b)
'quarrel or commotion'; rhymes with *now*.
>
>(33)  *sake* (a) 'end, purpose, benefit'; rhymes with *take*;
(b) SAH-kee 'Japanese beverage.'
>
>(34)  *sewer* (a) SO-er 'one who sews clothing'; (b) SUE-er
'conduit for sewage.'
>
>(35)  *shower* (a) 'one who shows'; rhymes with *mower*;
(b) light rain, etc.; rhymes with *flower*.
>
>(36)  *slaver* (a) SLAY-ver slave-trader or slave-ship'; (b)
SLAV-ver 'slobber or drool.'
>
>(37)  *slough* (the only *triple* heteronym so far encountered
by this investigator): (a) SLAU 'deep mud or mire;
a state of dejection or moral degradation, as in
Bunyan's &ldquo;Slough of Desmond&rdquo; '; (b) SLOO 'a tidal flat,
inlet from a river, etc.'; (c) SLUFF 'cast-off skin, etc.'
>
>(38)  *sow* (a) 'broadcast seed, etc.'; rhymes with *go*; (b)
'female pig or hog'; rhymes with *now*.
>
>(39)  *stingy* (a) STING-ee 'having a sting'; (b) STIN-jee
'mean or ungenerous.'
>
>(40)  *tarry* (a) 'linger'; rhymes with *carry*; (b) 'covered
with or full of tar'; rhymes with *starry*.
>
>(41)  *tear* (a) 'moisture from the eye'; rhymes with *hear*;
(b) 'rip apart' and 'a torn place'; rhymes with *bear*.
>
>(42)  *tower* (a) TOE-er 'one who or that which tows'; (b)
'high structure' and 'loom over or dwarf something or
someone else (with *above* or *over*)'; rhymes with flower.
>
>(43)  *vale* (a) 'dell or valley'; rhymes with *dale*; (b) VAH-lee;
VAY-lee; WAH-lay; Latin 'farewell.'
>
>(44)  *wind* (a) 'breeze, gale, etc.'; rhymes with *sinned*;
(b) 'entwine, twist and turn, etc.'; rhymes with *find*.
>
>(45)  *wound* (a) WOOND 'injure' or 'injury'; (b) WOWND
past tense of *wind*.

*II.  Quasi-heteronyms*

These are words of identical spelling and different pronunciation
that have very different meanings but ultimately share
the same derivation.  Some surprising examples follow.  (Question:
Which pair in Part I really belongs here among the
&ldquo;quasis&rdquo;?)

>(1)  *curate* (a) KEW-rit 'assistant of a rector or vicar,
clergyman'; (b) kew-RATE 'act as curator of a museum
or special collection.'  (Both words derive from Latin
*cura* 'care.'
>
>(2)  *desert* (a) DEZ-ert 'barren place'; (b) duh-ZERT
'abandon, etc.'  Also see under *Pure Heteronyms*.
>
>(3)  *lineage* (a) LIN-ee-idge 'descent, ancestry'; (b) LINEidge
'the number of lines of type.'
>
>(4)  *multiply* (a) MUL-ti-ply; 'to perform multiplication
on' or 'increase'; (b) MUL-ti-plee; 'repeatedly' or 'several
times.'
>
>(5)  *peaked* (a) 'having a peak, coming to a peak';
rhymes with *beaked*; (b) PEEK-ed 'thin, emaciated.'
>
>(6)  *primer* (a) PRIM-mer 'beginning reader and speller';
(b) PRY-mer 'base coat of paint.'  (Both are related to
Latin *primus* 'first.')

Much more obvious as &ldquo;impure&rdquo; heteronyms are noun-verb
pairs from the same root, though with different sounds,
stresses, or both, such as CONduct and conDUCT, CONtract and
conTRACT, RECord and reCORD, REFuse and reFUSE.  Noun-adjective
pairs include CONtent and conTENT, PATent and the
adjective rhyming with *latent*.  There must be many other
examples in these two categories.

Finally, we might note a sub-category of &ldquo;semi-demiheteronyms&rdquo;—words
and phrases of identical spelling whose
difference in sound depends on hyphenation.  Examples: *reside*
'dwell' and *re-side* 'put new siding on,' *preposition* and *preposition,
recreation* and *re-creation, light-housekeeping* and
*lighthouse-keeping.*

The author welcomes additions to any of these lists from
other VERBATIM readers (address: 4436 E. 5th St., Long Beach,
CA 90814).


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;It was Feshbach who, two years ago, first disclosed an
increase in Soviet infant morality.&rdquo;  [From an article in *The
Daily Herald*, Wausau-Merrill, Wisconsin, 31 August 1982,
p.14.  Submitted by George Johnson, Wausau, Wisconsin, who
believes that this may be a response to President Reagan's
criticism, at a recent press conference, of a lack of ethics on the
part of Soviet leaders.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

(Woman's voice): &ldquo;I told my Goodyear mechanic that all I
needed was a simple lube and oil change.&rdquo;  [From a commercial
on WRTN (radio), New York, 20 September 1982.  Submitted
by Bernard Witlieb, Bronx Community College, Bronx, New
York.  And there she is, waiting for Mr. Goodyear.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Tennis Titlist Back for UA&rdquo; [Headline in *The Cincinnati
Enquirer*, 8 September 1982.  Submitted by
Joseph W. McNair, Cincinnati, who
asks Who is to do the seeding?  Is this what
they mean by women's doubles?]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;No matter where you live in Cleveland, we're only
twenty minutes from downtown.&rdquo;  [From a commercial on
WVAB-TV, Cleveland, 27 August 1982.
Submitted by Dr. Dorothy Branson, Columbus, Ohio.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Hammond Medallion World Atlas*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/hammond-medallion-world-atlas/first-edition/)
(Hammond, Inc., 1982, 9&frac12;" &times; 12&frac12;"), 672pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

Although the rationale for reviewing an atlas in VERBATIM
and for offering it as a Book Club Selection may seem a bit farfetched,
in fact it is less remote than one might think; first, an
atlas fits in well with the general scheme of reference works
that are offered in the Book Club; second, the coverage of
place names in the *Hammond Medallion* is quite extensive:
100,000 entries in the A—Z index and 48,000 in individual map
indexes.

As a reference work, the *Medallion* is complete and
thorough.  It contains 192 pages of foreign and world maps, in
addition to 128 pages of state maps and a 12-page illustrated
section on environment.  The names in the Chinese People's
Republic are given in Pinyin, with cross reference from the
older, more familiar Wade-Giles system.  Other special sections
include a 48-page atlas of Bible lands, a 48-page world history
atlas, a 64-page U.S. history atlas, and a 4-page section of city
maps of Washington, New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles.  It is
printed in 8 colors.

We have used the *Medallion* for years and have found its
maps accurately and clearly drawn and its demographic and
other information both accurate and up to date.  The new
edition lists new countries (Vanuatu, Antigua and Barbuda,
etc.) and new territories (Bophuthatswana, Venda, etc.).

*Laurence Urdang*

## The Way of a Wag
*Edward C. Pinkerton, Baltimore, Maryland*

[Reprinted from *Word for Word*, by Edward C.
Pinkerton, Verbatim, 1982.  Information about
ordering *Word for Word* can be found on page 2 of
the Verbatim Book Club Catalogue.]

The reason a quipster like Groucho Marx is called a WAG is
not that his tongue WAGS so much (plus, in Groucho's
case, WAGGLING eyebrows and cigar), but that jokers like him
are apt to end their days WAGGLING from the end of a
hangman's rope.  In other words he's what was called in 16th-century
England a WAGHALTER 'one who is likely to swing
from a halter; a gallows bird.'  This term of opprobrium was
early shortened to WAG and applied humorously to mischievous
boys and habitual pranksters.  At least that's one theory
advanced to explain the meaning of the noun WAG 'a jester;
one full of sport and humor,' even though in the *OED* the
earliest use of WAG 'a mischievous boy' (1553) antedates the
earliest use of WAGHALTER (1570).  More commonly used is the
verb WAG 'to move briskly and repeatedly from side to side'
[from Middle English *waggen*; from the root of Old English
*wagian* 'to move about; to totter, to sway'], as a friendly or
excited dog does his tail.  WAGGLE 'to move back and forth or
up and down repeatedly' is labeled by the authorities a
&ldquo;frequentative&rdquo; of WAG, thus meaning 'to wag frequently'
(though it strikes me as being a diminutive meaning 'to wag a
little').  A WAGTAIL is 'one of a genus of birds characterized by
long, constantly waggling tails.'

The source of all these words is Indo-European **wegh*- 'to
move, to set in motion; to go, to transport in a vehicle.'  The
more specialized sense of 'to transport in a vehicle' hints at the
fact that WAG, WAGGLE, WAGHALTER, and WAGTAIL are all first
cousins to English WAGON 'a four-wheeled vehicle' [from
Middle Dutch *wagen*], a vehicle in which things are transported.
Wagons range all the way from children's go-carts
through the homely VOLKSWAGEN 'people's wagon' to that
once luxurious mode of travel, the WAGON-LIT (literally)
'wagon-bed'; 'a continental European railway sleeping car'
[French *lit* 'bed'].  The Old English words for four-wheeled
vehicles were *w&aelig;gen, w&aelig;gen*, and *w&aelig;n*, predecessors of English
WAIN 'a large horse-drawn farm wagon.'  The very similar
Dutch word *wagen* &gt; WAGON was first adopted as a military
term learned in the continental wars of the 16th century.
Related words are WAINWRIGHT 'a builder of wagons' and
WAINSCOT (etymologically) 'planking for wagons'; 'wood paneling
applied to the walls of rooms' [from Middle Dutch or
Middle Low German *wagenschot (schot* 'wooden partition')].
However, the identity of this Middle Dutch or Middle Low
German *wagen-* with *wagen* 'wagon' is doubted by some, who
refer it to Old Frisian *w&amacr;ch* = Old English *w&amacr;g* 'wall.'

A less easily recognized cognate of WAG 'to move to and
fro' and WAGON 'a vehicle (for moving things)' is WEIGH
(obsolete) 'to carry from one place to another'; 'to hoist; to
raise a ship's anchor; to ascertain the heaviness (WEIGHT) of
anything; to consider, to compare' [from Old English *wegan* 'to
move, to carry, to weigh'].  An Anglian (northern English)
variant of Old English *w&aelig;ge* 'weight' was *w&emacr;g, w&emacr;ge*, which
became in northern Middle English *wei, we*, and was usually
associated with the word 'little' so that 'a little wee' meant 'a
little weight,' also 'a little bit (of anything).'  Eventually the
noun *wee* 'weight' came to be used as an adjective meaning
'very small': WEE 'tiny' (a WEE lad, a WEE drop, the WEE hours,
the WEE folk).

The connection between WAGONING and WEIGHING is not
hard to grasp, especially for a trucker, who would also appreci-
ate the connection of both of these words with yet another
cognate, that is, WAY 'a passage, road, street, track or path'
[from Old English *weg*].  (In Modern German we have *Weg*
'way,' and *bewegen* 'to move.')  Additional cognates are AWAY
(originally) 'on the way'; 'from this place, from that place; at a
little distance; in a different direction' [from Old English *aweg,
onweg*; from *on weg* 'on the way, on one's way (from)'];
ALWAYS 'in every way; at all times' [from Middle English *alle
wei*, genitive *alles weis, alleweyes, alwayes*; from Old English
*(e)alne weg* 'all way']; SIDEWAYS; LENGTHWAYS; WAYLAY 'to lie
in waiting along the road; to ambush'; WAYFARER 'a traveler
along the road'; and WAYWARD = AWAYWARD 'straying from
the path.'  Yet another cognate is WIGGLE 'to squirm; to move
back and forth quickly; to move slightly to and fro,' described
by some linguists as a &ldquo;thinning&rdquo; of WAGGLE, and certainly
cuter.

The Latin word for 'way' is *via* 'way, road, street, route,
highway; march, journey.'  According to some etymologists, *via*
traces back to Indo-European **wegh*- 'to move; to go' by way
of Old Latin *veha* and Indo-European **wegh-ya*-.  Others,
however, link Latin *via* to Indo-European **wei*- 'to go after
something' or associate it with Latin *vis, vim* 'force.'  In
English, the Latin word *via* is used to mean 'by way of,' but
*via* shows up in other English loanwords, like VIADUCT 'a
bridge carrying a road over a valley or other low-lying area'
[from Latin *via* 'road' + *ductus* 'a leading'] (by analogy with
*aqueduct*, from Latin *aquaeductus* 'an elevated structure for
supporting a water conduit over low-lying ground') and VIATICUM
'supplies for a journey; an allowance for traveling
expenses; the Eucharist given to a person in danger of death'
[from Latin *vi&amacr;ticum* 'money for a journey; a soldier's savings';
from *vi&amacr;ticus* 'of a journey' (*via* 'way' + -*&amacr;ticus* 'pertaining
to')].  Late Latin *vi&amacr;ticum* evolved into Old French *veiag,
veage, viage, voiage*, whence Anglo-French, whence Middle
English *veiage, viage, voiage*, whence Modern English (and
French) VOYAGE 'a long journey to a distant land; a journey
across the open sea.'  Thus, what started out as a road, then
preparations for taking to the road, now applies to trips across
the trackless ocean, or into outer space (and what started out as
a day's trip, that is, a *journey* &lt; *journ&eacute;e* 'a day's traveling'
stretches out into years, and what started out as a step, that is,
a *trip* 'to step lightly' becomes a journey).

The element *via* 'road' appears in many compound English
words, for example DEVIATE 'to turn aside from the path,
to stray off the road; to digress' [from Late Latin *d&emacr;vi&amacr;re,
d&emacr;vi&amacr;tus* 'to go off the road'].  Late Latin *d&emacr;vi&amacr;re* is based on
the Latin adjective *devius* 'out of the way; off the road,' which
is also the ancestor of English DEVIOUS 'roundabout, circuitous;
not straightforward, underhanded' and OBVIATE 'to remove
from the way; to make unnecessary by anticipating or circumventing'
[from Late Latin *obvi&amacr;re, obvi&amacr;tus* 'to meet, to
encounter,' hence 'to prevent' (*ob* 'against, facing' + *via* '(in)
the way')].  Here again the Late Latin verb is based on an
earlier Latin adjective, this one *obvius* (< *obviam*) '(standing)
in the way,' forerunner of English OBVIOUS (archaic) 'standing
in the way'; 'easily perceived.'

In Latin a place where three roads meet is called a
*trivium*.  One might expect the related adjective *trivi&amacr;lis* to
have something to do with forks in the road, but instead Latin
*trivi&amacr;lis* means 'commonplace, ordinary; what can be met with
anywhere, at any crossroads.'  *Trivi&amacr;lis* has been borrowed into
English as TRIVIAL 'ordinary, commonplace; of little importance.'
The plural noun TRIVIA 'insignificant matters, trifles' is a
recent coinage, although in Roman antiquity *trivia* meant 'a
crossroads,' and capitalized, 'Diana as the three-faced goddess,
Hecate.'  Essentially a back formation from TRIVIAL, Modern
English TRIVIA is not listed in the *OED* nor the *OED Supplement*
of 1933, but it is in *MW2*, published 1934.  In the Middle
Ages a new meaning was assigned to the Latin word TRIVIUM
'the three liberal arts of grammar, rhetoric, and logic forming
the elementary division of the seven liberal arts in medieval
schools and required of all who would obtain a bachelor's
degree.'  The other four liberal arts were arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music.  Together these were known as the
QUADRIVIUM, which in Latin means 'crosswords; place where
four roads meet.'  According to Henry Hallam's *Introduction to
the Literature of Europe*, the TRIVIUM and QUADRIVIUM were
introduced into the halls of learning in the 6th century.

To go along with DEVIOUS and OBVIOUS we have PREVIOUS
'having gone that way before; existing or occurring before
something else' [from Latin *praevius* 'going before, leading the
way' (*prae* 'before')] and PERVIOUS 'open to passage, allowing
passage through' [from Latin *pervius* 'passable, unobstructed'
(*per* 'through')].  The last word is more often encountered in the
negative IMPERVIOUS 'incapable of being penetrated.'

As already seen in the development of the word VOYAGE,
Latin *via* 'way' changed to French *voy*-, or more correctly, to
French *voie* 'way.'  Similarly, Late Latin *invi&amacr;re* 'to send on a
journey' became Old French *envoier* 'to send,' and has resulted
in the two English words ENVOY 'a messenger sent on a
mission; an emissary' and INVOICE 'a detailed list of goods
shipped.'  INVOICE is a variant spelling of the plural of French
*envoi* 'parcel, package; goods forwarded,' i.e., *invois*, construed
as a singular and respelled with -*ce* to conform with English
usage.  Also used in English literature is French ENVOI 'a short
concluding stanza of certain verse forms; a parting word.'

Similar words are CONVOY 'to accompany on the way; to
escort' [from Old French *conveier, conveier*, from Vulgar Latin
**convi&amacr;re* (*con* &lt; *cum* 'together with')] and CONVEY 'to carry
from one place to another; to communicate, to make known'
[from Old French *conveier, convoier* and Vulgar Latin
**convi&amacr;re*].

The Classical Latin verb descended from Indo-European
**weigh*- 'to move, to transport in a vehicle' is *vehere, vectus* 'to
carry, to transport.'  The most obvious English borrowing is
VEHICLE 'any device for carrying passengers or goods; a
medium of expression' [via French *v&eacute;hicule* from Latin
*vehiculum* 'conveyance'].  The Latin suffix -*iculum*, whence
English -*icle*, usually indicates a diminutive, as in *particle* 'a
little part,' *auricle* 'a little ear,' *versicle* 'a little verse,' and
*article* 'a little joint, division,' but in this case it seems to be
used as an instrumental suffix meaning 'means of (carrying).'

A word that is listed in some English dictionaries as
foreign and not listed at all in others (although well known to
members of the American Legion, especially the Forty-and-Eight
Division), is French VOITURE 'a carriage; a railway
coach; a railway car' [from Latin *vect&umacr;ra* 'carrying; conveyance'].
In the American Legion, a VOITURE is 'a local constituent
unit of the Forty-and-Eight Division' (*MW3*), who took
their name from the French railroad cars that were marked
during World War I as capable of transporting forty men or
(sardonically &ldquo;and&rdquo;) eight horses 'voiture &agrave; quarante hommes
ou huit chevaux.'

Latin *vehere, vectus* has many compounds, but only one
that has been adopted into English as a verb, that is, INVEIGH
(etymologically) 'to carry into; to sail into'; 'to assail with
words; to give vent to a denunciation' [from Latin *invehere,
invectus* 'to carry into,' passive *inveh&imacr;* 'to burst into; to attack'].
The past participle *invectus* yields Late Latin *invect&imacr;vus*
'vituperative' and Medieval Latin *invect&imacr;va* (*&omacr;r&amacr;ti&omacr;*) 'abusive
(speech),' whence English INVECTIVE 'an abusive expression; a
vehement denunciation.'

Speaking of *vehement* and VEHEMENCE 'forcefulness of
expression; great or excessive ardor' [from Latin *vehem&emacr;ns* =
*v&emacr;m&emacr;ns* 'violent, furious; forcible'], some etymologists suggest
the possibility that these words may also derive from Latin
*vehere* 'to carry, to transport.'  (One speaks of an incensed
person as being &ldquo;transported&rdquo; with rage.)  The suffix -*ment* (<
Latin -*mentum*) is used to express the result of an action
(*fragment* 'what is left after something is broken') or the
instrument of an action (*ornament* 'that which embellishes').  If
*vehemence* stems from *vehere* that would make it either 'the
product of being transported' or more likely 'the instrument of
attacking' (*inveh&imacr;* 'to attack').  However, other etymologists
believe that the *vehe*- of Latin *v&emacr;hem&emacr;ns* = *v&emacr;m&emacr;ns* is derived
from Latin *v&emacr;*- 'lacking,' so that the etymological meaning
would be 'lacking in or deprived of mind' (*m&emacr;ns* 'mind').

Another English word based on the Latin past participle
*vectus* 'carried, transported' is CONVECTION 'the process of
transmitting or conveying' [from Late Latin *convecti&omacr;*, from
Latin *convehere* 'to carry together'].  CONVECTION is mostly
restricted to scientific meanings in physics and meterology
(the fact that hot air rises is an example of *thermal convection*
'the transmitting of heat by motion of the hot materials').  In
Latin, *convector* means 'fellow passenger.'

A related term is Latin *convexus* 'valuted, arched.'  This is
apparently an old past participle of *convehere, convectus* 'to
carry together,' and the meaning arises because in forming an
arch the extremities of the surface are &ldquo;drawn together to a
point&rdquo; (*ODEE*).  The English loanword from *convexus* is CONVEX
'curved like the outside of a circle or arch.'

Other English borrowings from the past participle *vectus*
are more abstruse; for example VECTOR (biology) 'an organism
that carries pathogens from one host to another'; (mathematics)
'a quantity specified by a magnitude and a direction' [from
Latin *vector* 'bearer, carrier']; ADVECTION 'a local change in a
property of a system'; and EVECTION 'solar perturbation of the
lunar orbit' [from Latin *&emacr;vecti&omacr;* 'a carrying out; a raising up'].
(A defaulting tenant's furniture is &ldquo;carried out&rdquo; when he is evicted, but this is a different word, from Latin evincere,
*evicted*, but this is a different word, from Latin *&emacr;vincere,
&emacr;victus* 'to conquer completely.')  Note, also, PROVECTION 'the
carrying forward of the final sound of a word to a following
word.'  Examples of provection are *a nickname* &lt; *an ekename*
('an additional name'); *a newt* &lt; *an ewt; the nonce* &lt; *then
ones; Nash* &lt; *an ash, Powell* &lt; *ap Howell*; and *Price* &lt; *ap
Rhys*.  This linguistic phenomenon also takes place in the
opposite direction.  Examples are *an umpire* &lt; *a nompere; an
adder* &lt; *a nadder; an apron* &lt; *a napron* (compare *napery*);
and *an orange* &lt; *a narancia* (compare Spanish *naranja*).
TRANSVECTION, labeled rare in most modern dictionaries,
refers to the 'transportation through the air of a witch by a
devil,' fortunately a relatively uncommon occurrence these
days.

The Latin verb *vex&amacr;re* 'to agitate; to torment, to harass' is
also thought to be related to Latin *vehere, vectus*, probably by
way of the past participle.  Since *vehere, vectus* 'to carry'
implies transportation, and transportation in Roman days was
by horseback, in springless vehicles, or on a boat or ship, one
can see how the 'to agitate' meaning of *vex&amacr;re* arose, and the
extended meanings of 'to torment, to harass.'  (Compare the
semantic progression of Vulgar Latin *trip&amacr;li&amacr;re* 'to torture' >
Old French *travailler* 'to travail' &gt; English *travel*.)  Obvious
English borrowings from Latin *vex&amacr;re* 'to harass' are VEX 'to
irritate, to annoy' and its derivatives VEXATIONS and VEXATIOUS.

Returning to Germanic derivatives of Indo-European
**wegh*- 'to move, to set in motion; to go, to transport in a
vehicle' that have come down to English, we are buoyed up by
the English noun WAVE 'a swell moving along the surface of a
body of water; oscillations' [from Middle English *wawe,
waghe*; from Old English *w&aelig;g* 'motion, wave'].  This is the
derivation given by some, but others trace the noun WAVE to
the same source as the verb to *wave*, which comes from Indo-European
**webh*- 'to weave.'  What seems to have happened is
that as the two forms approached each other phonetically, the
one for 'moving the hand back and forth as a signal' (from
**webh*- 'to weave') superseded the Middle English *waw* 'a
moving swell of water' (from **wegh*- 'to move, to go').  Note,
also, VOGUE 'the prevailing fashion' [from French *vogue* 'rowing,
sailing, going,' *voguer* 'to row (a boat)'].  This elegant word
had a slangy origin, that is, to be in VOGUE was something like
'to be in the rowing, sailing, going.'  (Compare *to be in the
swim*.)  French *voguer* 'to row' has Italian, Portuguese, and
Spanish counterparts, respectively *vogare, vogar*, and *bogar* 'to
row.'  They all presumably come from a Germanic source
related to Middle High German *wogen* 'to float, to be borne by
the waves' and descended from Indo-European **wegh*- 'to set
in motion.'  Another derivative of Indo-European **wegh*- is
EARWIG 'an insect once thought to be able to penetrate a
person's head through the ear,' a creature known in German as
*Ohrwurm* 'earworm.'  The -WIG of EARWIG comes from Old
English *wicga* 'earwig; &ldquo;thing that moves quickly&rdquo; (*AHD*),
related to WIGGLE (although some authorities tie the element -
*wig* to *vetch*, which would make it a descendant of Indo-European
**wei*- 'to turn' or **weik*- 'to bend').  Still other
derivatives of Indo-European **wegh*- are NORWAY 'northern
way; northern region' [from Old Norse *Norvegr*] (the Modern
Norwegian word is *Norge*); GRAYWACKE 'a kind of dark gray
sandstone' [from German *Grauwacke*, from *grau* 'gray' +
*Wacke* a German miners' word adopted as a geological term;
from Old High German *wacko, waggo* ' &ldquo;boulder rolling on a
river bed&rdquo; (*AHD*)]; and WALL-EYED 'having a light-colored,
whitish eye or eyes; having one eye that turns out with a
divergent squint; having bulging eyes' [from Middle English
*wawileghed*, from Old Norse *vagleygr*].  The *wall*- element is
thus traced to Old Norse *vagl* 'wooden beam, roost, perch.'
*Vagl* also survives in Icelandic *vagl* 'a film over the eyes' and in
Swedish *vagel* 'a sty in the eye.'  However; the connection with
'to set in motion' is not exactly obvious.  *MW3* has Old Norse
*vagl* 'beam, roost; beam in the eye' akin to Old Norse *vega* 'to
move, to carry, to lift,' so the semantic connection may be by
way of the notion of 'carrying.'

English *wall*- &lt; Middle English *wawil*- &lt; Old Norse
*vagl-trace* further back to Germanic **waglaz*, and thence to a
&ldquo;suffixed *o*-grade form (of Indo-European **wegh*-) **wogh-lo*-&rdquo;
(*AHD*).  From this same **wegh-lo*- comes Greek *okhlos* 'disturbance,
trouble; populace, mob; moving mass.'  Note that Greek
drops the initial digamma, or *w*-.  *Okhlos* 'mob' gives us the
English terms OCHLOCRACY 'mob rule' and OCHLOPHOBIA
'morbid fear of crowds; fear of mobs.'

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Pronunciation of English in Australia*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/the-pronunciation-of-english-in-australia/author/a-g-mitchell/)
Rev. ed. by A.G. Mitchell and Arthur Delbridge, (Angus &amp; Robertson, 1965), xiv + 82 pp.

&ldquo;Why do these people talk with an accent?&rdquo;  an American
boy asked his father when they arrived in New Zealand.  This
amused New Zealanders, who think it is Americans who speak
with an accent.  It is normal to be aware of another group's way
of speech and to think of accents as something other people
have, but sometimes for historical or sociopolitical reasons a
community takes the speech of another group as &ldquo;better&rdquo; or
&ldquo;more correct&rdquo; than its own.  So it has been in Australia, where
the local accent has often been regarded as deviant and has
only comparatively recently been studied systematically and
objectively.  Then it was one of those cases where the first
serious book on the subject has remained the best, the standard
work.

A.G. Mitchell's *The Pronunciation of English in Australia*
appeared in 1946, and a revised edition in collaboration with
Professor Arthur Delbridge came out in 1965.  The first edition
was reprinted five times, the second already three times.  Other
writers have added details to our understanding of Australian
speech but no one has challenged the outlines of Mitchell's
analysis of its phonemes.  His view that Australian English is
not differentiated locally but has various levels that are roughly
related to education, described in the revised edition in terms
of the three main categories of broad, general, and cultivated,
has likewise survived without serious challenge.

In the preface to the revised edition, the authors apologize
for retaining a description that compares Australian speech
point by point with Educated Southern English.  For overseas
readers, however, comparison with a better known variety can
be helpful; even in Australia, most generally available books on
phonetics describe this variety.  In any case, readers outside
Southern England may be assured that the most distinctive
Australian sounds, the vowels and diphthongs, are also constantly
described with reference to cardinal vowels (the vowel
quadrilateral) as described by Daniel Jones.

Apart from its segmental sounds, Australian English differs
from other varieties in its rhythms, stress, and intonation.  Stress
tends to be more even than in British English but, in words at
any rate, probably rather less even than in typical varieties of
American English.  Mitchell illustrates with the sentence &ldquo;It's a
long way to go.&rdquo;  Spoken with stress on *long* and *go* and a rapid
pronunciation of the other syllables it will sound British; with
slower delivery and stress on *long, way* and *go* it begins to
sound Australian.  Intonation likewise differs.  An Englishman
pronouncing &ldquo;Have you any matches?&rdquo;  might begin with a
high pitch at *have*, then rapidly at the same high level
pronounce *you any*, then drop low to begin *match*- but glide
upwards until the termination -*es* reaches the initial high level.
An Australian begins with low pitch on *have you any* (the -*y* of
*any* rising a bit), to arrive at the moving tone *match*- from
below.  Such low initial tones may sound rather glum or even
menancing to British speakers, who might in turn seem over-brisk
and birdlike to Australians.  It is in the suprasegmentals,
stress and tone, that Australian English differs most markedly
from Cockney.

As a science grows it accumulates technicality, so that
pioneer studies often stand out as very readable (witness Sapir
or Bloomfield).  Mitchell was no exception.  The revision, making
use of large-scale statistical studies, is able to add precision to
the initial observations, perhaps with some departure from the
urbanity of the original text here and there, but not so as to
endanger in any serious way its pleasantly readable flavor.  For
anyone wanting to have a look at the sound system of a not-too-foreign
language or communicate with a speech community
twice as large as Denmark, this book can be thoroughly
recommended.

*[G.W. Turner, University of Adelaide]*


#### EPISTOLA {Leslie R. Axelrod}

As an electrical engineer involved with computers, I'm
quite familiar with the word *kludge* [IX, 2].  It is most
emphatically *not* a &ldquo;term of endearment for a pet computer.&rdquo;
*A kludge* is a term of derision for either hardware or software
that is put together awkwardly, like a &ldquo;lash-up&rdquo; or a &ldquo;jury-rig.&rdquo;
*To kludge* means to put together some hardware (or write a
program) by combining parts of existing computers or their
programs.  The general tone is that such an approach is
temporary, perhaps to demonstrate a concept or perhaps to
repair a system that would otherwise remain inoperative.
Incidentally, the word is pronounced with a long *u* sound, as if
it were spelled *klooj*.

*[Leslie R. Axelrod, Highland Park, Illinois]*


#### EPISTOLA {P.S. Falla}

Dr. Macey says in his letter [IX, 2] that he has not
encountered the use of *rabbits* in the 'good luck' sense in
Australia.  However, it was familiar to me in a New Zealand
childhood in the 1920s; so was *hares* in a related sense.
Quotations for both will be found under *rabbit* (sense l.d.) in
vol. III of the *Supplement to the OED*.  It does not confirm the
etymology *orabitis*, and I should be interested to know Dr.
Macey's authority for this.

*[P.S. Falla, Bromley, Kent]*


#### EPISTOLA {Gary Muldoon}

In his review of *The Morrow Book of New Words* [IX, 2],
John T. Gage criticizes the work for including words which
have been around for a long time.  He also notes several words
omitted from the book, including &ldquo;pathetic fallacy.&rdquo;  According
to *A Handbook to Literature*, by C. Hugh Holman, this term
(&ldquo;false emotionalism in writing resulting in a too impassioned
description of nature&rdquo;) was coined by John Ruskin.  Ruskin
died in 1900.

Mr. Gage also notes the omission of *PB* (for 'personal
best,' a sports term).  While I cannot write for enthusiasts of
other sports, we who jog refer to it as *PR* 'personal record.'

*[Gary Muldoon, Rochester, New York]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Brunner}

In re Leonard Cochran on &ldquo;Witchcraft&rdquo; [IX, 1] the attention
of the readership should be drawn to the two mock articles by
Paul Jennings under the joint title &ldquo;1066 and All Saxon,&rdquo;
included in his collection *I Was Joking, Of Course* (Max
Reinhardt, 1968), which may still be available via Bibliophile
Books, the source whence I obtained my own copy.  I can think
of no other modern writer of English who would have had the
gall to revise Hamlet's major soliloquy into the kind of English
we might now speak had the Normans lost at Hastings...and
got away with his &ldquo;improved&rdquo; version!

*[John Brunner, South Petherton, Somerset]*


#### EPISTOLA {David A. Freeman}

In the first column on the first page of &ldquo;Holy Water,...&rdquo;
[IX, 1], you refer to the word *horse* as an English slang word
for 'heroin.'  I think you may find that the English word comes
from Canada.  Canadian narcotic policing is done by the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police.  Amongst the heroin consumers and
trafficers the Police are therefore known as &ldquo;horsemen.&rdquo;  Hence
the use of the word *horse* for *heroin*.

*[David A. Freeman, Vancouver, B.C.]*


#### EPISTOLA {Harold Mann}

Along the road from here is a cast iron drain cover set in
the pavement (=sidewalk).  The lettering on it is still bold and
reads &ldquo;THOMAS CRAPPER, MARLBOROUGH WORKS, CHELSEA.&rdquo;
Hardly a sophomoric joke, though it is of course true that the
worthy Thomas did not bequeath a word to the language, as a
decent dictionary reveals.  This distinction, however, did fall to
another worker in the same field, one Joseph Bramah.  In 1778,
he took out a patent for a water closet with two valves which
was considered to be the best on the market for nearly a
hundred years, and the word *Bramah* came to be associated
with anything of first-rate quality.  This information is from the
Thames Water Authority Bulletin, and I can add that it was so
used in Essex (England) in the 1940s.  An acquaintance from
there assures me it is still in use, the usual form being &ldquo;That's a
bramah!&rdquo;  or some such phrase.

*[Harold Mann, Faversham, Kent]*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald R. Ricklin}

Zelling Bach [IX, 1] misread &ldquo;theater-ese&rdquo; as a Stefan
Kanfer misuse of Aleichem as a last name.  Stefan Kanfer was
reviewing the play *The World of Sholem Aleichem* not talking
about the individual in the quote about Gilford.

Among Theater People (and reviews of plays would-should?
—certainly reflect such usage) one often abbreviates a
play's title to one word (e.g., *Love's Labour's Lost* would be
called *Love's*, or just *Pond* for *On Golden Pond*).  Therefore,
Gilford is a peasant (of whatever kind) in Aleichem, the play,
as one might say &ldquo;in Shakespeare&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;in *Love's
Labour's Lost*.&rdquo;

*[Donald R. Ricklin, Worcester, Massachusetts]*


#### EPISTOLA {Garland Hicks}

The appearance of the letter from Frank E. Day [IX, 1]
puzzled me a bit.  His explanation of *hooker* was along the lines
of my explanation (which you said you would print but didn't),
but he gave the location as Falmouth, not Washington.

He may well be right; I said I could give no source more
authoritative than my memory.

However, I think it extremely unlikely that the term
applied only to women imported for Hooker's own pleasures
(assuming that such was his bent; you may hear from Hooker's
descendants on this point).  I think it much more plausible that
the term referred to camp followers in general.

*[Garland Hicks, Mt. Kisco, New York]*

## Pairing Pairs No. 10

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Slacker is down on his luck.  
(b). Knowledge of what goes to waste.  
(c). Early settlers first tend to these.  
(d). Roland choreographed this.  
(e). Openwork shoes.  
(f). Corner the flour market.  
(g). Insane duvet.  
(h). Gangester rubs out heroin dealer.  
(i). Literarily, a healthy communist.  
(j). Important dockmaster.  
(k). Superior to the pound.  
(l). Nursing quadruplets.  
(m). What a microcephalic nanocerebral ninnyhammer ought to do.  
(n). Huey's son.  
(o). What poor sick Achilles wasn't.  
(p). Turned by inattentive one.  
(q). Tennis on the house creates judges.  Nein?  
(r). Additional rendition adds to outgoing variety.  
(s). In this place, at present, but not in evidence.  
(t). How to greet students in school for elite.  
(u). Woman jailor in armor.  
(v). Crazy turnkey got away?  
(w). Quarry layout.  
(x). Site of Huey's seat.  
(y). Haberdashery makes custom curse.  
(z). Lease on torture device is exorbitant.

(1). Abreast.  
(2). Ahead.  
(3). Baby.  
(4). Boot.  
(5). Button.  
(6). Chez.  
(7). Class.  
(8). Court.  
(9). Crazy.  
(10). Deaf.  
(11). Dress.  
(12). Ear.  
(13). Ere.  
(14). Extra.  
(15). Feather.  
(16). Game. 
(17). Get.          
(18). Healed.            
(19). Here.          
(20). High.          
(21). Hole.            
(22). Intelligence.          
(23). Key.         
(24). Lace.           
(25). Long.          
(26). Longue.        
(27). Loose.        
(28). Man.           
(29). Men.             
(30). Merchant.           
(31). Navel.            
(32). Now.          
(33). Old.           
(34). Over.           
(35). Petit.           
(36). Plan.           
(37). Point.           
(38). Quilt.           
(39). Rack.      
(40). Read.        
(41). Rent.           
(42). Ride.          
(43). Scores.            
(44). Screw.           
(45). Slay.           
(46). Swear.          
(47). Two.           
(48). Version.          
(49). War.           
(50). Weight.          
(51). Well.        

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 of &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&egrave;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or 18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 of &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market
Square, Aylesbury, Bucks, England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer*.

*N.B.:* To allow for the slouth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either office,
we shall arrange to collect correct answers for 21 days, starting
with the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw
one winner from each office.

## Pairing Pairs No. 9

(a). Shoes that give some young girls a real lift.  (29, 24) Mary Jane.  
(b). Hearty contingent from New York City?  (1, 9) Apple Corps.  
(c). He gets only the sweet he merits.  (25, 11) Just Dessert.  
(d). Dame Sheep has it all together.  (15, 26) Ewe Knighted.  
(e). Shadow Boxing?  (17, 44) Feinting Spell.  
(f). Okay-he has the price of a ticket.  (16, 14) Fare Enough.  
(g). Is *The Birds* treacherous?  (20, 37) Fowl Play.  
(h). Play bridge to become aroused?  (19, 37) Four Play.  
(i). Special device for watching Persian fairies.  (34, 40) Peri Scope.  
(j). Defendant opposed to ordinary squabble.  (36,48) Plain Tiff.  
(k). Doubly contemptible musical instrument.  (4,49) Base Vile.  
(l). Slippery scene.  (43,42) Slide Show.  
(m). Naval person.  (5, 10) Belly Dancer.  
(n). Alley's just dessert.  (3,39) Baba Rum.  
(o). Forget to put out the cat.  (30,31) Nocturnal Omission.  
(p). Where they wait for the flowers to grow.  (38, 21) Queue Garden.  
(q). Marcel reported heavily Zeus has it with Leda.  (46,50) Swans Weigh.  
(r). Impressionable leather pendulum.  (13, 45) Easily Suede.  
(s). Flagg or nut?  (51, 22) Which Hazel.  
(t). Taxi queue at night club.  (6, 2) Cab Array.  
(u). Did Porter know film director?  (41, 32) Ship Ophuls.  
(v). Cockney camp follower to ask for a fight.  (33,7) Order Combat.  
(w). Patch.  (12,28) Dutch Man.  
(x). Has it rung up for him?  (23,27) Jacob's Ladder.  
(y). Order of the day.  (1,35) Apple Pie.  
(z). Swindler leads broker a merry dance.  (8, 47) Con Tango.  

The correct answer is (18) File.  The solutions are given
below.  The winner of No. 9 was Janet R. George, Worcester,
Massachusetts.

The winners of Paring Pairs No. 8 were Nancy L. Walden,
Schenectady, New York, and Emlyn Stephenson, Greenwich,
England.


#### EPISTOLA {Lillian Mermin Feinsilver}

Bryan A. Garner writes a lively letter [IX, 2], but he
apparently reads too hastily.  So intent he is on attacking my
criticism of John Simon's *Paradigms Lost* in &ldquo;When Paragons
Nod&rdquo; [VIII, 4], that he misinterprets much of my material.

Allowing that &ldquo;some&rdquo; of my complaints—regarding both
*PL* and Michaels &amp; Ricks's *The State of the Language*—are
justified, he notes that the &ldquo;majority&rdquo; of my criticisms of Simon
are &ldquo;subtle miscorrections of illusory falls from grace.&rdquo;  Well,
out of my presentation of seven sample defects (plus variations
on two) in the Michaels &amp; Ricks volume, Garner rejects but
one part of a triple comment on one author.  With regard to
Simon's work, my piece detailed-besides the title's failings—
eight imperfections (plus variations on two).  Three of my
objections (to the wrong verb form after a conditional clause,
to *et cetera* for *et alii* or *et al*., and to *like* as conjunction) are
sustained by Garner.  Two of the same infelicities are examples
of usage which Simon himself disparages, as are four others
(past tense for present perfect; poor punctuation; and—albeit
with somewhat different emphasis—inappropriate use of *less*;
and non-agreement of subject and verb).  Garner's judgment
therefore hardly absolves Simon, for if the latter's falls are
mostly illusory, so too must be his faultings of other writers.

Moreover, the cited stylistic inadequacies are not, as
Garner implies, &ldquo;rarities.&rdquo;  If proof be needed, witness the
redundancy on p. 72: &ldquo;It would perhaps not be an excessive
oversimplification...&rdquo; (Simon rails at others' redundant expressions
over a dozen times); or the confusion of *comprise* with *are
comprised* of on p. 136: &ldquo;...one should say... that all
segments of the industry 'are staffed with' responsible people
or 'comprise' them...&rdquo;; or the non-parallel construction with
*not only* on p. 178: &ldquo;...it is not only not needed, it may even
be a hinderance&rdquo; (this is inconsistant with the call for strict
parallelism with *either*... *or* on p. 45); etc.

Space is too limited for all the surprising violations of
espoused principle.  Let's pick up a few of the specific darts
thrown at my text:

Concerning *less*, I did not recommend the expression
Garner attributes to my &ldquo;literal-mindedness&rdquo;: &ldquo;Two readers, no
fewer..., have sent me....&rdquo;  I did mention that &ldquo;Two
readers, no less...&rdquo; conflicted with Simon's disapproval of *less*
for *fewer*, but I asked why *no less* was used at all, since two is
not a large number and the other meaning of the phrase-as in
&ldquo;The King and Queen, no less, will address our party&rdquo;—does
not fit the situation.

The &ldquo;perfectly lucid sentence&rdquo; Garner refers to still stops
me.  Without quoting it again, may I suggest that it does not
fulfill the goal projected by Simon on p. 58: &ldquo;to forestall
misunderstanding—to make some hypothetical reader's sailing a
little smoother.&rdquo;  If it did meet that standard, surely the editor
of this quarterly would have challenged my effort to improve it.

Regarding my call for a plural verb in &ldquo;What good is
correct speech and writing...?,&rdquo;  Garner asserts: &ldquo;*What*, as
subject, takes the singular verb, whether the noun that follows
is singular or plural.  Here the subject happens to be the noun
phrase *what good* rather than *what* alone, but that makes no
difference.&rdquo;  He seems unaware that *What good* is not the
subject here but a predicate nominative phrase.  (I assume he
would not recommend &ldquo;What is your motives?&rdquo;)  Garner is
attempting to exploit, in his first sentence, a statement from
Partridge's *Usage and Abusage* (1942, p. 354), as quoted by
Simon on p. 172, without recognizing that the models Partridge
offers—&ldquo;What I like is sprouts&rdquo;; etc.—are syntactically different
from the sentence under discussion.  He also is not cognizant
(along with Simon) that Partridge's guideline falls short of
being a hard-and-fast rule even for the relative-pronoun construction,
as may be seen in the following quotation, one of
several provided in Curme's *Syntax* (1931, p. 214): &ldquo;What have
been censured as Shakespeare's conceits are completely
justifiable.&rdquo;

Garner might more convincingly have limited his argument
to the point he makes concerning &ldquo;Why, you may ask, is
correct speech and writing important...?&rdquo;  —namely, that
*correct speech* and *writing* expresses a single idea-correct use
of language—and that the single verb is therefore an acceptable
choice.  (It is still not *my* choice or that of other readers who
perceive speech and writing as discrete, particularly in the
question on p. 176: &ldquo;What good is reading and writing to
people who cannot think?&rdquo;

Garner dismisses as vogue words *viability* (which I used)
and *viable*; but the terms still have legitimate meaning, in
which Simon employs the latter on p. 40: &ldquo;Slang is like a joke:
funny and viable only while it is new.&rdquo;

I have no objection to Garner's revision of a sentence in
either the recent piece or an old one, but I must reject his
statement that my &ldquo;tone is iconoclastic, as if by wrangling over
Simon's punctuation and phraseology we can [*sic*] dispose of
Simon forever and invalidate all his linguistic notions.&rdquo;  The
inference is illogical.  My article decried the decline of standards
as exemplified by two books which should have been
unrepresentative of that process, and I noted that Simon is
&ldquo;more than half right when he charges (p. 92): 'The real
culprits are the editors....' &rdquo; (Although Simon is there referring
to a specific journal, he also makes the accusation against
publishing media generally on p. 50: &ldquo;The deterioration of
copy editing and proofreading, incidentally, is a token of the
cultural entropy that has overtaken us in the postwar years.&rdquo;)

In the instance of *Paradigms Lost*, the previously published
discourses seemed to have been collected without any
attempt at rewriting or copy editing; and when the volume
went into paperback, it did so almost entirely without change
(I spotted only one problem sentence-not quoted in my
article—that was improved in the paperback issue).  The criticism
therefore had to be expressed.  It makes me, according to
Garner, a &ldquo;tarnished carper.&rdquo;  The pun is clever.  Some might
say that the phrase is applicable to John Simon.

The same designation may fit Garner as well.  His tone in
part mimics the disdain of Simon's; and besides the signs of
tarnish already noted, Garner is guilty of what Simon considers,
on pp. 44,172, and 186, to be an egregious solecism: using
the indicative in place of the subjunctive (*can*, quoted above,
for *could*).  He also slips into a locution that Simon on pp. 40-41
derogates except for &ldquo;informal usage&rdquo;: *can* for *may*—in &ldquo;But
one... should not gloat... nor can one really use such lapses
to discredit exemplary writers....&rdquo;  His punctuation, too, is
careless in several places.

Most incriminating is the fact that Garner could at once
be seeking a successor to Follett and be able to go through
Simon's volume even casually without noticing its—yes—&ldquo;fla-grant
or frequent&rdquo; shortcomings.  This may be further evidence
that Garner reads too hurriedly.  It may also point up the
ultimate effect of declining standards: from the drop in
conscientious workmanship and quality control that I spoke of
comes a drop in readers' perceptions of quality itself.  Even
literate readers have shrinking reserves of resistance to such
undermining influence.  Unless the current level of performance
is raised, verbal precision will turn out to be a lost cause—in
which event my husband's joking comment on &ldquo;When
Paragons Nod&rdquo; will have become accurate prediction: &ldquo;We
ain't seen nodding yet.&rdquo;

*[Lillian Mermin Feinsilver, Easton, Pennsylvania]*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Maine Lingo: Boiled Owls, Billdads, &amp; Wazzats*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780892720101/Maine-Lingo-Boiled-Owls-Billdads-0892720107/plp)
John Gould, (Down East Magazine, 1975; Second printing, 1980), xiv + 342 pp.

John Gould explains on page 1 of his *Maine Lingo*, under
the first entry—*B, begin with*—that superstitious seamen used to
believe they could avoid dire mishaps by giving their vessels
names that did not begin with *A*.  So in this book the *A* entries
come after the *B*s.  If you comprehend the logic of this, if you
note that this &ldquo;dictionary&rdquo; deals not with language or speech
but *lingo*, and if you recall that Gould's other books are &ldquo;fun
books,&rdquo; you have struck the right approach.  His entries—many
of them very amusing—are as miscellaneous as the words that
go into them, and they are full of his own comments and
quotations, with frequent illustrations from the speech of his
fellow *Mainiacs (q.v.)*: nothing (God forbid!)  prescriptive in it.

The book exists, I suppose, to amuse dabblers in language
and to educate Maine's *summer complaints* or *summercators*—
sometimes known as tourists—who are bewildered by its *money
cats, mitten money*, and the *scurryfunging* or *teakettling* of a
house ('tidying up').  And the *Obbligato* at the end of the
volumes may help tourists—if they're patient—in spotting on
their road maps some of the places they hear the natives
mention.  These placenames are listed (the *As* first, no doubt at
some risk) under their rightful spelling, so it may take time to
find *Shar-l't* under *Charlotte* and *Eel-a'-hut* under *Isle au Haut*.

What's included in the &ldquo;dictionary&rdquo;?  God's plenty.
Mainers breed words, Mainers continue to use old words—
sometimes preserving old dialect—and Mainers are quick to
extend the meaning of words—to *swamp out*, for instance.  In
the old logging days, the workers *swamped out* to clear away
trees and brush; now, when company is coming, a woman
swamps out her parlor or front room, whatever she calls it.
Some of the old words preserve the old pronunciation, like
*heist* for *hoist*; or old-fashioned verb forms, perhaps never
acceptable, like *drug, sot* for both *set* and *sat, clim, het up*.
Several of Gould's entries are succinct answers to questions
that non-Yankees frequently ask.  What's the difference between
a *clambake* and a *shore dinner*?  *Clambakes* are picnics, usually
on beaches, where clams and other delicacies are steamed or
baked; at a *shore dinner* you will have the same foods but in a
hotel dining room.  He comes to grips with the repeated query
about tomato in clam chowder.  If it's Maine clam chowder
there will be no tomatoes; Manhattan clam chowder will
contain tomatoes, perhaps other vegetables—and it may not
even have clams in it.  New Yorkers, says Gould, can't tell a
clam from a quahog.  Then there's *downeast*.  Anyone who looks
at a map might wonder why a person who goes from Boston to
Portland is going downeast.  The term, he explains, goes back to
the old sailing days when windjammers sailed out of Boston for
Maine and the Maritimes.  Sailors took advantage of prevailing
westerlies, sailing down wind.  Then when people no longer
depended on the winds, they still sailed down, now *downeast*
for some reason.

Are all the words Maine words?  It depends on what you
mean by *Maine words*.  All the words and expressions certainly
are or have been used in Maine.  Some of them are of Maine
origin and have never had occasion to escape to other parts of
the country—*sannup*, let's say, from Abnaki Indian, &ldquo;loosely
used throughout Maine for a boy-child and usually a mischievous
one,&rdquo; *coodle*, 'a small cove or backwater.'  Consider these
entries, all from the *G*s: *gaffle* (several men gaffle into something
heavy and lift it together), *goose greens, grinding sheep,
gundalow, gunkhole, gurnet, gurry* and *gurrybutt, guzzle hole*.
Most of us live our whole lives without encountering a single
one.

Many words and expressions infrequently heard in other
parts of the country are Yankee, perhaps eastern, but not
unique to Maine.  I recognize many *Maine Lingo* words that I
never hear in the Middle West as words current when I was
growing up in central Massachusetts about the time of WWI,
for instance: *dropped eggs* (on toast, of course), *wizzled up* (old
ladies and old apples), *nicely* and *poorly* as in &ldquo;Well, how *are*
you?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Nicely now but I was poorly all winter.&rdquo;  I would still
reply &ldquo;No, I never&rdquo; if anyone asked me, &ldquo;Did you ever?&rdquo;

There are too a good many words and expressions that
turn up farther away than New England.  I suspect that *catch it*
'get scolded,' *connections* 'near-relatives,' old *duffers*, and *gin-gerbread*
(on houses) are general terms now, as is *dead* used as
an adverb in *dead wrong* and *dead right*—to mention only a
few.  I have seen *fish or cut bait* used as the caption of a
political cartoon in a Wisconsin paper, and during the extra
long snowy winter a few years ago there was much talk of
*cabin fever*.  With the publication in the near future of the
*Dictionary of American Regional English*, edited by Professor
Frederic G. Cassidy, it will be considerably easier to sort out
these three categories.

I mistrust (to use one of Gould's words I have been
familiar with all my life) that I am not the only reader to object
to some of his attempts at representing Maine pronunciation.
Not that anyone would expect IPA in *Maine Lingo*—even big
dead-serious American dictionaries eschew that.  There *are* a
few idiosyncrasies in New England pronunciation that a person
must face up to if he tries to record them with letters of the
alphabet.  There are the so-called &ldquo;broad *a*&rdquo; heard sometimes in
words like *bath* and *last*: the &ldquo;*r*-less vowel&rdquo; heard in both
stressed and unstressed positions—*park your car in the lumber
yard* would give you four examples; and what is sometimes
referred to as the New England short *o*, falling between the *o*
of *go* and the *u* of *cut*, which makes *road* sound like *rod*, or
*boat* like *bot*, to name two.  In the *bath* words Gould follows
the usual practice of inserting an *h*-in *bahstid (bastard*) for
instance.  The *r*-less vowels do not fare so well: he does not use
any special spelling to represent this vowel in a stressed
position.  The *r* itself is not pronounced by Mainers—it indicates
that the preceding vowel is &ldquo;broad.&rdquo;  He does tell us that *palm*
is pronounced PARM in Maine; and he says *balm* and *barm* are
pronounced alike.  YES-MARM is his spelling of *yes-ma'am*,
probably to indicate that it is not YES-MA'M.  In unstressed
syllables he handles the vowel in two ways: he uses UH in such
words as POW-DUH and HAH-BUH (*harbor*) to represent almost a
secondary stress in such words; and he uses the apostrophe in
words like BAR'L (*barrel*) and KARM'L (*Carmel*, a town near
Bangor) where the vowel is almost nonexistent.  An apostrophe
sometimes serves other functions: in PA'TRIDGE (*partridge*) it is
used in a stressed syllable to show, I would guess, that this *r-*
less vowel has the *a* sound in *cat*, for I have heard both
*partridge* and *cartridge* so pronounced in central Massachusetts.

Sometimes the author neglects to indicate where the stress
falls, in PEE-KID, for instance.  Usually a reader's educated guess
will be right, but it is asking a good deal of a &ldquo;foreigner&rdquo; to
give him such a thing as ESK-UH-HORS (Aziscoos), with no
indication.  Most annoying of all is his frequent use of two
letters where only one is needed: POLE-LOCK for *Polack*, FAYYET
for *Fayette*, PLERM-MO for *Palermo*.

Once in a while, in explaining pronunciation or the origin
of words, Gould waxes a bit romantic for scholarly tastes.  For
instance, he explains that *doze* is a kind of interior wood rot, an
infection which causes disintegration only when the wood is
burned.  &ldquo;Likely,&rdquo; he suggests, &ldquo;this use of *doze* derives from a
person's dropping off for a nap, because the wood seems
palpably to go to sleep.&rdquo;  And in discussing the New England
short *o*, he says that some (is he among them?) fancy that &ldquo;*o-at*&rdquo;
words have a &ldquo;mannerism...lingering from very old
Anglo-Saxon, when there was almost a two-syllable tingle to *go-at,
bo-at, co-at*, etc.&rdquo;  A likely story!  But far from romantic is his
unconvincing explanation of *tomally* 'the liver of a lobster.'
This term, Gould claims, originated in Maine.  *Webster 3* says it
is &ldquo;of Cariban origin akin to Galibi *tumali* sauce of lobster and
crab livers.&rdquo;  With all due respect to the Mainiacs, I find
Webster more convincing.

It *is* a good book and an attractive one.  There are margins,
plenty of space for one's own observations and criticisms.
Typographical ornaments give it a dressed-up look.  Several
sections of pictures, chiefly photographs, easily take a reader
back into a Maine of the years between the Civil War and the
early 1920s: pictures of all sorts of horsedrawn vehicles—
buggies, a watercart, a circus wagon, a fire engine, a snow
roller, a stagecoach, a trolley; of workers engaged in hauling
granite, hauling lumber, cutting ice, lobstering, clamming;
sailing vessels of many types.  One more recent close-up says
Maine as clearly as the old photographs do.  One elderly
woman, at what may well be a town meeting, is saying to
another *sotto voce* as she covers her mouth with something that
may well be an agenda, &ldquo;Who you doctorin' with this winter?&rdquo;

God's plenty it is.

*[Margaret Waterman, Associate Editor Emeritus, DARE]*


#### EPISTOLA {Library Staff Member}

Mr. Garner [VIII, 3] should check up on his Thaises—the
second one is supposed to have lived in the 4th century A.D.
(not the 1st century B.C., when it might have seemed strange to
have become a nun on any account).  She was converted by
Saint Paphnutius (some say Bessarian and, in Massenet's opera,
Athanasius).

*[Library Staff Member, Smith College]*


#### EPISTOLA {Madeleine Macanlay}

Harry Zoshak [VII,3] seeks the name of the author of the
pun, &ldquo;Is life worth living?  That depends on the liver.&rdquo;  While
thumbing through the *Oxford Dictionary of Quotations*, Second
Edition, 1953, I noted the following [p.403:25]: &ldquo; 'Is life
worth living?  ...' he suspects it is, in a great measure, a
question of the liver, from *Punch*, Vol. lxxiv, p. 210, 1878.&rdquo;

*[Madeleine Macanlay, White Rock, B.C.]*


### OBITER DICTA: *The Misplaced Stop*
*John Levitt, University of Keele, Staffordshire*

It was interesting to read Herman Doh's account of the
use of misplaced stops for comic effect in Udall and Shakespeare
[IX, 1], but readers should be warned that these are far
from being the earliest uses of this device in English literature.
There are three short satirical poems reprinted in R.H. Robbins's
edition of *Secular Lyrics of the XIVth and XVth
Centuries* (Oxford, England, 2nd edition 1954) which probably
date from a good century before the examples from Elizabethan
drama.  They occur in two Cambridge University Mss.
The most effective of them, No. 111 in Robbins, is

>Nowe the lawe is ledde by clere conscience.  
fful seld.  Couetise hath dominacioun.  
In Euery place.  Right hath residence.  
Neyther in towne ne feld.  Similacion.  
Ther is truly in euery cas.  Consolacioun.  
The pore peple no tyme hase. but right.  
Men may fynd day ne night.  Adulacioun.  
Nowe reigneth treuth in euery mannys sight.

The trick, of course, is to read the poem with the mid-line stop
taken as the real point of the line division in each case.  &ldquo;Right
hath residence neither in town nor countryside,&rdquo; etc.  The few
words which might give a modern reader a little trouble are:
*seld*, 'seldom'; *couetise*, 'covetousness'; *similacion*, 'dissimulation.'
The last sentence should be read &ldquo;Adulation now reigns
*as* truth in every man's sight.&rdquo;  This particular poem was quite
popular, being found scribbled on the fly-leaves of no fewer
than four manuscripts.


#### EPISTOLA {Peter A. Douglas}

I was intrigued by the idea suggested by Mary Patterson
of Toronto [IX, 2] that the increasing popularity of digital
clocks and watches might push into disuse such terms as
*clockwise* and *anti/counterclockwise*.  While some traditionalists
will always have clockwork watches and many public clocks
will always be of the conventional type and thus preserve the
visible meaning of the words, it is nevertheless interesting to
consider possible replacements.  In speculating on this I
wandered along some fascinating linguistic byways.

Obviously just *right* and *left* will not do since they convey
no sense of circular movement.  Realistically, that alternatives
will ever be needed is highly doubtful, but a perusal of a few
dictionaries showed me that there are far more candidates than
I ever suspected.  The most appealing is *sunwise* or *sunways*
'moving in the direction of the sun,' which is clockwise at least
in the northern hemisphere (when facing south), and does
suggest circular movement.  It is likely to lead to confusion,
though, since neither of these words would mean the same in
Australia as in England.  Most of the words I unearthed belong
to the province of science and do not have the simple
unpretentiousness of *clockwise* or, in fact, the same specific
meaning.  Some are not true or synonymous candidates because
their strict meaning includes a spiral motion.  *Dextrose* and
*dextrorsal* are botanical words referring to climbing plants
which twine upwards in a spiral from left to right.  Other plants
twining spirally around an axis from right to left are called
*sinistrorse* or *sinistrorsal*.  The Latin *dexter* 'on the right' and
*sinister* 'on the left' feature frequently in these terms.  Here
they are combined with *vorsus*, a variant of *versus* from *vertere*
'to turn.'

From the world of the marine biologist comes *dextral*,
referring to gastropod shells that have the spire or whorl
ascending from left to right as viewed by the observer.  Its
opposite in the field of conchology is *sinistral*.  Also applying to
shellfish are *dexiotropic* and *laeotropic*, where the shell's spire
turns to the right and left, respectively.  These two terms refer,
I gather, to the right and left side of the creature, not the
observer, as is the case with *dextral* and *sinistral*, says the
*OED*, quoting from the 1883 edition of *Encyclopaedia Britannica*.
Sounds like an additional complication to me.

As if that were not enough to ensure the longevity of
refreshingly ordinary words like *clockwise*, further along the
avenues of science we come across the adjectives *dextrorotatory*
or *dextrorotatary, dextrogyrous, dextrogyrate* and *dextrogyre*.  All
refer, somewhat exorbitantly, to a clockwise rotation chiefly in
connection with certain substances whose properties cause the
plane of a ray of polarized light to rotate in a clockwise
direction.  (Hence *dextrose* 'the dextrorotatory isomer of glucose.'
Rotation in the opposite direction is known to the
initiated *as laevorotatory* or *laevogyrate*, from the Latin *laevus*
meaning 'left.'  From this we get *levulose* 'the fruit sugar with a
laevorotatory effect on polarized light.'

It is evidently far from likely that any of these words will
ever trespass into everyday writing, let alone speech, as they
are cumbersome and obscure in their classical unfamiliarity and
lack the homey straightforwardness of *clockwise* and *anticlock-wise*.
Even those unacquainted with old-fashioned clockwork
timepieces would be more comfortable with *clockwise* than any
of these arcane technical terms.  The everyday words we now
use are, moreover, more useful since they may be employed
both adjectivally (*a clockwise turn*) and adverbially (*he turned
clockwise*) without any change to the word.  The long Latinate
adjectives require further lengthening with the adverbial suffix,
and who would ever use *dextrogyrately* or *sinistrorsally?*

In passing it may be of interest to note that other
languages tackle the matter in various ways and somewhat
uncomfortably too.  For *clockwise* my French dictionary has
&ldquo;dans le sens des aiguilles d'une montre,&rdquo; the inadequate &ldquo;&agrave;
droite&rdquo; and the rare &ldquo;dextrorsum&rdquo; (=Latin 'turned towards
the right').  Spanish also prefers to define *clockwise* rather than
provide an equivalent word: &ldquo;en el sentido de las agujas del
reloj.&rdquo;  Italian is more concise with *destrorso*, while the German
is more akin to English: *im Uhrzeigensinn* 'in clock-handssense.'

Like many words, *clockwise*, to me, has a meaning in itself
which is not inseparable from the progressively more extraneous
image of the hands and face of a clock.  This is another
reason such words will outlive the object which they are
initially associated with: their meaning transcends that of their
components.  When I use *clockwise* I give no more thought to a
clock than I do to honey when I use *honeymoon* (or to *moon*,
for that matter), or to a pig when I write *pig-iron*.  I think that
*clockwise* has reached—or will eventually reach-that stage.
Some other words where the components are so separated that
they are really remote from the word as a whole are *window*
&ldquo;wind-eye,&rdquo; *daisy* &ldquo;day's eye,&rdquo; *scapegoat, gossamer* &ldquo;goosesummer,&rdquo;
*handicap* &ldquo;hand-in-cap,&rdquo; *bonfire* &ldquo;bone-fire,&rdquo; *halibut*
&ldquo;holy butt&rdquo; or *flatfish*, etc.  Centuries of use have blurred the
words' elements as well as awareness of the original elements
of their composition.

Technical changes are always likely to take us further from
familiar objects which gave rise to words and expressions, but
if the words and expressions are useful, essential, picturesque
or more convenient than other expressions, then they are likely
to survive.

*[Peter A. Douglas, Albany, New York]*

## Light Refractions
*Thomas H. Middleton*

&ldquo;It takes a heap o' livin' in a house t' make it home,&rdquo; said
Edgar Guest.  No more.  Today, it just takes an advertising copy
writer of moderate intelligence.  You never see advertisements
for luxurious houses.  What you see advertised are &ldquo;luxury
homes.&rdquo;  Out here in Southern California, where, as someone
once said, you have to brush aside all the fake tinsel to get to
the real honest-to-God tinsel that underlies it, a developer
creates an enormous, oddly shaped, serpentine ditch that
meanders over a few hundred acres, fills it with water, and calls
it a lake.  He has designed his lake to have a long and tortuous
shoreline that twists and turns all over the acreage so that he
can build as many &ldquo;waterfront homes&rdquo; as possible.  Then he
crowds that shoreline with a hundred or so houses, installs
identical stoves, washing machines, and refrigerators in all of
them, and instantly, with a stroke of a copy writer's pen, they
are homes.  Forget that heap o' livin'.

You can't blame the copy writer.  He was just doing what
we all do—using the warmest-sounding word to make something
appear most attractive.  This is a ploy related to euphemism,
the use of a more pleasant-sounding term for an
unpleasant fact, such as &ldquo;pass away&rdquo; or &ldquo;pass on&rdquo; for *die* or
&ldquo;disadvantaged person&rdquo; for *pauper* or &ldquo;slow learner&rdquo; for
*knucklehead*.

&ldquo;Home&rdquo; for &ldquo;house&rdquo; can't really be classed as a euphemism,
as there is nothing necessarily unpleasant or offensive
about a house; but the use of &ldquo;home&rdquo; for a newly erected
building is a step in the same general direction as euphemism.
A house really isn't a home until someone lives in it.  To that
extent, at least, Edgar Guest was right.

Cars have been subjected to the same sort of treatment in
advertising recently.  It used to be that automobiles were
advertised as automobiles, autos, or cars.  Then some huckster-wizards
got fancy-schmancy, and not many years ago, we were
addressed on television by a very ritzy-looking English doll who
looked like the type who gets strings of diamonds and emeralds
in her Crackerjack box and who purred over Lincoln Continentals.
She never referred to the Continentals as &ldquo;automobiles&rdquo;
or &ldquo;autos&rdquo; or simply &ldquo;cars.&rdquo;  They were &ldquo;motorcars.&rdquo;
The way she said &ldquo;motorcars&rdquo; made these machines sound very
high-class, indeed.  I suppose Continentals are, in fact, pretty
high-class.  They're way the hell out of my reach, anyway.  This
veddy-veddy U-looking blonde with her veddy-veddy U-sounding
&ldquo;motorcars&rdquo; simply reeked of riches and crushing hauteur.
I didn't for a second question &ldquo;motorcar&rdquo; as a perfectly
legitimate word for &ldquo;car,&rdquo; but she's the only person I've ever
heard actually refer to an automobile as a motorcar.  Some may
think that &ldquo;motorcar&rdquo; is common in England, but I've never
heard it over there.  Maybe it's used mostly by filthy-rich blonde
beauties.  The only filthy-rich Brits I know are a couple who
customarily barrel around London in a Land Rover—one of
those oversized Jeep-spinoffs you see in the movies jouncing
over the Serengeti, terrorizing the giraffes and zebras.  My
friends do a pretty fair job of terrorizing their own local
citizenry, and it has crossed my mind that if the British version
of the Jacquerie ever takes charge, my friends' heads will have
every right to be among the first to roll.  But they would never
call their juggernaut a motorcar.

The term I actually object to for a car, though, isn't
motorcar; it is one the Chrysler Corporation and the BMW
folks share a liking for—or did until quite recently.  Their term-of-choice
for a car was *driving machine*.  BMW last year ran
ads for &ldquo;the ultimate driving machine.&rdquo;

It seems to me that a driving machine should be a
machine that drives something, just as a sewing machine is
a machine that sews.  But a &ldquo;driving machine&rdquo; doesn't drive
a damned thing (unless you own an only slightly mitigated
lemon like my Dodge Omni, in which case your car has by now
driven you 'round the bend, making it a true driving machine).
There is something disturbing about calling a car a driving
machine, though.  The implication is that the primary purpose
of a car is to be driven.  I suppose there are some people who
buy cars just so that they can drive them.  These guys—I say
&ldquo;guys&rdquo; because I think women are generally brighter and more
practical about this sort of thing—are apt to buy things like
driving gloves for driving their driving machines.

For most of us, the purpose of a car is to transport
ourselves and our families and friends from one place to
another, and our concerns are mundane, like how many adults,
children, and dogs will fit into the damned things, how much
luggage they'll take, how many skis and bicycles we can lash to
the outside, and how many miles they'll get to the gallon.
These concerns are not germane if what you have is a driving
machine.

We're all familiar with the obscenely euphemistic style of
nomenclature developed by the Pentagon—stuff like &ldquo;delivery
systems&rdquo; to designate not United Parcel and Railway Express,
but incredibly sophisticated means of inflicting mass destruction.
During my own illustrious military career, while World
War II was taking place elsewhere, I encountered a piece of
military hardware called the M1 Space Heater.  There were
instructions on the bulletin board of our barracks in Freeman
Field, at Seymour, Indiana—instructions titled &ldquo;How to Fire
the M1 Space Heater.&rdquo;  I had no idea what an M1 Space
Heater was.  It sounded pretty Buck Rogers-y to me.  I was
shortly disabused of this notion.  The instructions said &ldquo;1. Place
some wadded newspaper in the bottom of the space heater. 2. Put some wood scraps on the paper to serve as kindling. 3. Light the paper, using a match or cigarette lighter.  4. When
the kindling has caught fire and is burning steadily, place lumps
of coal in the space heater.  5. Close the door of the space
heater and adjust the damper for proper burning of the fuel. 6. Add coal as needed.&rdquo;  The barracks were heated by a row of
four coal-burning pot-bellied stoves running down the center of
the floor.  It wouldn't have occurred to me to call a pot-bellied
stove a space heater, but of course, that's what it is.

Personally, I'd have been tempted to call it a G.I.-warmer,
but there were more effective flesh-and-blood G.I.-warmers in
town, some in houses, and a gratifyingly goodly number in
their cozy homes.

## You Said a Mouthful
*Richard Lederer, Concord, New Hampshire*

In an earlier VERBATIM [IX, 2] I exposed the hidden herds of
animals, flocks of birds, swarms of insects, and universities
of fish that metaphorically gallop, fly, creep, and swim through
our English language.

Now it is time to nibble on another spicy, meaty, juicy
topic—the veritable banquet of mushrooming food metaphors
that grace the table of our language and season our tongue.  As
we chew the fat about the food-filled expressions that are
packed like sardines and sandwiched into our everyday conversation,
you'll have a meal ticket to a cornucopia of food for
thought.

I know.  I have heard through the grapevine that you don't
give a fig because you think that I'm out to lunch and nutty as
a fruitcake; that you're giving me the raspberry for asking you
to swallow a corny, mushy, soupy, cheesy, seedy, syrupy, sugarcoated,
saccharine topic that just isn't your cup of tea; that
you're beet red with anger at the idea of a pot-boiler that's no
more than a tempest in a teapot; and that you're simmering
because I'm out to cook your goose and egg you on by
rehashing an old chestnut that's just pie in the sky and won't
amount to a hill of beans.

But nuts to all that.  You may think that my gastronomic
metaphors are garbage, tripe, and a lot of baloney, but I plan
to bring home the bacon without hamming it up.  This fruitful
topic is no lemon; it's a plum.

Rather than crying over spilt milk, I'm going to put all my
eggs in one basket because I'm cool as a cucumber and
confident that you'll relish this crackerjack, peachy-keen feast
that I've cooked up.  I don't wish to become embroiled in a
rhubarb, but your beefing and stewing sound like sour grapes
to me.  In fact, if you've digested the spoonfed culinary
metaphors up to this course in my meat-and-potatoes article,
the rest will be gravy—duck soup, a piece of cake, and easy as
pie: just like taking candy from a baby.

Just think of the people whom we meet every day.  Some
have taste; others we take with a grain of salt; and still others
drive us bananas:

the young sprouts and broths of lads who feel their oats
and are full of beans;

the crusty oldsters who are wrinkled as prunes and no
longer in their salad days;

the peppery smart cookies (no mere eggheads, they) who
use their beans and noodles to cut the mustard;

the half-baked, pudding-headed vegetables, meatheads
who drive us nuts with their slow-as-molasses pea brains, who
gum up the works, and who are always in a pickle, a jam, hot
water, or the soup;

the unsavory, crummy, hard-boiled, ham-fisted types, with
their cauliflower ears, who can cream us, beat the stuffing out
of us, make us into mince meat and hamburger, and knock us
flatter than a pancake;

the mealy-mouthed marshmallows and cream puffs whose
knees turn to jelly as they gingerly waffle on every issue to see
which side their bread is buttered on;

the carrot-topped, pizza-faced string beans and bean poles
who, with their lumpy Adam's apples, are long drinks of water;

the top bananas, big cheeses, and big bread-winners who
ride the gravy train by making a lot of lettuce and dough and
who never work for peanuts or small potatoes;

the honeys, tomatoes, dumplings, cheesecakes, and sweety
pies with their peaches-and-cream complexions, strawberry
blonde hair, almond eyes, and cherry lips;

the saucy tarts who wiggle their melons and buns and
fritter away their time buttering up and milking their sugar
daddies dry;

the salt-of-the-earth good eggs who become the apples of
our eye and make life a bowl of cherries.

Hot dog!  I hope you're pleased as punch that this souped-up
topic is the berries, not the pits.  The proof of the pudding is
in the eating, and this cream of the crop of palate-pleasing food
figures is bound to get its just desserts and sell like hotcakes.
And if I'm wrong, I'll eat crow and humble pie.

In a nutshell, you now can see how often we truly eat our
words.

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. I'd bear it badly, getting such angry criticism.  (8)  
5\. Head light?  (6)  
9\. Astronauts view this place with mixed emotions.  (4,4)  
10\. Fighter running back to meet the barbarian is anxiously nervous.  (4,2)  
11\. Mental blocs.  (15)  
13\. A thing impelled to be reborn.  (8)  
14\. Fellow who may err so, yet go back in and make it all right.  (5)  
15\. Honey gets her degree, and she's a peach!  (5)  
17\. Automobile in smart reverse among other vehicles.  (8)  
20\. Strange treat is no dish for the Home Office. (7,8)  
21\. Finds out the mad king is facing two different poles.  (6)  
22\. If I sign it I only will see power to use the car.  (8)  
23\. So you can't have a rose garden.  How about a string of beads?  (6)  
24\. The little woman joins other little women, and that's it.  (8)

**Down**

1\. A fool for dark humor. (6)  
2\. Pelota's champion has a religious bent.  (7)  
3\. Steal fresh steaks for the chuckwagon?  (6,2,1,6)  
4\. Putting a modest sum on a nag, I gave it to a bent gent.  (7,1,3)  
6\. Chess moves to offset the attack.  (15)  
7\. Gin is for the gangbuster's constant complaints.  (7)  
8\. Former sham now tells all.  (7)  
12\. Reading rendered in a poor tone is not exactly this charming for the audience.  (9,2)  
15\. It could be all wool and a yard wide when you buy it for the jalopy.  (7)  
16\. Lines thrown for a lot of bull.  (7)  
18\. Nastier tot of liquor, and the Greeks have a word for it...(7)  
19\. ...but if you really want to get a bag on, it's better than Brand X!


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;I am sure the leaders in the Kremlin are enjoying to the
hilt the aura of low esteem in which teachers in the United
States are held.&rdquo;  [From &ldquo;The teacher has a quick quiz for
you,&rdquo; by Susan Schan, in the *Kalamazoo Gazette*, 3 October 1982.     Submitted by Michael B. Huston, Kalamazoo, Michigan.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

300 platers at British Shipbuilders' Scott Lithgow yards on
the Clyde walked out last week after one shop steward was
dismissed and another was suspended for allegedly doing The
Financial Times crossword during working hours.&rdquo;  [From *The
Times*, 29 September 1982.  They had to send them down to get
the point across.]

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Hav-'er-sack  
6\. PHASE (SHAPE)  
9\. WATER POLO (R-A WET POOL)  
10\. Armor  
11\. T-ale-NT  
12\. F-ire-ARMS  
14\. EVIL KARMA (A VILE MARK)  
16\. e-X-its (Crossties)  
19\. Sense  
20\. Belittled  
21\. M-edit-ATE  
23\. Pen(n)-on  
26\. ME-dia  
27\. Kama Sutra  
28\. Cheek  
29\. Stride-NCY.

**Down**

1\. HOWITZERS (SIZE WORTH)  
2\. VITAL SIGN (VIGILANT'S)  
3\. Rerun  
4\. AWOL  
5\. (K)NO-WIT-all-S  
6\. PLA-cement  
7\. AI-me-R  
8\. Earns (urns)  
13\. Grub-stakes  
15\. Keep track  
17\. I-sling-ton  
18\. S-Eden-TARY  
21\. Mimi-c  
22\. Dodge  
24\. Eased (teased)  
25\. O-mar.  



[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v9n3_Winter_1983)