--- 
title: "VOL IX, No 3 [Spring, 1983]"
draft: false
sidebar-toc: true
sidebar: right
widgets: [toc]
---

## Prep School Slanguage
*Richard Lederer, St. Paul's School*

Not long ago (it could have been any night), a group of
students who board at St. Paul's School, where I have been
teaching English for twenty-one years, sat around waiting for a
shipment of starch to arrive from a local pizza emporium.
When almost an hour had passed beyond the appointed time of
delivery, one of the boys called up and asked the parlor to *bag
the za* (meaning 'cancel the pizza').  The pizza parlor person
asked, &ldquo;You want me to do what?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Bag the pizza,&rdquo; the boy explained.  After a pause, the voice replied: &ldquo;We don't bag
pizzas here; we put it in boxes.&rdquo;

Take 500 boys and girls who are blessed with an abundance
of linguistic exuberance and word-making energy, gather
them into a close-knit boarding school community far from a
big city, and you can be certain that they will create their own
special vocabulary, full of daring metaphors, cryptic abbreviations,
surprising semantic shifts, and curious coinages.  Since
one of the purposes of such a vocabulary, as to the thieves'
cant to which it is cousin, is to make it possible for the group
*not* to be understood by the uninitiated, the pizza man, quite
naturally, did not comprehend the special usage of *bag* in St.
Paul's School lingo.

According to H.L. Mencken, the word *slang* developed in
the eighteenth century either from an erroneous past tense of
*sling* or from *language* itself through blending and clipping, as
in (thieve)*s'lang*(uage) and (beggar)*s'lang*(uage).  The average
prep school student combines the more bizarre elements of
American jive talk, beat lingo, student cant, and regionalisms
with a number of terms that are pure preppie.  Thus, I have
adopted the broad term *slanguage* for this disquisition on the
informal speech (seldom the writing) of students (seldom
faculty) at St. Paul's School, a rural boarding school set in
Concord, New Hampshire.  Most of the words I shall discuss
are not to be found in even the most up-to-date dictionaries of
American slang.

Slanguage words tend to lead mayfly lives.  Like Shakespeare's
poor player, they have their hour upon a school's stage
and are heard no more.  But while their birth is more violent
and their expiration more rapid than those of standard English
speech, all slanguage words are created and derived in a
number of time-honored methods of word formation.  My hope
is that readers may use the following analysis to make sense
and order of the slanguage that is slung in other environments
and may gain insight into the ways that all new words are
formed.

*Clipping*.  The shearing away of a part of a word so that
the remainder comes to stand for the whole is called clipping.
Much of prep school slanguage consists simply of the shortening
of familiar terms so often used by a homogeneous group
that a hint is sufficient to indicate the whole.  Brevity is the soul
of slang.

Thus, a *preppie* who attends St. Paul's School is a *Paulie*
(clipping + pet suffix -*ie*).  All Paulies start life at school as
*newbs* ('new boys'; girls are also *newbs*).  Paulies begin each
day in their *dorms*, from which they go directly to *breck*
('breakfast') and then to *chap* ('chapel') for nourishment and
nurture.  Afterwards come classes, whose titles are often
clipped, including *Intro* ('Introduction to Religious Studies'),
*Hum Rel* ('Human Relations'), *Hum Sex* ('Human Sexuality'),
and (gasp!) *Hum Per* ('Human Personality').  Paulies who don't
*vedge* ('vegetate') will produce good grades to show their *rents*
('parents').  On spring afternoons, some Paulies go to *lax prac*
('lacrosse practice'), where they hope to be *jocks,* not *spazzes*
('spastics'), as their *bods* soak up *rays*.

*Acronymania*.  The most extreme form of shortening is in
the acronym, in which words are reduced to their initial letters.
Such verbal compacting is bound to happen at a place like *SPS*,
where community members need to refer to buildings, committees,
and programs succinctly yet comprehensively.  Thus, rule-breakers
will often find themselves meeting with the *DC*
('Disciplinary Committee') and having to go *OR* ('on restriction')
or, worse yet, *OB* ('on bounds').  All students may relax at
the *CC* (a reduplicative acronym for the Community Center) or
pick up news from home at the *PO*.

SPS slanguage has spawned two particularly clever acronyms.
First, when a suite of audio-visual rooms was installed in
the basement of our main academic building, some waggish
genius added a suffix to the acronym A-V to create the brilliant
and apparently enduring pun: *The Aviary*.  Second, the arrival
of coeducation to our school in 1971 inspired the verb to *to scope*
(a clipping of *telescope*) and the derived noun *scoper,* 'one who
appreciatively ogles the opposite sex.'  From this process has
arisen an unofficial organization named *SCOPERS,* an acronym
said to stand for 'Students Concentrating On the Palatable
Extremities of the Reciprocal Sex.'  Happily, the society is open
to both boys and girls.

*Shifty conversions*.  Because modern English has shed most
of its flexional endings, its words are endowed with the happy
facility of changing their so-called parts of speech with great
ease.  This ability of our words to rail-jump from one grammatical
class to another is called function shift, or conversion.

Prep school slanguage fully exploits this lively characteristic.
Many SPS conversions are desubstantival verbs: *to book, to
brick, to duke (it out),* and *to tube* mean, respectively, 'to do
something rapidly' (&ldquo;the track captain's really booking&rdquo;), 'to be
frightened' (&ldquo;I took one look at the exam and just bricked&rdquo;),'to
fight,' and 'to watch television.'

As the boundaries between word classes become blurred,
almost any interchange, it seems, is possible: &ldquo;that guy's a real
*grind*&rdquo; (verb into noun), &ldquo;my dormmaster sure serves great
*munchies* at our *feeds*&rdquo; (verbs into nouns), &ldquo;let's go *pond* a
newb&rdquo; (noun into verb), and, most exotically, &ldquo;I've just been
*latered*&rdquo; ('done in,' adverb into passive verb).

Two vogue words that are prominent in the SPS lexicon
were formed in strikingly similar ways.  To *boze* means 'to mess
up because of disorganization or sloppiness'; a team with a big
lead must be sure to avoid bozing in the last period.  The word
appears to be a clipping of the name Bozo (the Clown) that has
been converted to a verb.  To *bogue,* 'smoke a cigarette,' has
traveled the same morphological route.  Take the name of
cigarette-puffing Humphrey Bogart, convert the surname into a
verb, and then lop off the last syllable.  Thus, both words are
eponyms that have been clipped and function-shifted, illustrating
that very often several methods are simultaneously at work
in the formation of a slanguage word.

*Curious combinations*.  True to its Germanic heritage, the
English language loves to make compounds by welding
together two independent words to form a new concept.
Among such combinations in the slanguage corpus are

*moon-man*: a noun describing a person not like ourselves.
We are popular, attractive, and clever.  Moon-men may be
smart, but they are not popular, attractive, or clever.  Moon-women
do not exist.

*space cadet*: a neophyte moon-man.

*embryo Joe*: a large-brained *computer-jock*: a science-loving
moon-man.

*wale on*: to embarrass or to triumph, as &ldquo;I waled on his
face.&rdquo;

Sometimes in English we combine morphemes in such a
way that the beginning of one word runs into the end of
another to form a blend.  Lewis Carroll's *chortle (chuckle* +
*snort*) and *galumphing (gallop* + *triumphing*) are famous
examples.  Two slanguage words that mean 'sickeningly sloppy'
may fit into this category.  About half of my informants insisted
that *scuz* is a bland of *scum* and *fuzz,* while the other half
claimed that it is a front and back clipping of *disgusting*.
Similarly, some maintain that the vogue word *rasty* is a blend
of *rancid* and *nasty,* while others assert that it is a pure
coinage.

*Figuratively speaking*.  In &ldquo;A Visit to the Language Zoo&rdquo;
[VERBATIM, IX, 2] and &ldquo;You Said a Mouthful&rdquo; [VERBATIM, IX,
3], I attempted to show how zoological and food metaphors
enliven our vocabularly, proving the truth of James Greenough's
and George Kittredge's statement that &ldquo;language is
fossil poetry which is continually being worked over for uses of
speech.&rdquo;

In the slanguage of prep schools, this metaphorical substitution
for the plain, literal word can be seen in full activity,
and it is not surprising that the words with the greatest
metaphorical energy concern academic life.  Disastrous performances
on tests generate two striking linguistic clusters.  The
first I call the rotisserie metaphor: one doesn't just do poorly on
an exam: he or she (in vaguely increasing degrees of heat) gets
*smoked, lit, torched, burned, toasted, fried, baked, roasted*, or
*sizzled*.  Then there is the violent, paramilitary pattern of verbs:
one gets *hammered, bombed, shot down,* or *blown away*.

Note that all the verbs are in the passive voice.  The
student is seen as a helpless victim of menacing, uncontrollable
forces.  In pale contrast stand a few active verbs, most notably
&ldquo;to *ace* a test&rdquo; (probably a golfing metaphor).  This is not to say
that preppies don't often perform superbly on examinations,
just that it is bad form to talk about it.

A few other slanguage metaphors are

*cooler*: a relatively ancient refrigeration metaphor for the
Infirmary, where one's social activities are put on ice.

*tool*: one who is used by others; a stooge.

*to cruise*: a ship or airplane metaphor denoting a social
tour of the campus after hours.

In the figure we call synecdoche, a part of the whole
becomes a name for the whole, or vice versa as in &ldquo;sixty *head*
of cattle&rdquo; or &ldquo;fifty *sails*.&rdquo;  Paulies play *puck* (ice hockey) or
*hoop* (basketball, also acronymed to *b-ball*).  Paulies do not
watch television; they watch *the tube*, or they *tube out*.  Here
we have a synecdoche, which is the result of a function shift,
which in turn is a clipping of *picture tube*.  Metonymy, a figure
by which something is designated not by its own name but by
the name of something that suggests it, can be observed in *the
Second Floor* (a locational designation for the School's administration),
*pit* (another name for basketball), and *jock* (an athlete).
In *jock*, an item of sports apparel has been (figuratively) clipped
and has come to stand for the person, so that girls can also be
jocks.

*Semantic antics*.  Once a word has been invented and
taken its place in our language, it doesn't just sit still, as we
know from the recent histories of entries like *gay, clone*, and
*Mickey Mouse*.  In SPS slanguage we discover that the word
*lush* has come to mean 'easy,' as in &ldquo;a lush course,&rdquo; that *bag*
means 'to drop from one's agenda,' as in &ldquo;*bag the za*,&rdquo; and that
*a turkey*, which has nothing to do with geography or ornithology,
describes someone we can't stand.  *A fog* is not a weather
phenomenon but, rather, a person who is out of it, in a mental
fog, and a *fogue* (probably a clipping of *fogey*) is a stupid
mistake that a real fog makes, like pulling an all-nighter and
then sleeping through the examination.

One process of semantic change is called emptying.  Words
which once possessed very real and specific meaning can, with
time, become vague and hollow.  In the late Sixties, at many
schools, everything was *cool* or *neat*, from the style of a friend's
boots to an epic poem.  By the mid-Seventies, the vogue words
expressing approval were *unbelievable, fabulous*, and *fantastic*.
Today the affirmative grunt-words on campus are *intense* and
*awesome*, be the subject an athletic victory or a great symphony.
Negative grunt-words include *rude, beat*, and *rasty*.

*Curious coinages*.  Very few words in English are fashioned
from unrelated, meaningless elements.  The abundance of
resources for making new words that I have outlined above,
plus the cheerful willingness of English to borrow from other
languages, make outright coinages rare.  Nonetheless, the SPS
slanguage mint has produced an impressive array of pure
coinages.  Among the current currency are

*doof* (or *doofus*): one who habitually bozes.

*dweeb*: a nerd, a social incompetent who wears white,
unalligatored socks and high-water, polyester trousers.

*snarf*: the act (or non-act) of falling asleep on or in a bed
with one's clothes on.  One who snarfs is a snarfer.  The concept
of snarfing has become so sophisticated that four degrees have
been identified—*4th degree snarf*: falling asleep on top of bed
with no shoes on; *3rd degree snarf*: falling asleep on top of bed
with no shoes on; *2nd degree snarf*: falling asleep under covers
with no shoes on; *1st degree snarf*: falling asleep under covers
with shoes on.

Throughout history it has been the custom to sneer
meanly at slang as a kind of vagabond language that prowls the
outskirts of respectable speech.  But, in fact, slang is nearly as
old as language itself, and in all languages at all times some
slang expressions have entered the stream of standard usage to
pollute or enrich, depending on one's view of the matter.

Slang is a powerful stimulant that keeps a language alive
and growing, and many of our most valuable and pungent
words and expressions have begun their lives keeping company
with thieves, vagrants, hipsters—and, quite likely, prep school
students.  One day, in the not-too-distant future, everyone may
laugh at dweeb newbs and snarf out at parties, and pizza chefs
will not fogue when someone asks them to bag the za.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The American Heritage Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780395329436/American-Heritage-Dictionary-Second-College-0395329434/plp)
(Second College Edition, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1982) 1568pp.

The publication of a new and thoroughly revised edition
of so fine a desk dictionary as *The American Heritage Dictionary*
is cause for great interest if not excitement among language
enthusiasts.  The original edition of 1969, product of a distinguished
staff of editors, was remarkable for its fresh approach
to language and lexicography, and had, along with its very
attractive format and appearance, a host of features that made
it unique and very useful.  It was and *is* an important reference
book.  The 1982 *AHD* displays throughout the kind of extensive
and thoughtful revision that we should expect from the editors
at Houghton Mifflin, and incorporates new features and
improvements while retaining much of what was so appealing
about the first edition.

Would that the story could end there.  Regrettably, the
new *AHD* also has been changed significantly in ways that
diminish the qualities that the many satisfied users of the first
edition had come to cherish.  Most obviously, the format has
been reduced from 8&frac12; &times; 11 to 7 &times; 9&frac12; ins.  This would not in
itself be bad were it not for the fact that the type and
illustrations suffer noticeably from a proportionate reduction.
The new edition is more wieldy, but once open it is harder to
read and has a grayer, more crowded, less sharply defined
appearance than the old.  Illustrations, so comely in the 1969
book, are much less attractive and clear (as a comparison of the
line drawings at *argali* demonstrates), a fact which not only
detracts from the book but vitiates the efforts of those who
toiled to revise it.  Fortunately, the sheer number of illustrations
can still be counted as a prime advantage of this dictionary.

Perhaps most distressing, at least from a lexicographic
standpoint, is the disappearance of the appendix of IndoEuropean
roots, cornerstone of the 1969 edition's etymologies
and *the* feature which made it an enduring value.  Gone with it
are the more thorough etymologies; the new edition has brief,
cryptic etymologies that employ abbreviations.  In the entry for
*be,* for example, the ten-line etymology of the first edition,
explaining the multiple roots behind this verb's unusual paradigm,
has been replaced by:

> [ME *been* &lt; OE *beon*.]

Etymology, it may be argued, has little general interest or
appeal and may be the least noticed part of most dictionaries.
Houghton Mifflin, in choosing to style its dictionary more like
that of the competition in the college dictionary market (i.e.,
with smaller format and truncated etymologies), has done a
disservice to language lovers both present and potential.  One
could spend many a pleasant hour with the 1969 edition, being
referred by the etymologies to many intricate and interesting
connections between words.  This trimmer *AHD* can be offered
at a price competitive with its rivals', a victory for marketing,
&ldquo;the consumer,&rdquo; and the corporate balance sheet, but a setback
for the dictionary-conscious public.

All is not lost, however, for the new *AHD* does contain
about the same amount of raw information as its larger-sized
predecessor (a comparison of page and line counts reveals this),
and reorganization has made room for thousands of new words
and definitions (the jacket claims 25,000), which are, after all,
the foundation of a dictionary.  Close examination of a segment
in the *Ns* revealed the addition of *no-show, no-win, nucleophile,
nuke, number cruncher, nut house,* and *nuts and bolts,*
while on the technical side *nucleosome, nucleosynthesis, nullipara,*
and *nurturance* were added, among others.  Inexplicably,
*number one, Nutmeg State,* and *nympho* are gone, but the
general trend is toward marked improvement, with a significant
number of new, well-chosen entries both from general and
specialized language.  Another useful new feature of the book is
the grouping together of phrasal verbs and idioms, now labeled
under appropriate headwords.

The very handy, albeit controversial, usage notes have
been thoroughly revised, expanded, and improved under the
watchful eye (and attentive ear) of Edwin Newman.  One may
not agree with all that is found in them, but these notes are a
great convenience to the user and allow the editors to take a
(usually reasonable) stand on many linguistic and stylistic
disputes of the day.  The very sensible approach generally
found in them is reflected in the note for *hopefully*:

>*Usage:* The use of *hopefully* to mean &ldquo;it is to be
hoped,&rdquo; as in *hopefully we'll get there before dark,* is
grammatically justified by analogy to the similar uses of
*happily* and *mercifully*.  However, this usage is by now
such a bugbear to traditionalists that it is best avoided
on grounds of civility, if not logic.

The several new appendices are another improvement.  In
separate sections biographical entries, geographical and political
entries, and standard abbreviations (all moved here from
the main listings) are defined and illustrated, followed by a list
of two- and four-year colleges and universities of the United
States.

On the whole the new edition of the *AHD* is substantially
different from the 1969 edition.  The revision necessary to
maintain a dictionary in these times of unprecedented language
growth and change seems to have been well done, without
sacrificing the pleasant readability and defining style of the
original.  The 1982 *AHD* is a college dictionary, and as such is
an excellent choice for anyone needing a handy and up-to-date
quick reference source.  Those who were expecting to replace
their tattered but beloved *AHDs* with a new, revised, more
current version may be disappointed, and justifiably so.  For
many, the 1969 edition was a cut above other college dictionaries.
Its descendant is a good book that should do well in the
stores; whereas the first *AHD* surpassed its competitors, this
new one aspires only to meet them.  Frank R. Abate


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;A free lamp to the first ten customers who purchases a
King Size bed every day.&rdquo;  [From an advertisement in the *San
Francisco Chronicle*, 1 July 1982.  Submitted by O. William
McClung, San Francisco.  Those sleepy (and soporific)
copywriters!]


### OBITER DICTA
*Lingua Collegiensis Circa 1850, Charles Lafayette Todd*

Reading through my bound copy of Verbatim [Vols. III
and IV] I ran across a piece by Sterling Eisiminger of Clemson
University entitled &ldquo;College Slang 1975.&rdquo;  As a collector of such
arcane items during my years as a Professor of Speech at
Hamilton College in Clinton, N.Y., I was frequently called
upon by several older colleagues on our joint Faculty-Student
&ldquo;Sin Committee,&rdquo; known officially as a &ldquo;Student Activities&rdquo;
committee, to translate some of the words and phrases that
came so trippingly off the tongue of our student members.  For
example, I recall a case in which a roomie of a young gaper
who had caused some damage at an Eastern women's college
(Skidmore) tried to explain his friend's behavior.  &ldquo;Well,&rdquo; he
announced, &ldquo;We rolled off on the Skids that weekend, and Joe
got stuck with a turkey.  As a result he got snoggered, started to
flail and caused some demo.&rdquo;  I translated this along these lines:
'This obstreperous young fraternity pledge drove to Skidmore
for a weekend mixer, found himself paired off with an
unattractive date, drank too much and demolished some furniture.'
According to Eisiminger, Clemsonites are familiar with
gapers and turkeys—though I am not certain they are aware of
flailing and demo.

All of this brings to mind one of my more cherished books,
A Collection of College Words and Customs, published by
Benjamin Homer Hall while a senior at Harvard in 1851.  Hall,
who was apparently acing his courses in Latin, Greek, and
Rhetoric, got bored, as so often happens to over-achieving
seniors, and purchased &ldquo;two quires of note paper&rdquo; which he
proceeded to fill with &ldquo;a strange medley, an olla podrida, of
student peculiarities&rdquo; he had picked up from his fellow students
and through occasional visits to other New England
colleges.  Arranging these linguistic peculiarities in alphabetical
order, adding notes as to their meanings and possible origins,
he sent off his collection to a Cambridge publisher, John
Bartlett.  Fearful that Harvard's formidable president, Jared
Sparks, might look askance at his publication, he used a
pseudonym; but somehow Sparks discovered the young
author's name, and, to Hall's amazement, called him into his
office and presented him with a three-volume set of The
History of Harvard College with some complimentary remarks
on his &ldquo;scholarly achievement.&rdquo;  Shortly after his graduation,
Hall went to work in earnest, canvassing student magazine and
newspaper editors in 34 other colleges throughout the country.
The response was obviously enthusiastic, for in 1856 Bartlett
published a &ldquo;Revised and Enlarged Edition&rdquo; of 506 pages,
bearing the name B.H. Hall.  It was replete with an index and
a list of all of the contributing colleges.  Save for a History of
Eastern Vermont, it was the only book by Hall ever published;
he spent most of his career as editor of the Troy, N.Y., Whig
and died in 1892.

Reading through Hall's collection of mid-nineteenth-century
(and earlier) college slang, one is struck by the unchanging
preoccupations of college students: passing and failing tests,
currying professorial favors, labeling the peculiarities of their
peers, complaining about college food and other conveniences
(or lack of same), cheating when necessary, and trying to
survive four long years without being rusticated ('sent home for
a few weeks to think it over'), or being ruthlessly expelled.
About the only aspects of college life that Hall fails to dwell
upon are terms applied to that rare commodity on college
campuses, females (who, as Elizabeth Cady Stanton's father
pontificated, &ldquo;suffered from a defect of sex&rdquo;) and the consumption
of &ldquo;ardent spirits,&rdquo; which was kept very much under
wraps at the time except by Eliphalet Nott, the president of
Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., who constantly warned
his students against the &ldquo;spontaneous combustion&rdquo; which
might result if one smoked while drinking.  Incidentally, I was
pleased to discover that Hamilton College produced 16 entries,
edging out Columbia and Dartmouth but outclassed by Harvard,
Yale, Bowdoin, and Union.

One of the main obsessions of college students in those
days was the ubiquitous privy, and, on this subject, Hall
certainly got around.  His first entry is bogs, emanating from
England's Cambridge University.  At Harvard it becomes a
mingo, derived, he says from the Latin, mingere &ldquo;a structure
estimated at less than 2000 pounds advoirdupois which could
easily be burned down.&rdquo; [Of course, we know better: mingere
is Latin for 'urinate.']  He cites the Williams College Monthly
Miscellany as lamenting the &ldquo;incineration of the Lem—may it
rise from its ashes like the Phoenix.&rdquo;  At Hamilton College it
was called the Joe, named, says Hall, for president Joseph
Penny who was often careless about having the equipment
&ldquo;purified&rdquo; at appropriate intervals.  When the campus Joes gave
out, Hamilton students sometimes hired horse-drawn carts and
took off down the Hill, where they liberated local privies in
Clinton and burned them on campus during ceremonial occasions.
It was called burning the Joe and, says Hall, &ldquo;the
derivation is obvious.&rdquo;  Union College called it the Burt, named
after the &ldquo;architect of the sacred latrinae at the institution.&rdquo;  At
Wesleyan it became a minor, reflecting, Hall assumes, its
&ldquo;spatial inadequacies.&rdquo;  Today's students are much less inventive,
referring to their sanitized facilities simply as the John, or
the can.

As for one's peers, few of the terms used to delineate
them were flattering, although Princeton referred to those who
were very pleasant and agreeable as bucks, usually well
groomed, or diked out.  Opposites at Dartmouth were called
gonuses, defined by the author as &ldquo;uncouth or stupid fellows.&rdquo;
Overly pious and sententious lads were referred to at Washington
College in Pennsylvania as donkeys or lapars.  Nearby
Jefferson College transformed the latter into long ears.  When
donkeys, etc., became too vociferous in their attempts to
reform their peers at Harvard they were told to ferg, or as
students would say today, cool it.  Cheating or attempts to do
so produced such words as gamming (University of Vermont),
chawing (Dartmouth), or gassing (Williams).

The ancient art of currying favor with a professor, now
known almost universally by even the more refined students as
brown-nosing, ass-kissing, or sucking up, was treated more
gingerly by Hall's contemporaries and produced a multitude of
strange words such as cahooling (University of North Carolina),
coaxing (Yale), fishing (Harvard) and bauming (Hamilton).  Hall
provides no explanation for the Hamilton term, though one
suspects it derived from the name of a student who was adept
in such matters.  With regard to failing a crucial test, the author
produces a fine medley of appropriate terms such as to Barney,
to dead, and to burst (all from Harvard).  Princeton students
referred to a complete failure as a blue fizzle; Middlebury lads
balled up, while Yalies simply flummuxed.  In most Southern
colleges, says Hall, the word is cork.  Incidentally, Yale flummuxers
were known as students of the science of Flunkology.
Walking out on a professor who arrived late to class also came
in for its share of descriptive words.  Students at Hamilton and
other Eastern colleges bolted.  Bowdoin boys, however, simply
staged an adjournment.  During the 1880s one entire Hamilton
class staged a mighty bolt from the entire College, and there is
a stone marker on campus bearing a carved bolt in memory of
a class that never enjoyed a commencement exercise.

B.H. Hall's prodigious research produced many other
student linguistic peculiarities too numerous to mention here,
though I can't resist adding to his olla podrida the word fat,
which at Princeton meant a letter containing money from
home—one of the more glorious events in the life of college
students throughout the ages.

Finally, I was pleased recently to find that Hall's book was
copiously devoured by at least one eminent twentieth-century
novelist, Samuel Hopkins Adams, a Hamilton graduate best
known for his motion picture script for &ldquo;It Happened One
Night,&rdquo; and for his stories of the Erie Canal days.  In his lively
picaresque novel, Banner by the Wayside (1947), the tale of an
itinerant theatrical company barnstorming along the route of
the Erie Canal during the 1830s, Adams begins his story on the
Harvard campus with a gathering of witty but indolent young
seniors prior to commencement.  Their leader, Aryault Quintard,
who later joins the traveling thespians, &ldquo;brandished his
arms in an expressive gesture&rdquo; and burst out with:

>What avails it to make a shine in Greek if the next
hour one does a barney in calculus.  There have been
times when in sheer disgust I have bleached my classes
for weeks on end.  I have been degraded, suspended,
and rusticated until today I do not know whether I
shall be an alumnus of this honored institution or not.

Shine meant 'ace' &agrave; la Clemson and Hamilton; bleach Hall
defines as 'being absent in mind if not in body at class'; barney
means 'fail.'  I feel certain that Sam Adams, a lover of linguistic
anachronisms, used Hall's pioneer work as a pony whenever his
collegians appear on the scene.

## Degrees of Right and Wrong
*Laurence Urdang, Editor, VERBATIM*

Although writing about correctness in English has been
published for a long time, it is only relatively recently that
books, articles, and newspaper columns on the subject have
appeared in such profusion.  That is probably owing to a
number of diverse factors, none of which commands our
attention at the moment.  But it is obvious that &ldquo;correct&rdquo;
English and the avoidance of &ldquo;errors&rdquo; in grammar, lexicon,
usage, idiom, spelling, and, at a different level, pronunciation
are serious concerns for an increasing number of people.  It
seems an appropriate time, therefore, to take stock of the
situation in an attempt to provide some useful guidelines for
those who need them.

To many of the self-styled critics, everything is supposedly
quite simple: there is good, or &ldquo;correct&rdquo; English and bad, or
&ldquo;incorrect&rdquo; English.  Yet, as was shown in an article in
VERBATIM, &ldquo;When Paragons Nod,&rdquo; by Lillian Mermin Fein-silver
[VIII, 4], even the more vociferous and outspoken critics
make mistakes.  [See also the follow-up correspondence in *IX,* 1
and *IX,* 2.]  One is led to believe that errors in English must
somehow be classifiable into those that are trivial and those
that are unforgivable, though such a view is bound to be
unpopular with those who consider everything in life to be
classifiable as either right or wrong.  One might observe that
language is in a constant state of flux, its &ldquo;rules&rdquo; being defined
by usage; the best that a grammarian can do is describe the
way a given language works at a given period.  Even then, the
documentation is at best sketchy, for there is far more language
uttered and written in a single day than could be analyzed in a
lifetime.  Moreover, tradition plays an important role in influencing
grammarians, lexicographers, and others who try to
extract principles, rules, or models from such a vast continuum:
there has long been a trend to describe good English as the
English used by the best writers; that such a precept is
untenable can be readily demonstrated by pointing out grammatical
errors in Shakespeare, Shelley, and many other &ldquo;best&rdquo;
writers.  To excuse such writers' lapses under the rubric of
poetic license is sheer nonsense: documented errors in their
writings cannot be attributed to (or blamed on) art.  The simple
fact is that they wrote certain things in which verbs disagree
with their subjects in number, to take a basic example.  It might
thus be concluded that not even the best writers write
perfectly grammatical English.  And one is constrained to point
out that even their lexicon was occasionally faulty; wasn't it
Browning who thought that *twat* meant 'habit' and refers to a
*nun's twat* in &ldquo;Pippa Passes&rdquo;?  Such slips, though recorded in
some dictionaries—probably out of a perverse sense of humor
on the part of their editors—have done little either to change or
to confirm usage.  If one compares the virtual infinity of spoken
and written English with what appears in the best writings, the
unavoidable conclusion is that while language analysts may
select the best writers' works as models for grammars, dictionaries,
usage books, and handbooks, the vast majority of speakers
never have recourse to such works and, indeed, before the
spread of literacy, were totally unaware of their existence, let
alone their need.  That is not to say that certain dictionaries,
grammars, and other books have been without influence—we
can readily document the effect on standardization of American
spelling wielded by Noah Webster, chiefly through the
agency of the spelling books he published, somewhat less
directly so because of his dictionaries.

Only the most obdurate conservative would deny that
there is a scale of &ldquo;wrongness&rdquo; in the uses of English, and the
most obdurate conservative of the day has perpetrated solecisms
that most of us would classify as being quite close to
basics.  For instance, most speakers of English would agree that
the combination &ldquo;He don't&rdquo; is ungrammatical—even many who
use it do so with the knowledge that it is appropriate to a
certain level of language which they may occasionally be called
upon to speak.  At the other end of the scale come subleties like
the difference between &ldquo;He is a friend of the family&rdquo; versus
&ldquo;... of the family's&rdquo; and &ldquo;She doesn't like me coming home
late&rdquo; versus &ldquo;... my coming home late.&rdquo;  It must be acknowledged
that, although certain prudes may claim that they would
never allow the first member of these to pass their lips, the
odds are pretty good that they could be caught saying or—
worse—writing similarly heinous combinations.

It is fairly easy, in considering a continuum or spectrum,
to contrast readily identifiable distinctions: ultraviolet and
infrared are not difficult to tell apart.  It is in attempting to
classify contiguous elements that the subtleties of shading make
decisions almost impossible: bluish-green is indistinguishable
from greenish-blue without an elaborate spectrographic analysis.
It can also be said that what may be tolerable in a
plumber's business letter may be less tolerable in a newspaper
article, even less so in a magazine piece (where a longer time
for editing, hence greater care, may be assumed), and totally
anathema in a book on usage.  In this connection, it might be
interesting to examine a few typical errors of English and to try
to classify them.

>1.  *adverse for averse (He is not averse/adverse to being
called &ldquo;Red.&rdquo;)*
>
>2.  *due to* for *owing to (Owing to/Due to the storm, the
telephone was not working.)*
>
>3.  *between you and I* for *between you and me
(Between you and me/I, George doesn't think he'll
win.)*
>
>4.  singular verb for plural *(She is one of those women
who like/likes to play bridge.)*

In each case, the second choice is the wrong one, yet on
balance one could easily be led to accept the wrong choice for
items 2 and 4, and only the purist is likely to insist on a
correction for these.  Again, the question arises: for whom are
the wrong choices in 2 and 4 acceptable and for whom
unacceptable?  That is not easy to answer, but the fact remains
that some errors are more acceptable than others.  Indeed, there
are probably some purists who would not identify 2 as an error
at all, which only proves that acceptability depends to a large
extent on the knowledge of the critic.

It would be an interesting experiment to ask a group of
knowledgeable editors to go through a list of common usage
problems, asking them to grade them on a scale of 1 (acceptable)
to 5 (totally unacceptable), with appropriate gradations in
between.  The experiment would be conducted with editors
because they are eminently practical people who are concerned
about clarity and expressiveness in language no less than
grammaticality.  This may appear to be an experiment similar to
the rating system conducted by the *American Heritage Dictionary*
compilers, who asked a number of writers and language
experts their opinions on matters of usage.  But there are some
differences: first, most writers are not editors, the latter having
far more experience with a diversity of writing styles and
functions; second, the experiment would allow for the insertion
of choices among perfectly acceptable usages in order to
obviate weighting the prejudices of the group; third, the
experiment would be conducted in such a way as to prevent
the participants from checking their answers against a book of
usage.  As far as can be ascertained, since the *American
Heritage* poll was conducted by mail, there was no way to
prevent its participants from looking up the answers in a usage
manual.

Despite this, the *American Heritage* panelists disagreed
about many of the items presented to them; as far as is known,
there were no placebos among the questions, which is to say
that there was no inherent method for testing the honesty of
the participants.  An examination of the list of participants
yields no reason to assume any lack of honesty, but one would
feel more secure had a method been devised to ensure the
untainted validity of response.

## Antipodean English: *The Elusive 'Kangaroo'*
*George W. Turner*

Kangaroos are not themselves elusive.  You see their bodies
along outback roads where they have been dazzled by the
headlights and knocked down by the heavy protective grills
(called *roo-bars*) on the front of vehicles.  You can meet them
more peacefully in zoos or parks where the constant presence
of kindly visitors with bits of bread has made them approachable
and tame.  My wife does have a scar on her forearm which,
when in Europe, she attributes to a kangaroo—truthfully—but it
was gained, if that's the word, when she was surrounded by
kangaroos begging for bread and one importunate beggar
found her distribution too slow.  It was in fact a Kangaroo
Island kangaroo, one of a species whose safe ancestral home
has trained them to be the quietest of kangaroos.  I have seen a
female of this species let children fondle the ears of a joey
peering from her pouch.

No, it is the word *kangaroo* that is elusive, in its origin and
in its exact meaning.  It is clearly Aboriginal and dates back to
Cook's voyage of 1770, not to the well-known visit to Botany
Bay but to his stay at the Endeavour River in Northern
Queensland for repairs to his ship on the voyage home.  There
the botanist Daniel Solander described and the artist Sydney
Parkinson drew a marsupial and introduced the kangaroo to an
interested world.  Soon a kangaroo from Botany Bay would be
exhibited in the Strand with the claim that &ldquo;Ocular Demonstration
will exceed all that Words can describe or Pencil
delineate.&rdquo;

In fact a Dutch explorer, Pelsart, had described a similar
animal in 1629, but modern Dutch, like other European
languages, has a word (*kangoeroe*) capturing in its own spelling
system a word brought to Europe by Cook and his associates,
especially Joseph Banks, in the form *kangooroo* or *kanguru*.
Within the decade Buffon had introduced it into French (as
*kanguros* plural) and the modern French form *kangourou* is
recorded in 1800.  It is now thought that the animal described
by Solander was not a kangaroo in the strict sense but a
wallaby, specifically a Cape York form of whip-tail wallaby with
the scientific name *Wallabia canguro* in recognition of the
connection with Cook's expedition.  Cook's men emphasized
the size of the &ldquo;kangaroo&rdquo; but since early voyagers referred to
&ldquo;a sort of raccoon&rdquo; (Dampier) or &ldquo;civet-cat&rdquo; or &ldquo;squirrel&rdquo; or
(most seriously) &ldquo;jerboa,&rdquo; all small animals, even a medium-sized
wallaby might seem large by contrast with a different
expectation.  It is the old paradox that a little elephant is not a
little animal.

A new obscurity began to attach to the name.  Natives at
Botany Bay appeared not to know the word *kangaroo*.  One of
them asked if cows were to be called kangaroos.  This ignorance
became explained when it was realized that there was not
simply one language spoken by natives through Australia, that
even a little way from Sydney a different language was spoken
and the Endeavour River was some 2,000 miles to the north.
But a new puzzle arose when in 1820 P.P. King in the
Endeavour River area made a vocabulary similar to that of
Banks, except that a kangaroo was called *min-nar* and variants.
Theories were advanced that *kangaroo* simply meant &ldquo;I don't
know,&rdquo; for instance, but no appropriate phrase existed in the
language (Guugu Yimidhirr) of the area.  Had taboo led to a
change of name for the animal?  Scholars agreed that the origin
of the word was obscure.

Actually the Chief Protector of Queensland Aborigines,
Dr. W.E. Roth, had pointed out in a letter to the *Australasian*
in 1898 and again in *North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin*
2, 1901, that a word *ganguru* was still current in Guugu
Yimidhirr.  This information went unnoticed.  Only when John
Haviland began his study of the language in 1972 was it
generally accepted that a word, pronounced *gang-uru*, was the
Guugu Yimidhirr term for a large black or gray kangaroo.
Perhaps the animal studied by Solander and Parkinson was not
the animal pointed to by Banks at the important moment when
European languages gained the word *kangaroo*.  In any case
there is some evidence that Cook's men encountered and
described more than one kind of marsupial.  King's word was
probably *minha*, meaning 'an animal that can be used as food.'

What *is* a kangaroo?  We may concentrate on one or
another quality of the beast, its strangeness, its leaping motion,
its pouch to carry its baby or *joey*.  Germans seem to think of
its strangeness, asking visiting Australians have they seen or do
they keep kangaroos.  The German language seems to make no
metaphorical use of the concept, unlike the Italians or French,
who, impressed mainly by the pouch, use it to name vehicles
that carry other vehicles.  In France a railway wagon to carry
the trailer of a semi-trailer (*articulated lorry* to British readers)
is called *wagon kangourou* (defined by *Grand Larousse* as
*&ldquo;wagon muni d'une poche pour loger l'essieu routier&rdquo;*), while
Italians call an airplane used to launch a smaller one *canguro.*
Since a *canguro* can also be someone promoted rapidly and
over the heads of his colleagues, the Italians have also utilized
metaphorically the leaping habit of the kangaroo, a habit
noticed by the Danes when they coined *k&aelig;ngurustylte* for a
pogo-stick.  It is the quality which appeals to Australians too,
when they choose a logo for Qantas, the national airline, or
when they use *kangaroo* as a verb to describe releasing a clutch
unevenly so that a vehicle *kangaroos* or moves forwards in a
series of jerks.  It perhaps appeals to Americans too, with their
contribution, the *kangaroo court.*  (Why?  Because it leaps over
the formalities of an established legal system?  I'd be glad if any
American reader can provide information on its origin.)

In another sense, what is a kangaroo?  How does it differ
from a wallaby?  As Arabs proverbially have many words for
kinds of camel and Eskimos for kinds of snow, so Australians
have many words for kinds of kangaroo.  Not that every
Australian can tell you what a *bettong* or a *tammar* or even a
*nail-tailed wallaby* is.  Even scientists cannot point to a clear-cut
correct use of popular names, and, for that matter, even
scientific names are not always beyond dispute.  Current usage
seems to be that *kangaroo* serves as a general term and also as
a term for a group of the largest marsupials (genus *Macropus*,
literally, 'big feet').  Wallabies are closely allied to the large
kangaroos anatomically and some were once included in the
genus *Macropus*.

The naturalist Ellis Troughton has suggested a threefold
division of kangaroolike creatures by size into *pademelons* (also
spelt *paddymelons*), wallabies, and kangaroos.  A kangaroo in
this sense will then be a marsupial with adult foot length heel
to longest toe without nail of more than ten inches (more
technical criteria relate to teeth).  The term *pademelon* varies
regionally in its application but may be taken to be a small
wallaby.

The large kangaroos themselves can be divided into three
main groups, differentiated technically this time by the hair on
their noses, the *wallaroo* (in its western variety called *euro*,
pronounced and sometimes spelt *yuro*) of coastal mountains
and rocky inland ranges, the *red kangaroo* of the inland plains,
and the *great grey* or *forester kangaroo* of open forest country.

Wallabies are more various.  There are *swamp wallabies,
rock wallabies, brush wallabies,* the *nail-tailed wallaby* with a
naillike horny protuberance, of uncertain function, on its tail,
and others.  There are local names for local kinds, as the *quokka*
or *tammar* of various parts of Western Australia.

More primitive than pademelons, wallabies, or kangaroos
are the *tree kangaroos*, which have reverted to arboreal habits,
and the small *rat kangaroos* (sometimes, but less accurately,
from a zoological point of view, called *kangaroo rat*).  Varieties
of these give rise to further names, such as *bettong* or *potoroo*,
but even among Australians these are hardly household words.

Much more could be said about the word *kangaroo* (I've
scarcely touched on its compounds), but already the editor
must be contemplating the merits of a kangaroo closure.


#### EPISTOLA {A. George Koplow}

Mary Patterson expresses concern [IX, 2] that digital
timepieces could result in the loss of the terms *clockwise* and
*anticlockwise* (*counterclockwise* in the States).  Are we also in
danger of losing another clock dial reference, as used by air
controllers: &ldquo;Traffic approaching, one mile at three o'clock,&rdquo; for
example?

What the trend to digital watches and clocks has brought
about is a new and interesting use of the word *analog*.  In
electronics, *digital* means converting signals to binary for
processing.  *Analog* is processing the actual signal.

Digital timepieces show the time in digits, but this is a
much different meaning from, say, digital recording or digital
computers.  But with the acceptance of *digital* for timepieces,
manufacturers are referring to timepieces with a dial as *analog*.
*Analog* has become the opposite of *digital* in this usage.

One thing is certain.  When Joe DiMaggio tells us that the
Automatic Mr. Coffee is &ldquo;now available with an analog clock,&rdquo;
who are we to question the new use of this term?

*[A. George Koplow, Rock Island, IL]*


#### EPISTOLA {John Brunner}

The best solution to the problem posed by Mary Patterson
in [IX, 2] and discussed in [IX, 3] by Peter A. Douglas is to
campaign for the restoration to normal use of those splendid
words *deasil* and *widdershins*.

Much as I like *sungates* (better than *sunwise/ways*), Mr
Douglas does have a point about the southern hemisphere.  But
since neither of these favourites of mine includes a specifically
solar element, they would suit our cousins Down Under just as
well as us northerners.  Don't people dance widdershins at balls
in Australia, too, even if over there it isn't &ldquo;the wrong way of
the sun?&rdquo;

*[John Brunner, Somerset, England]*


#### EPISTOLA {Rosemarie Forster}

Reading Diane Chapman's article &ldquo;Eponymous Anonymous&rdquo;
[IX, 2] I was surprised to learn that Sylvester Graham's
only eponym to survive in the States is &ldquo;graham crackers,&rdquo;
whereas in Switzerland, where I live, you can go to almost any
bakery and ask for &ldquo;Grahambrot&rdquo; (graham bread).

The German enyclopedia Brockhaus has an entry, the
translation of which would read as follows:

Graham bread: An unleavened bread made out of shredded
wheat according to the instructions of the American
physician Sylvester Graham (1794-1891).

*[Rosemarie Forster, Kriens, Switzerland]*

## Playing a Doublet Game
*Hugh Dovey, Thetford, Norfolk*

In his interesting article &ldquo;Who Needs Enemies?&rdquo;  [IX, 1],
Harry Cohen wrote about *faux amis,* those deceptive English
and French words that look the same, or nearly, but whose
meanings differ—to some extent at least.  Among them he drew
attention to one large category, those French words adopted in
English in the past whose meanings have evolved along
different lines in each country.  Alongside them is another
interesting group, English and French words of common origin
which, as well as a change of meaning, have undergone a
change of form, usually in English, and now look so different
that they are unlikely to deceive.

One way of demonstrating how widely words in both
these categories can differ in sense from their counterparts in
the other language is to put together a bit of prose where some
of the English ones are used as if they had the meaning, or one
of the meanings, of their French doublets.  The result is
nonsense, as these paragraphs illustrate:

>At the fine of a long journey Joe left the counter of
the National Bank where he had been implied for
thirty years.  The travel was dull but his appointments
were fair.  As usual at the hour of affluence the going
was slow.
>
>On his way home he visited his wife who was still in
hospital after a bad rut accident: both her legs were
still in slices.  She was as pale as the drabs.  Even before
the crash she had lost a lot of her slat: her eyes no
longer stenciled as they used to some twenty years
before at the tense when they walked down the alley
together.  There was no chance of a quick garrison but
she was happy to scout music from her portable post
and he did not stay long, leaving her the journal he
had brought in his serviette.
>
>At home he found his son Stan in the saloon with
his usual friends—young men of the gender Joe disliked
most.  Stan was a disappointment.  He had always been
lazy and sturdy, he never ranged his habits and affairs,
they always trained all over the place.  His room was a
very equerry.  At school his notes were always bad, he
was frequently consigned.  Not surprising that recently
he had once more got nowhere in a concourse.  His
friends were as bad: a cigarette had broiled the edge of
the card table, there was a dark tack on the carpet
where a glass of drink had fallen.  The cashiered morsels
had been carelessly pushed in a corner.
>
>Joe watched his son toil the cards, deal and then
attempt the contract.  What he clearly ought to do was
to play his quarrels first and his father groaned
inwardly as the boy chose pikes instead.  Now he was
bound to be a ply or two light.
>
>Feeling hungry Joe made his way to the cuisine to
see what was in the placard.  It had to be a sandwich:
he spread a couch of butter on some bread he found
in the hutch and coped some cheese while he chafed
some coffee.  All the while he pondered why nothing
marched for him.  He never had any vein, never
achieved what he set out to do.  When he had gone in
for swimming, he had never arrived to do even the
brace.  Despite his post any actions he acquired soon
lost valor.  He sometimes thought he would buy a campaign
propriety, run a smallholding.  Then he repealed
himself that when he basted some mews to keep pools
the wind abated them in one night.
>
>Lost in these sad souvenirs he noticed too late that
the coffee was boiling.  As he snatched up the casserole
the queue came off in his hand and he watched some
of the liquid spawn itself over his trenches of cheese
while the rest soaked into his chemise.

To restore sanity to this text all that is needed is to
substitute for the incomprehensible English words the translations
of their French doublets, listed in the third column of this
table:

| ENGLISH WORD      | FRENCH DOUBLET          | TRANSLATION OF FRENCH DOUBLET |
| ----------------- | ----------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| fine              | fin                     | end                           |
| journey           | journ&eacute;e          | day                           |
| counter           | comptoir                | branch                        |
| implied           | employ&eacute;          | employed                      |
| travel            | travail                 | work                          |
| appointments      | appointements           | salary                        |
| hour of affluence | heure d'affluence       | rush hour                     |
| rut               | route                   | road                          |
| slices            | &eacute;clisses         | splints                       |
| drabs             | draps                   | sheets                        |
| slat              | &eacute;clat            | radiance                      |
| stenciled         | &eacute;tincelaient     | sparkled                      |
| tense             | temps                   | time                          |
| alley             | all&eacute;e            | aisle                         |
| garrison          | gu&eacute;rison         | recovery                      |
| scout             | &eacute;couter          | listen to                     |
| post              | poste                   | receiver                      |
| journal           | journal                 | newspaper                     |
| serviette         | serviette               | briefcase                     |
| saloon            | salon                   | sitting-room                  |
| gender            | genre                   | kind                          |
| sturdy            | &eacute;tourdi          | scatter-brained               |
| ranged            | rangeait                | put away                      |
| habits            | habits                  | clothes                       |
| affairs           | affaires                | belongings                    |
| trained           | tra&icirc;naient        | lay around                    |
| very              | vraie                   | real                          |
| equerry           | &eacute;curie           | pigsty                        |
| notes             | notes                   | marks                         |
| consigned         | consign&eacute;         | kept in detention             |
| concourse         | concours                | competitive examination       |
| broiled           | br&ucirc;l&eacute;      | burnt                         |
| tack              | tache                   | stain                         |
| cashiered         | cass&eacute;s           | broken                        |
| morsels           | morceaux                | pieces                        |
| toil              | touiller                | shuffle                       |
| quarrels          | carreaux                | diamonds                      |
| pikes             | piques                  | spades                        |
| ply               | pli                     | trick                         |
| cuisine           | cuisine                 | kitchen                       |
| placard           | placard                 | cupboard                      |
| couch             | couche                  | layer                         |
| hutch             | huche                   | bin                           |
| coped             | coupa                   | cut                           |
| chafed            | chauffa                 | heated                        |
| marched           | marchait                | went right                    |
| vein              | veine                   | luck                          |
| arrived to        | arriv&eacute; &agrave;  | managed to                    |
| brace             | brasse                  | breast-stroke                 |
| post              | poste                   | job                           |
| actions           | actions                 | shares                        |
| valor             | valeur                  | value                         |
| campaign          | campagne                | country                       |
| propriety         | propri&eacute;t&eacute; | property                      |
| repealed himself  | se rappelait            | remembered                    |
| basted            | b&acirc;tit             | built                         |
| mews              | mues                    | coops                         |
| pools             | poules                  | hens                          |
| abated            | abattit                 | brought down                  |
| souvenirs         | souvenirs               | recollections                 |
| casserole         | casserole               | saucepan                      |
| queue             | queue                   | handle                        |
| spawn itself      | s'&eacute;pandre        | spread                        |
| trenches          | tranches                | slices                        |
| chemise           | chemise                 | shirt                         |

Once you get the hang of this *jeu de mots* you can play it
in reverse by writing a bit of French in which some words are
used as if they had the meaning of their English doublets and
so make no sense in the context.  Then, for greater enjoyment
of the result, translate it, literally, into English.  Alternatively
write a piece of English which is nonsense because it uses the
translations of some French doublets and get your friends to
work out which English words you have disguised.  All this does
wonders to your vocabulary—in both languages.


#### EPISTOLA {Robert Devereux}

I very much enjoyed Garland Cannon's &ldquo;698 Japanese
Loanwords in English&rdquo; [IX, 1], although I must confess that it
left me not a little chagrined.  I have been collecting such
loanwords for several years with a view to using them eventually
as the basis for an article in VERBATIM, a project that
obviously is now no longer feasible.  Moreover, I must admit
that the length of Mr. Cannon's list makes mine a dwarf by
comparison.  However, in checking his list against mine, I found
a number of words on mine that had eluded him, namely:

>catan (or cattan)   
gaimusho            
gyakura             
ikehana             
kabure              
kanagugui           
koku                
machi               
maru                
marumi  
matsucoccus  
mishima  
rotenone  
sami  
shoka  
torafugu  
yatobyo  
yeki  
yukon

After studying Cannon's list carefully, I concluded that his
title was somewhat misleading.  He actually lists fewer than 698
loanwords, since a number of his entries are merely variant
spellings of the same words.  I noted, for example:

>gingko       
ginkgo       
jinricksha   
jinriksha    
jinrikshaw   
jiujitsu     
jujitsu      
keyaki  
kiaki  
No  
noh  
oban  
obang  
ricksha      
rickshaw     
rikisha      
samisen  
samsien  
Shin  
Shin-shu  
shoyu  
soy  

I must also question whether all the words listed by
Cannon are really Japanese loanwords.  All the sources I
consulted gave Alaskan Indian as the origin of *hooch* and
*hootch* (variant spellings, in any case).  The same sources
attributed *skimmia* to New Latin and described *Taka-Diastase*
as a trademark, without stating, unfortunately, whence the
trademark came (admittedly the *taka* could be Japanese in
origin; I must confess ignorance on that point).  Also, one of my
sources attributed *mebos* to Afrikaans, *probably* (my italics)
from the Japanese *umeboshi*.

Finally, as a matter of possible interest to VERBATIM
readers, I might note that some of the loanwords cited by
Cannon are actually Chinese in origin, that is, they had been
borrowed by Japanese from Chinese before English borrowed
them from Japanese.  They include:

>Amidism (*et al.*)   
ansu                            
chanoyu                         
gingko                          
judo                            
jujitsu                         
oban                            
ri                              
samisen  
sen  
seppuku  
soya (*et al.*)  
Tendai  
tycoon  
yen  
Zen

*[Robert Devereux, Falls Church, Virginia]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Charles Dicken's The Life and Adventures of Nicholas
Nickleby.&rdquo;  [from the title artwork of the television special
sponsored by the Mobil Corporation, January 10-13, 1983.
Submitted by Robert J. Powers, Shreveport, Louisiana.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Child grows into sweater.&rdquo;  [From a headline in the *New
York Daily News*, 30 November 1982.  Submitted by Bernard
Witlieb, White Plains, New York, who comments, &ldquo;Perhaps his
bones began to knit.&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Slow Down ... Children Playing Sleeping Drunks on
Road.&rdquo;  [From a road sign in Newnes, Australia, in the *National
Enquirer*, 5 October 1982.  Submitted by Fairfax
Stephenson, Seal Beach, California.]

## Philip Howard on English English
*Philip Howard*

Etymology is a notorious minefield for amateur enthusiasts:
and not just amateurs.  The great Dr. Johnson perpetrated
some spectacularly false derivations in his *Dictionary.*  He
derived *curmudgeon* as &ldquo;a vitious manner of pronouncing *coeur
m&eacute;chant;*&rdquo; but took the prudent precaution of blaming an
unknown correspondent for the false etymology.  He blamed
Skinner for his etymology for *helter-skelter* from the Anglo-Saxon
words for the darkness of hell: &ldquo;Hell, says he, being a
place of confusion.&rdquo;  Samuel Whyte, a young Irishman staying
in London, walked rather abruptly into the drawing room one
day and found his host and Thomas Sheridan and two other
men &ldquo;with large folios on the table between them; Johnson's
*Dictionary,* then but lately published.&rdquo;  One of the volumes was
lying open, and the first word that caught Whyte's eye was
*helter-skelter*.  The Irishman was not convinced by Johnson's
explanation, and called out: &ldquo;That's a very far-fetched etymology.&rdquo;
The other three men looked thunderstruck, and &ldquo;staring
at him for a moment, cast a significant glance towards the
window, where stood an odd looking figure, which he had not
before noticed, observing the boats passing on the Thames.&rdquo;
This was the great man himself.  His host, &ldquo;again casting an eye
towards the window,&rdquo; asked Whyte, &ldquo;Well, young sir!  I
suppose you can give a better derivation.&rdquo;  To which Whyte
replied: &ldquo;O yes, sir!  from the Latin; *hilariter celeriter*, 'merrily
and swiftly'; won't that do?&rdquo;  The older men made no reply,
&ldquo;but they hustled him out of the room as fast as they could,
after some judicious animadversions on his temerity.&rdquo;  They
thought it was lucky that Johnson had been completely
absorbed in his own contemplations, and the young man had
avoided &ldquo;what perhaps he deserved, a good rap over the
knuckles.&rdquo;

Alas and dammit, Sam Whyte's ingenious derivation is as
bogus as Sam Johnson's.  The best authorities agree that *helter-skelter*
is sixteenth-century rhyming jingle like *harum-scarum*
and *hurry-scurry*.  It may be ultimately based on the Middle
English verb *skelte*, 'to hasten.'  You can find analogies in Low
German *hulter bulter* and Dutch *holderdebolder*.

A more recent and very popular British false etymology
has just been shot down in flames by Robert Burchfield in his
latest volume of the *Supplement* to the *Oxford English Dictionary*.
This derives *posh*, meaning 'smart,' or, as you lot might say
on the other side of the fish-pond, 'classy,' as an acronym from
the initials of &ldquo;port outward, starboard home,&rdquo; referring to the
shady, and therefore more expensive side for cabins on ships
formerly traveling between Britain and its Indian Empire.  A
few years ago I wrote and delivered a radio program lasting 45
minutes on the BBC (about an anniversary of the Peninsular
and Oriental Steam Navigation Company) which was actually
called &ldquo;Port Outward, Starboard Home.&rdquo;  I blush to remember
it.  We all blush when we commit a false etymology.  And we all
go on doing it.  There is an ingrained didactic instinct to show
off and make jokes.  Resist it, Philip, resist it.

Burchfield dismisses the folk etymology as lacking foundation:
and those are devastating words from that mild scholar.
He says that the pronunciation of *posh* to rhyme with &ldquo;push,&rdquo;
as a supposedly posh or facetious way of saying the word, may
exemplify a different word.  I have never come across this
facetious pronunciation, though I have sometimes heard
middle-aged and elderly upper-class men pronounce it with a
long &ldquo;o&rdquo; as in &ldquo;poached egg.&rdquo;

The matter is further confused by the fact that *posh* has at
least three other meanings in British English.  Fortunately all of
them are rare, and possibly obsolescent.  *Posh* is thieves' slang
for a coin of small value, particularly the old duodecimal
halfpenny, which was at least a coin you could get your fingers
round and buy something with.  The tiny new decimal halfpenny,
apart from being worthless, is so small that it slips
through cracks in the trouser pocket and into the socks.  This
*posh* probably comes from the Romany word *posh* meaning
'half.'

Then there is the Edwardian slang word *posh* meaning a
'dandy or regular swell.'  I have never met this *posh*, but he
occurs in respectable writers around the turn of the century.

Finally there is *posh* meaning 'balderdash or rubbish.'
Again the etymology is unknown; but it is probably just a
facetious or ignorant British variant pronunciation of *bosh*.

It all just shows that in matters of scholarship, particularly
etymology, we ought to mind our Ps and Qs (and for Sam
Johnson's sake don't let us go into them).  But I don't suppose
that we shall.  Folk etymology is fun.  *Floreat*.

*The following item is reprinted in full from the* *EFL Gazette.*

>*In Memoriam*
>
>On November the 17th, 1982, a memorial service was held
at the English Speaking Union in London, in remembrance of
the English language.
>
>The service, or the fourth Sotheby lecture as it was called
in the press, was attended by academics, linguists and other
friends of the deceased.  The address was given by Mr Bernard
Levin.
>
>Mr Levin recalled the past glories of the language: from its
birth in Chaucerian England, to the coming of age in Shakespearian
times...
>
>After that, Mr Levin seemed to feel, it was downhill all
the way.  To be sure, attempts were made to revive the failing
language—themes were reworked, styles embroidered—but to
no avail.  By the twentieth century it was all over.
>
>On the 28th July 1961 the English Language finally
succumbed.  Its passing was marked by a Dr Burchfield
(believed to be some kind of lexicographer), when, in an article
published that day, he uttered the fateful words: &ldquo;Aleotoric
music.&rdquo;
>
>Mr Levin did not seem surprised by this tragic turn of
events.  In his opinion, it merely reflected the state of a society
where artists in every field had forsaken the forms of their
ancestors, a society where the uneducated mimicked the
speech of the educated and where the educated had become
almost entirely illiterate.
>
>The outcome, he felt, was inevitable.  &ldquo;There is something
in the sulphurous air of our time that adds up to disintegration,&rdquo;
he said.
>
>And there are some things in Mr Levin's speech that add
up to bad English.  For a start, you need at least two things
before you can add up to anything at all.  Perhaps, though, Mr
Levin was using the term &ldquo;add up&rdquo; in the current &ldquo;sloppy&rdquo;
meaning of &ldquo;is indicative of.&rdquo;  Mr Levin?  Sloppy?  Never!  But
then, as he went on to point out, the English language now lies
&ldquo;dead in the mouths of its users.&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*A Feast of Creatures: Anglo-Saxon Riddle-Songs*](https://www.amazon.com/Feast-Creatures-Anglo-Saxon-Riddle-Songs-Middle/dp/0812211294)
Trans., intr., notes, and commentary by Craig Williamson, (The University of Pennsylvania Press, 1978), xii + 230 pp.
 
Craig Williamson, who provided a text edition of *The Old
English Riddles of the Exeter Book* (Chapel Hill, 1977), here
furnishes his own translations of the originals (91 in number,
ranging from 3 to 84 lines each, with an average length of 12
lines).  He tells us that he deals with the problem of rendering
Old English verse in modern English by adopting a compromise
that &ldquo;represents a cross between the traditional Anglo-Saxon
meter and a looser form used by Aelfric, sometimes
called rhythmical prose&rdquo; (47).  A comparison of his renditions
with the Old English originals seems to reveal him as a
successful and skilled translator.  His task was far from easy, for
he had to take into account alliteration, stress, assonance,
verbal repetition, play on words, and the involved multiple
meanings of the Old English vocabulary, the semantic fields of
which rarely match those of modern English words.

The title of this volume is more felicitous, perhaps, than
that of the text edition, for &ldquo;Riddle-Songs&rdquo; leads us to expect
something quite different from &ldquo;Old English Riddles.&rdquo;  Hence,
we do not have a collection of the Why-is-grass-like-a-mouse
type of riddle, with a single banal solution for each one.  The
translator gives us solutions at the end of the volume
(225-228).  But 10 out of the 91 are marked &ldquo;uncertain,&rdquo; i.e.,
they have several possible solutions, varying in number from
four to ten.  Apparently none of the variants is favored over the
others, unless the order in which they are presented implies
some kind of ranking; usually it seems not to.  For riddle No.
91, the final one, the following multiplicity of solutions is
suggested: Book, Wandering Singer, Moon, Quill Pen, Dream,
Riddle [!], Prostitute, Soul.  The last two lines of that riddle
song, while regarded by Williamson as probably alluding to the
unknown or unknowable parentage of riddles and cited by him
in that connection in his treatment of &ldquo;origins&rdquo; (Introduction,
p. 5), may just as well refer to the intricate task of &ldquo;solving&rdquo;
the riddles themselves:

>Though the children of earth eagerly seek  
To trace my trail, sometimes my tracks are dim.  (p. 154)

(And something entirely different could be intended
simultaneously.)

In addition to the ten solutions designated as uncertain,
there are sixteen other riddle songs for which there are multiple
solutions, but the author evidently believes that the favored
solutions are fairly certain.  Readers may, of course, have their
own ideas about the validity of any given choice, and it is quite
possible that the original was at times meant to permit more
than one &ldquo;correct&rdquo; answer.  In fact, as Williamson so deftly
puts it in his note on riddle 23 (177), there are &ldquo;several Old
English double-entendre riddles with a sexual solution for the
bawdy and a plain solution for the prim.&rdquo;  It is, however, a rare
riddle song that permits of no more than two solutions,
although many of them contain an invitation to the reader to
find &ldquo;the solution,&rdquo; cf.:

>Weird riddle-craft riding the drift of words—  
Now sing the solution to what you've heard.  (p. 94)

We may have some trouble in assuring ourselves that we are on
the same wavelength as the Anglo-Saxon riddler, but that is a
problem often encountered by those trying to fathom the
literature of older periods, especially when cryptic features are
intentional.

Since the author perceives a &ldquo;riddle connection&rdquo; in Zen
koans and, to demonstrate the claimed affinity, even quotes
one, a pertinent caveat may be called to our attention here:
&ldquo;The koan is not a conundrum to be solved by a nimble wit.  It
is not a verbal psychiatric device for shocking the disintegrated
ego of a student into some kind of stability.  Nor, in my
opinion, is it ever a paradoxical statement except to those who
view it from the outside.&rdquo;  [*The Zen Koan*, by Ruth Fuller
Sasaki, New York, 1965, p. xi.]  Those who view it &ldquo;from the
inside&rdquo; need, of course, to be immersed in certain Buddhist
doctrines, and that sort of religious requirement is hardly
involved in understanding the riddle-songs.  (That any of them
reflect ancient Germanic religious beliefs is highly dubious,
although not completely impossible.)

Williamson says, cogently it seems, &ldquo;The Old English
riddles are a metaphoric and a metamorphic celebration of life
in the age of the Anglo-Saxon.  Metaphoric because each riddle
creature takes on the guise of another... Metamorphic
because ... all creatures shift shapes.&rdquo;

The book offers far more than a review of this scope can
indicate, for there are treatments of Latin riddles (compared
and contrasted with the Old English ones), of parallels in Old
Icelandic, of systems of analysis and classification of riddles, of
kennings and their special role in riddle-songs, of the translation
procedure followed by the author (with some reference to
that of other translators), etc.

Before looking at the answers, a reader will perhaps want
to try to solve the riddles.  If he is no more adept at this than
the reviewer, he will succeed in only a few instances.  But then
he will need to read them all at least once again, and he will
then relish everything he missed in the frantic task of trying to
hit upon the right solution.  For the book is, as is implied in part
of its title, a veritable &ldquo;feast.&rdquo;

*[Robert A. Fowkes, Professor Emeritus, New York University]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Where a hundred tapping feet thunder like one.&rdquo;  [From a
television commercial for 42nd Street.  Submitted by Herbert B.
Turkington, Somers Point, New Jersey, who comments, ... *as
Captain Ahab or Long John Silver would thunder were he in
the cast.*]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Room's Classical Dictionary, the Origins of the Names of Characters in Classical Mythology*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780710092625/Rooms-Classical-Dictionary-Origins-Names-0710092628/plp)
Adrian Room, (Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul), 341pp.

Now that they are no longer a compulsory part of the
syllabus for our brightest children, there are silly trendies and
neophiliacs who consider Latin and Ancient Greek obsolescent,
elitist, and, most wounding of epithets, irrelevant.  They are, of
course, daft.  Greek and Latin are ineradicable roots of our
literature and art.  Imagine trying to read James Joyce or
Auden, to understand the paintings of Picasso or Michael
Ayrton, to enjoy the music of Berlioz, without knowing about
the myths in the background.  Try to have a conversation or
read a newspaper without frequent classical references to such
things as halcyon days, or Scylla and Charybdis, or to somebody
being saturnine.  The last is frequently misunderstood and
misapplied these days.

If you drive our classical heritage out with a pitchfork, it
will soon find a way back.  The classics are the ancestors of the
culture and literature of Western Europe and, ergo, the United
States, and you cannot disinherit your ancestors.  What we need
are good new books to introduce and explain the classics to the
new generation, most of whom have little Latin and less Greek.
This is not one of them.

It concentrates on the least interesting, least important,
and most inexplicable aspect of mythology: the etymology of
its nomenclature.  Folk etymology is a notorious King Charles's
head for amateurs.  The ancient authorities from Homer to the
Byzantine &ldquo;grammarians&rdquo; occasionally succumbed to the itch
and offered explanations and derivations of the names of their
characters; and jolly silly they often were, in the class of the
etymology that was offered by sixteenth-century antiquarians
for the origin of the name of the town of Windsor on the
Thames: &ldquo;Because the wind bloweth sore there.&rdquo;  But at least
the ancient etymologies can be illuminating about the development
of the myth or the growth of the language or the
dottiness of the commentator.  We can use them without taking
them seriously.

There are a number of interesting things one can say
about the Greek God of the North Wind, called Boreas.  One
can note his fertilizing part in the creation myth of the world
and recall Pliny's account of mares turning their hind-quarters
to the wind and breeding foals without the help of a stallion.
One can remember how the Athenians invoked Boreas to
destroy the Persian fleet, and thereafter regarded him as their
brother-in-law, and built him a temple on the banks of the river
Ilissus.  One can compare his cult in Athens with that in Sparta.

About the least interesting thing one can say about Boreas
is &ldquo;His name may derive from *boros*, 'devouring,' or possibly
from *oros*, 'mountain,' since it was from the mountains that the
harsh north wind blew.&rdquo;  It depends on where you were
standing, baby.  The Boreas cult seems to have originated in
Libya, where there are not a lot of mountains to the north in
the knowledge of the inhabitants.  The etymologies are flatulent
or built on wind.

This dictionary assembles in alphabetical order between
one and two thousand of the best-known names of classical
mythology and gives a very brief explanation of who or what
they were—in one of their mythological forms anyway—followed
by an etymology of their names.  Some of them are
obvious.  We need no oracle to tell us that *Arachne* is the Greek
for 'spider.'  It might be more interesting to consider whether
the story of the girl who was too good at weaving for her own
good reflects ancient commercial rivalry between the Athenian
textile industry and Asia Minor, where Arachne is said to have
come from.

Take Odysseus, one of the most famous names in mythology.
Room gives Homer's implausible account of how the little
boy's grandfather, Autolycus, named him Odysseus, from the
Greek word meaning 'to be angry,' either because he had
collected so many enemies during the course of his life or
because he himself hated so many men.  We are told that
Odysseus may be connected with the Greek word for a road,
because he was a great traveler.  We are even given the
grotesque story of its origin in the phrase &ldquo;Zeus rained on the
road,&rdquo; because he was born in a storm of rain.

Folk etymology and bullshit to all of those derivations,
including Homer's.  Robert Graves in *The Greek Myths* goes for
the &ldquo;angry&rdquo; etymology but gives fourteen chapters to comparative
study of the different Odysseus stories, explanations,
etymologies, and parallels.  Some of it may be moonshine, or
rather Moon-Goddess-Shine, but there is a formidable display
of material and original thought.  Crowell's *Handbook of Classical
Mythology* gives nineteen pages to the Odysseus myth,
setting out the various strands and knots of the story, with
copious references.  Even dear old Lempri&egrave;re's *Classical Dictionary*
gives two columns, with references ranging from
Homer to Tzetz ad Lyc.  [Who he?  —Ed.] Room just gives three
dubious etymologies, and suggests that we settle for Odysseus
meaning 'trouble-maker,' adding, &ldquo;which is incidentally supported
by the fact that Odysseus is traditionally described as
having red hair.&rdquo;  There are no references for entries or
pictures.

The origin of his name is the last thing we need to know
about Odysseus.  It is a matter of considerable interest to a few
specialists and of minor interest to those who know the myth
well.  Those ignorant of the mythology, who are the only people
at whom this book can be aimed, will find the entries jejune
and off-putting.  They would be far better off with a translation
of Homer, or Ovid, or any of the great myth-makers.

*Philip Howard*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Word City: A New Language Tool*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/word-city-a-new-language-tool_marvin-morrison/2581199/#edition=5730595&idiq=913878)
Originated and comp. Marvin Morrison, (Pilot Light, 1982), xxi + 352pp.

Although I once lost—placed second, which is the same
thing—a spelling bee by leaving the second *e* out of *immediately*,
I am a pretty good speller.  Occasionally, I might check a
dictionary to determine which &oacute;f a number of variants is
&ldquo;preferred,&rdquo; but most of the time I know the correct spelling
of a word.  One of my classmates when I lost the spelling bee—I
was nine at the time—was such a poor speller that we
speculated on his ability to spell his own name correctly.
Perhaps today he might be classified as dyslexic, but

>In those good old antediluvian days,  
In those good old days of yore,  
When all the beasts were elephants  
And the water H&#92;?&#92;2SO&#92;?&#92;4,

he was simply known as a lousy speller.

I think he might have been helped by this book, which is
the cleverest method I have yet seen for showing the correct
spelling of words that one cannot spell—even those to which
you may not have a clue.  &ldquo;How can I look it up if I can't spell
it?&rdquo;  —the logical cry of the bad speller—is the very theme of
*Word City*.  I am not familiar enough with every approach to
the bad speller's problem to know whether the technique
developed by Morrison is unique, but I can say it works.  It is
much to be preferred, too, to the solutions offered by other
&ldquo;bad speller's&rdquo; dictionaries I have seen: they tend to list words
in their incorrect spellings, following the entry with the correct
spelling.  That is not a good practice because it shows the
wrong spelling in print and may help to fix it in the mind of
the user.

Morrison's approach is to strip a work of its vowels (the
culprits that cause most of the spelling problems) and to merge
the consonant sounds together.  *Sounds*, that is: forget that you
know that *philosophy* begins with a *ph*-, and &ldquo;respell&rdquo; it FLSF;
ignore your recollection that *psychology* likewise begins with a
*p*-, and render it SKLJ.  To do this, you must follow Morrison's
phonetic rules (the first *g* in *gauge* is G, the second is J).  The
compressed clusters of consonants are arranged in alphabetical
order throughout the book, which means that you do have to
know the alphabet.  The front matter provides an exceptionally
clear set of instructions, quickly learned, on how to use the
book.

I checked a few words that I see misspelled quite often.
*Misspell* is certainly one, and I found it readily enough under
MSPL, along with *misapply, misapplied, misapplies*, and its
inflections, *misspelt* or *misspelled*.  Another gem is *accommodate*,
which I found under KMDT, along with *accommodated,
accommodating, commodity*, and *commodities*, but without
*accommodation*.  GJ yields *gage* 'pledge,' *gauge* 'measure,' and
*gouge*, with their inflected forms.  (I found an alphabetical
hiccup here: GHD and GHT are out of order, but why
complain?)  RT covers *right, rite, wright* and *right*, each with its
own gloss.

Included are more than 45,000 words (and inflected
forms), which ought to be enough for a beginning.  I am not
sure I would have listed which under HWCH without showing
it, along with *witch* and *watch*, under WCH, since in the
speech of many the initial sounds by *w-* and *wh-* are homophonic,
but Morrison can take care of such matters in a later
edition.

As a simple answer to a problem that besets many people,
*Word City* stands out as a useful and elegant solution.  As Pilot
Light books might not be readily available in (or through) a
bookshop, order it directly from Direct Purchase/Pilot Light/
P.O. Box 305/Stone Mountain, GA 30086.  The prices quoted
in the book are $5.45 for one copy, $11.95 for three.  Special
quantity rates are available on application.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Style and Communication in the English Language*](https://www.abebooks.com/Style-Communication-English-Language-Randolph-Quirk/30367360993/bd)
Randolph Quirk, (Edward Arnold, 1982. Dist. in the U.S. by University Park Press, Baltimore.), viii + 136pp.

Forgiving one heinous error—my given name misspelled as
&ldquo;Lawrence&rdquo;—this is an extremely worthwhile book, written by
one of the foremost linguists of our day, who recently became
Vice Chancellor of London University.  Most of the articles
published in this small volume have appeared elsewhere—many
as reviews in journals that few people read, in newspapers and
their supplements that almost no one keeps, and in books of
less than bestseller distribution.  Only the chapter entitled
&ldquo;Dictionaries&rdquo; seems to be entirely original to the book, though
the other material does not necessarily appear here in its
original published form.

Quirk, before acceding to the throne at London University,
was Quain Professor of English there; for many years, he
has enjoyed a worldwide reputation as a highly articulate,
outspoken, versatile, imaginative, lucid, accurate, lively, well-informed,
tolerant, productive, sympathetic, friendly, indefatigable,
humane scholar.  His incisive comments on a number of
aspects of style make interesting reading and awaken the
reader to ideas and opinions not often expressed in matter
readily accessible to lay readers.  The subjects covered range
from the general (&ldquo;Speaking into the Air,&rdquo; which deals with the
language of radio and television) to the specifically academic
(&ldquo;Grammatical and Pragmatic Aspects of Countability,&rdquo; which
would seem to be too technical for inclusion with the other
articles).  The final piece in the book, &ldquo;Focus, Scope and Lyrical
Beginnings,&rdquo; is also not likely to be as readable and interesting
to the uninitiated as the other articles.  Yet that leaves nine
excellent essays to be savored by the casual observer of the
language as well as the professional.

It should be clear from the foregoing that this is not a
&ldquo;style manual&rdquo; but a collection of writings on English style.
The term &ldquo;communication&rdquo; in the title, a buzzword of this
generation, pertains most specifically to the chapter &ldquo;International
Communication and the Concept of Nuclear English.&rdquo;
Otherwise, one might rationalize that all language is &ldquo;communication,&rdquo;
thus rendering that an empty word.

Quirk's knowledge of language (and linguistics) is vast,
and his opinions and comments are inspiring.  Those who are
unfamiliar with his ideas and writings should grasp this opportunity
to acquaint themselves with this outstanding and important
contemporary scholar.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Sea Jargon: A Dictionary of the Unwritten Language of the Sea*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780850596564/Sea-Jargon-Dictionary-Unwritten-Language-0850596564/plp)
Lew Lind, (Kangaroo Press, 1982), 160pp.

The South Seas are ineluctably associated with nautical
lingo, though before the settlement of Australia, most of the
language of sailors was imported from England till the American
whalers joined the hunt.  Although this dictionary contains
much material that is universal, it also lists entries that are of
Aboriginal origin.  Each entry is carefully labeled as to its
source: *Aboriginal (A.), Fleet Air Arm (F.A.A.), Merchant
Service (M.S.), Navy (N.),* or *Waterfront (W.)*.

It is indeed a lively work, with brief, well-written definitions,
some of which reflect a measure of informality that, if
copied by other lexicographic works, would make them infinitely
more interesting and readable.  For instance:

*International Club* *N. &amp; M.S.*  The only facility for sailor's
recreation in the ports of Murmansk and Archangel during
World War II.  The entertainment and fraternisation was [*sic*]
so strictly policed by the Russian Secret Police that one visit
satisfied most sailors.

*Fly the blue pigeon* *N.*  To swing the lead when taking
soundings.  A vigorous swing made the lead 'coo' like a pigeon.

Some of these explanations are, as can be seen, quite revealing
and therefore very useful.

Focusing on what is in the book rather than criticizing it
for what it omits, one finds not only the familiar—*Eye of the
wind; Factory ship; Slinging hash*—but the picturesque—*Ecclesiastical
bricks* 'holystones'; *Everyone gets kicked and the
cabin boy kicks the cat; Tonsil varnish*—and the mysterious—
*Number Ten* *N*.  &ldquo;A punishment introduced by Winston
Churchill in 1912.&rdquo;  If this last is so called because of *Number
Ten Downing Street*, the reference for 1912 is elusive; if it
refers to 'ten lashes' or some other punishment, that is not
expressed.  It would be interesting to know why 'A recoverable
test vehicle used in aircraft carriers to test the aircraft launching
catapult' is called a *Chloe*.

Not all of the entries are nautical: *Gefuffle* (more commonly
*kerfuffle* or *kafuffle*); *Bottoms up; Clap;* etc.  To make up
for those, one finds a fair number of entries that trace their
origins to old sea shanties and ditties, and these are quoted
through (usually) a full stanza and, if appropriate, a chorus.

Lew Lind is identified as a &ldquo;New Public Relations Officer
and Foundation National President of The Naval Historical
Society of Australia,&rdquo; though the precise import of the latter
title I cannot fathom.  He writes interestingly and, to be sure,
has here gathered a useful, anecdotal log of entries for sailor
and landlubber alike.

The book contains some drawings and halftones; some of
these illustrate entries, others are—or seem to be—purely
decorative in purpose.  My only adverse criticism is of the style
of the main entry, which is always shown with an initial capital
letter, but that might well have been the publisher's unfortunate
error.  Anyone who couldn't appreciate and enjoy this
book for what it is couldn't *see a hole through a ladder.*

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary of American Pop/Rock: Slang and Shop Talk, Styles and Sounds, Fads and Fashions, People and Places, Dances and Diversions*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780028723501/Dictionary-American-Pop-Rock-Shaw-Arnold-0028723503/plp)
Arnold Shaw, (Schirmer Books (A Division of Macmillan Publishing Co.), 1982) vii + 440pp. 

My own taste in music is far more eclectic than my taste
in dictionaries: as a lexicographer, I confess to a tendency
toward hypercriticism of the latter.  After all, there ought to be
*some* standards of how to write definitions (with a stylistic
consistency) and delineate the finer points of the trade (which,
among its practitioners, is privately referred to as an &ldquo;art&rdquo;).  All the more refreshing, then, to find through this book one of the
most literate and interesting writers around who has deigned to
enter the ranks.

And most welcome he is!  This is, without exception, the
most readable dictionary I have come across in many a moon.
Totally unqualified to comment on the accuracy and completeness
of the content, I can give it only my unqualified endorsement.
It contains all of those categories listed in the subtitle—
really the cover blurb, but I could not resist—as well as rock,
pop, rhythm and blues, folk, country, blues, gospel, jazz, films,
musical theater, recording and music business terms (cadged
from the title page).  It is a work to be *read*, then put on the
shelf for reference.  It is not only a dictionary but a valuable
documentation of music (chiefly in America) since the early
1930s.  The information in each entry is astonishing; the reader
is left with the ineluctable conviction that Arnold Shaw knows
everyone and everything having anything to do with modern
music.  Whether that is so (or possible) or not, he certainly is
adept at articulating information in a most palatable form.

Two minor distractions: there appears to be no rationale
behind the capitalization of terms like *Rock, Rhythm &amp; Blues,
Jazz,* etc.; the only typo I caught is in the entry for *Greenwich
Village*, where is is written that &ldquo;... Richie Havens ... eeked
out a living by drawing portraits of tourists...&rdquo;  One must
assume that they were screamingly funny drawings.

Forget those hiccups.  Get the book.

*Laureance Urdang*


### OBITER DICTA

There is an apocryphal story I heard many years ago about
a drug company that had programmed a computer to generate
trade names for their myriad products by combining various
word segments which had been stored in the computer's
memory.  Everything went quite well till there was a close call:
the sales department one day realized that the company was
about to market a drug called &ldquo;Damitol.&rdquo;

There is, however, a genuine drug on the market (Don't
you just *love* the sound of that?) is *Triaminicin*, which has all
the overtones of an invitation to a roll in the hay.

Can readers come up with more such ambiguities?  Only
real ones, please.


### OBITER DICTA: *Ye Olde &ldquo;The&rdquo;*
*Henry M. Truby, Language and Linguistics Res. Lab. South Miami, Florida*

The *Ye* of, for example, *Ye Olde Tea Shoppe*, has never
been anything else in English but 'The,' and properly so
pronounced.  As a definite article already in the English of 600
to 1100 A.D., the *ye* in question was never confused, before the
end of the fifteenth century, with the also now archaic pronoun
*ye*.  The present mispronunciation &ldquo;YEE&rdquo; for the definite article
is owing to an alphabetic character change.  The Anglo-Saxon
(or Old English) writing system had five letters which vanished
from our alphabet centuries ago.  Two of these characters,
known as *thorn* and *eth* (or *edh*), were used interchangeably for
the contrasting voiced/voiceless consonant sounds today represented
by the *th*- digraph, as in *thy/thigh, either/ether, thou/
thousand, this/thistle, them/theme, bathe/bath*, etc.; the consistently
voiced sound of *they, their, these, those, that, then,
though*, etc.; or the consistently voiceless sound of *thin, think,
thank, thirst, three, third, thirty*, etc.

Thus, one of the ways to spell Old English 'the' was: &ldquo;&thorn;e.&rdquo;
Written carelessly, sans serifs, &ldquo;&thorn;e&rdquo; became &ldquo;&thorn;e.&rdquo;  Written even
more carelessly the result was &ldquo;&thorn;e,&rdquo; which resembled &ldquo;ye,&rdquo; and
when, in the earliest days of printing, printers substituted the
type character nearest to the thorn, namely &ldquo;y,&rdquo; people soon
forgot why the almost-look-alike *y* appeared on signboards and
the like and began mispronouncing words with this
substitution.

Take a look, for example, at William Shakespeare's famous
auto-epitaph:

>GOOD FREND FOR IESVS SAKE FORBEARE,  
TO DIGG THE DVST ENCLOASED &#92;?&#92;:  
BLESS BE &#92;?&#92; MAN &#92;?&#92; SPARES &#92;?&#92;S STONES  
AND CVRST BE HE &#92;?&#92; MOVES MY BONES.

In the custom of the times (W.S. died in 1616), the above
two lines would have normally appeared as:

>Blest be &#92;?&#92; man &#92;?&#92; spares &#92;?&#92; stones,  
And cvrst be he &#92;?&#92; moves my bones.

Nowadays, the only public exposure the old &ldquo;Y-thorn&rdquo; gets
is in authentic inn signs and the like... and in countless quasi-antique
misusages of &ldquo;Ye&rdquo; by those seeking quaintness.

The coalesced &#92;?&#92; of &ldquo;BLESE&rdquo; and of &ldquo;&#92;?&#92;&rdquo;; the
superscribed E of &ldquo;&#92;?&#92;&rdquo; and T of &ldquo;&#92;?&#92;&rdquo;; and the V for U of
&ldquo;CVRST&rdquo; are all regular for the times, as are the elevated and
underscored lower-case fonts in the normal form.

And while we're examining the orthography of this epitaph,
note:

>FREND   —    This spelling of c. 1600 would have given
            us 382 years of peace had it stuck.  
>
>IESVS  —    Note V, for later U, in those days, and the
            overlarge capital I, with divine overtones;
            &ldquo;J&rdquo; also came later.  
>
>FORBEARE HEARE  —  The spelling and rhyming of these two words is quite accurate for c. 1600; the rhyme was closer to today's *hair*.  
>
>DIGG    —    The *Ormulum*, by 1300, had set the style
            for doubling the consonant letter following
            certain vowel letters miscalled &ldquo;short.&rdquo;  
>
>DVST   —     Another V—for its successor, U—standard
            for the times.  
>
>ENCLOASED  — Note both the spelling of the vowel-sound
            and the trisyllabicity.  
>
>BLESE —      The &ldquo;final-e&rdquo; question was far from resolved
            in 1600; likewise the consonant-letter
            doubling, or voiceless -*ed* matter.  
>
>THES   —     Here there were all sorts of conflicts: the
            single-consonant letter following the vowel-
            letter miscalled &ldquo;long&rdquo;; the marking with a
            final -*e* of such vowel sounds; the voicing of
            the monosyllable-final sound spelled with a
            single -*s*, whether followed by final -*e* or
            not.  This so-called silent -*e* question has yet
            to be resolved, witness: *geese, goose, loose,*
            *moose, noose, dose, close* adj., *use* n., etc.

Just accept antique *Ye* (pronounced THE, and so &ldquo;translated&rdquo;),
and add it to your list of English spelling curios... like
the *f* of *of*; the *o* of *woman, women*, or of *choir* (or *choir* on
other counts); or *ewe*, or *eye*, or *who*, or *two*; or *one, once,
ouija* (WEEJY), and *bologna* (BALONEY)... and remember that
the language is still changing all the time, now as &ldquo;in days of
yore,&rdquo; *tho some knights are just tougher to* unhorse.


### OBITER DICTA
*Gertrude Block, University of Florida*

When President Reagan exhorted Senators and Congressmen
to *stay the course*, the actual meaning of his words was
the opposite of his intended meaning.  What President Reagan
intended to say—and the American public no doubt understood
him to mean—was that Congress should remain steady on the
course it had set for itself.  But what he actually said was that
Congress should halt its course.  For the transitive verb *stay*
means stop, postpone, or delay,' as in the locution *to stay the
execution*.

The intransitive verb *stay* does carry the meaning President
Reagan intended, but like its synonym *remain*, it must be
followed by an adverbial, not a direct object.  No one would use
*remain* as a transitive verb (e.g., &ldquo;to remain the course&rdquo;).  To
convey his intended meaning, President Reagan would have
had to tell Congress to &ldquo;stay on the course,&rdquo; just as he would
have had to say &ldquo;remain on the course.&rdquo;

President Reagan was probably complying with the seeming
tendency of users to change intransitive verbs of motion to
transitive verbs by using them with direct objects instead of
adverbial phrases.  In airports today, one regularly hears stewardesses
admonish passengers to use care when they &ldquo;exit the
aircraft.&rdquo; (One used to exit *from* an aircraft.) That use of *exit*
seems to be confined to aircraft; have you recently exited a
car?  Having exited the aircraft, passengers duly depart the
airport, another transitive verb having recently been created
from an intransitive verb.  English speakers seem more ready to
change intransitive verbs into transitive verbs than, for example,
the French, who still use the verb *entrer* as an intransitive
verb, the necessary form being *entrer dans*.

President Reagan is probably entitled to coin the use of
*stay* as a transitive verb.  The only problem is that his use of the
verb in *stay the course* contradicts the meaning of the already
available intransitive verb *stay* and therefore not only contributes
to the ambiguity of his pronouncement but speeds the
demise of a perfectly good intransitive verb meaning 'stop.'

## A Word About Word Processing—Reminiscences
*Laurence Urdang, Editor,* VERBATIM

By this time, everyone ought to be familiar with the term
*word processing*, notwithstanding the fact that linguists
have been struggling for a century to define *word*.  From the
standpoint of those in the computer biz, *word* (in this context)
means 'any collection of characters preceded and followed by a
space.'  In technical computerese, *word* (or *machine word*) is &ldquo;a
standard unit of information consisting of a fixed number of
bits and treated as a single unit by the computer.&rdquo; [*RHD*].
Computers have been processing words for many years; only
recently have they been called upon to do word processing.  If
there is no confusion in the reader's mind between the two
definitions, he should note the critical phrase &ldquo;consisting of a
fixed number of bits&rdquo; in the second: words in natural language
and in word processing do not, of course, consist of a fixed
number of bits—or, for that matter, bytes 'a unit of information
consisting of eight bits.'

If all this is somewhat confusing, one must bear in mind
that these terms were given to us by that great gang of illiterati
who gave us *programming* (with two *ms*, where, for American
spellers, one would have sufficed), exciting advertising copy
that includes gems like &ldquo;The enormity of Santa's job...&rdquo; [from
a Silicon Valley Systems advertisement in *Creative Computing*,
February 1983], and, to choose a brief sampling, fertile ground
for onomasticians who have run out of given names, surnames,
placenames, and streetnames, and would like to record names
of programs like *Chomper, Snakman, Trashman, Money
Munchers, Bug Battle, Laser Bounce, Monster Mash, Pig Pen,
Laf Pak, Phaser Fire, Tunnel Terror, Crisis Mountain,* and
*Crazey Mazey*, all reviewed in *Creative Computing*, February
1983.  If that list isn't long enough, consider *Fort Apocalypse,
Reptilian, Claim Jumper, Shamus, Worm War I*, and *Escape
from Vulcan's Isle* in which you are &ldquo;shipwrecked on an
uncharted island,... attacked by winged demons, threatened
by an explosive volcano, and hunted by flesh-eating monsters&rdquo;
—all courtesy of your Atari, Apple—or whatever—
microcomputer.  Today, everyone in England, where *program* is
normally spelt *programme*, has been learning to spell it *program*
when referring to computers.  The paucity of imagination in
that computer crowd has also disturbed the senses of *language*.
God knows we had enough metaphors for that word but have
now had the sense added that includes COBOL, FORTRAN, and
so forth to further addle our brains.  At least we have seen some
serious comments, by those familiar with computers, aimed at
disabusing us of the term *electronic brain*, pointing out that the
analogy between the human brain and the computer is a totally
false one: although computers can sort and organize and
generally process information at incredible speeds, they cannot
(yet) think for themselves (and it is unlikely that they will be
able to do so for some time to come, Hal notwithstanding).  The
analogy is not false for certain functions that the human brain
performs; for the other functions, like exercising judgment and
imagination, people still outperform machines, though one is
bound to add that it depends on which people.

Considering the recent encroachments by computers into
the sphere of publishing, chiefly through word processing, it is
a great pity that those who prepare the programs and who
write the manuals are not more literate and more careful in
their exposition.  It is rapidly becoming apparent to many
(though it was quite obvious to me more than twenty years
ago) that programming is better done by idiot savants (or
twelve-year-olds): their minds are relatively unencumbered by a
predisposition to the distracted, creative thinking, born of
intelligence and experience, that characterizes the reasoning
adult.  However good the programs may be, using them is quite
another matter: since the manual is usually written by the
programmer, more often than not it omits important information
because it is so &ldquo;obvious&rdquo; to the writer.  What is invariably
overlooked is the fact that an enormous number of people now
owning microcomputers (also called &ldquo;personal computers&rdquo;)
have no experience or training in computers at all.  They really
do not need any to make those devices behave, but they do
need guidance, comfort, and redundancy to help them through
novel experiences with new programs.  One manual accompanying
a microcomputer that was introduced in 1982 had no
index.  Thus, though I was aware that the program could
perform a particular function because I recalled having seen it
when reading the manual, I had to reread the manual to
discover the proper command, as there was no way to look it
up in an index.  Happily, that shortcoming was rectified in a
more recent edition (which, curiously, has Appendix Q following
Appendix R, an arrangement I have still been unable to
fathom).

As for word processing itself, it is scarcely &ldquo;new&rdquo;: using
systems I designed, we did word processing as long ago as
1960, when I first started organizing the compilation of the
*Random House Unabridged*.  Because the keyboards and other
paraphernalia now available for keyboarding text into machine-readable
form were not yet available, we used typewriterlike
machines that produced a continuous punched paper tape,
each key depression producing a discrete code.  This tape—we
eventually produced 750,000 feet of it in the course of
preparing the *RHD*, all in all some 65 million characters—was
converted to magnetic tape by a special device.  The magnetic
tape could then be processed by a computer.

In addition to allowing for the sorting of data by computer,
the advantage of having the text in machine-readable
form was greatly enhanced by the prospect of being able to
feed a specially prepared version of the tape into an automatic
typesetting machine, thus saving the cost of keyboarding the
text all over again (and, of course, of proofreading it again).

In 1968, I attended the Fall Joint Computer Conference,
held someplace out west, possibly in Las Vegas.  There, I visited
the booths of a large number of equipment manufacturers,
asking their engineers (when they were available) to build for
me a device that consisted of a keyboard, a CRT (cathode-ray
tube = TV screen), and a mechanism that would allow for the
storage of data on magnetic tape.  (There were no &ldquo;floppy&rdquo; or
&ldquo;hard&rdquo; discs generally available at that time; moreover, an
earlier device, called the Unityper, was supposed to enable the
user to record bits on magnetic tape, but it did not work.) One
after another, the engineers I spoke with looked at me as if I
were daft, then offered to sell me the components they
manufactured—keyboards, CRTs, etc.—and said I should put
them together in my own laboratory.  When I explained that I
had no laboratory (except in my head), they turned away to
talk with someone enquiring about a more immediate and
practical application of their products.  Four years later, such
devices (now known as microcomputers, word processors, etc.)
made their debut, as did &ldquo;hard&rdquo; discs, and, naturally, no one
remembered the mad fellow who had accosted people at the
FJCC.

The keyboarding device I modified in 1960 was a Remington
Rand Synchrotape machine.  Soon, Remington was to be
replaced by Sperry and the manufacture of Synchrotapes was
to cease, requiring me to use Flexowriters, a similar (but less
versatile) device made by Friden.  The original Synchrotape,
when modified, allowed us to keyboard 160 discrete characters
in sixteen fonts of type (plus superior and inferior characters)—
and to read them from typescript with only an hour's training,
a degree of versatility not yet equaled by today's equipment.
[As I was enjoined from discussing these matters prior to the
publication of the *RHD*, the first revelations were made at the
1966 annual meeting of the American Documentation Institute
(now the American Society for Information Sciences) in a
paper entitled &ldquo;The Use of Typographic Coding for Information
Retrieval.&rdquo;  That may seem an odd way of approaching the
subject, but at the time I felt it was the only approach I could
use that would hold any meaning or interest for the members
of the ADI.  Offprints of that paper are available on request
from me at VERBATIM.]

Since those days, we have been using computers and
computer-driven typesetting machines extensively in the preparation
of dictionaries and other reference books—more than 100
since 1969.  There are many applications for computers in
publishing (aside from their use at the business end).  For
instance, we are no longer restricted to working in strict
alphabetical order, because the computers are so fast that they
can sort large files into &ldquo;dictionary order&rdquo; in a few hours.  The
advantages of being able to define all together words dealing
with a given subject category yield better, more consistently
styled definitions.  With the text in machine-readable form, we
can search for particular kinds of information and list them
separately (e.g., individuals in a biographical work that are still
living so that we can insert a death date when necessary); we
can make certain that every word used in the defining
vocabulary is an entry in the dictionary; we can check the
consistency of definition vocabulary in dictionaries that make
use of a restricted list of words; we can check cross references
(and variants) automatically; the computer can be relied upon
to alphabetize entries with greater accuracy (and speed) than
one can expect from people; for some reference books, we can
extract indexes automatically, relieving human indexers of
routine work and leaving for them the &ldquo;content&rdquo; indexing they
can do so much better than computers.  There are many other
functions that can be performed by computers far more
quickly, accurately, and less expensively than people.  Typographically,
an entire book (which may run to too many pages)
can be reset in a slightly smaller type size, with less leading
between the lines in order to make it fit to specified dimensions.
Modern computer-driven composing machines not only
set fully made-up pages, with page numbers and headings
ready for printing, but can also vary the size of the type by as
little as one tenth of a point, vertically and horizontally—that is
1/72 of an inch—and can vary interlinear spacing by increments
of 1/1000 of an inch.  An entire book can now be typeset in a
matter of hours.  Since the advantages of such speed may not
be immediately apparent, it would be worthwhile to point out
that while formerly a publisher might have had to tie up a
substantial investment in a large, complex manuscript for
several months during which it was being typeset and proofread,
today the manuscript can be keyboarded and proofread
while it is being written, so that the entire book is in machine-readable
form virtually at the same time it is being completed,
reducing considerably the gap between completion of the
writing and the date when books are available for sale.

Obviously, the benefits of applying these techniques to the
publication of fiction are somewhat limited.  Yet, the publisher
of a paperback edition of a hardcover work need only reset it
automatically (and cheaply) for his edition, which, again, may
then appear in fewer pages, less expensively, than the original.
The resetting is a matter of hours and does not require a new
proofreading effort.

Complicated textbooks also present special problems of
page composition as well as comprehensive content indexing,
and the application of computers to their preparation and
typesetting may not be feasible or economical on a broad scale.
Nonetheless, when computers are used judiciously and properly
in performing the functions they can do better than people—
especially the routine jobs—they have proved outstandingly
successful and profitable.  In this regard, it is important to note
that one would be foolish to use computers to do things they
are unsuited for, just as one would scarcely use a Jumbo Jet to
go crosstown or, for that matter, take any kind of airplane to
travel a distance covered by a car in an hour or so: it takes that
long just to get to the airport.  Like most machines, computers
do very well those things they are suited for, and it is silly to
use them inappropriately.

Microcomputers and the word processing programs available
for them offer writers and publishers the opportunity for
lower cost, reduced time from concept to publication, and
greater efficiency.  For documents and other publications that
need not be graphic-arts quality, the &ldquo;daisy-wheel&rdquo; printers
that can be driven by microcomputers to produce justified text
are quite adequate, despite the slower operating speeds—about
40 to 50 characters per second—of such machines.  For quicker,
proof-quality output, inexpensive matrix devices are available
that print at speeds in excess of 250 characters per second.  In
our operations we employ many free-lance writers, and we
have found it economical to provide many of them—depending
on their assignments—with microcomputers; they keyboard text
directly onto diskettes and send them to us for printing and
processing, their typewriters having fallen into disuse.

For those who fear or despise computers, there may be no
answer, for they were born into the wrong century.  Yet, I
wonder if they still write on vellum using a quill they have
plucked from a passing goose or if they use paper and a
fountain pen or ballpoint.  It is not easy to change one's habits
and prejudices, and for many it may not be necessary.
Learning to use a microcomputer is no more difficult than
changing from a mechanical typewriter to an electric or from a
stick shift to an automatic transmission.  The &ldquo;hands-on&rdquo; sensation
is somewhat mitigated, it is true, but then consider the
number of times you have retyped a page because you wished
(or had) to change one word.

It must also be said that one must change ingrained
attitudes toward information and how it has been processed
traditionally.  One favorable advantage of old-fashioned methods,
that of browsing, is sacrificed to a certain extent.  But
against that loss must be weighed the benefit of time and
energy saved by being able to key a short command to a
microcomputer word-processing program that will, in a matter
of seconds, find every instance of a given character or word in
a long, machine-readable document.  Many of the newer,
&ldquo;personal&rdquo; microcomputers are &ldquo;user-friendly,&rdquo; a term becoming
more and more popular in the trade.  As I mentioned at the
start of this article, the novice must tread carefully because the
programmers and manufacturers who prepare what they consider
to be &ldquo;user-friendly&rdquo; manuals often fall far short of their
goals.  Perhaps the best advice for a beginner is to suggest a
subscription to one or more of the several periodicals published
for users of microcomputers.  These, now available in many
libraries, will help to acquaint the novice with the many
devices and programs that can be bought from local shops and
through mail order.

This is not a &ldquo;plea&rdquo; to urge everyone to buy a microcomputer,
any more than I would try to convince an apartment-dweller
to buy a lawn mower.  But there are many who might
benefit from the many time-saving uses of a computer, and for
them I can only hope that these comments have helped remove
some of the apprehensions and misapprehensions with which
we all face the unknown.

## Pairing Pairs No. 11

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Febrile cerebral.  
(b). B.P.O.E. fanatic wears deerstalker.  
(c). Most deeply in the red.  
(d). Bragging gets flimflam artist the chair.  
(e). Caution!  Fruity exhibitionist.  
(f). Sojourn in Kennebunkport for person of substance.  
(g). Illegal whispering gallery.  
(h). Greek soldier has flea?  
(i). Flower yields proper wine.  
(j). Navigate through this network till your ship comes in.  
(k). Head of Eames Company.  
(l). Tyre or Sidon, e.g.  
(m). Mideast delicacy draws adoring glances.  
(n). Disarmament on the up-and-up.  
(o). Cause of the Fall: just dessert.  
(p). Restaurant investment.  
(q). Slothful spirit in Islam?  
(r). Lassie—are you serious?  
(s). Basically revealed by tight jeans.  
(t). Smell of the pitstop is rude.  
(u). Tumbler of sodium or potassium silicate.  
(v). Cross the line by burying the faction.  
(w). Man-talk is a curse.  
(x). Catafalque for a midget.  
(y). Gambling spouse.  
(z). Big(shot) daddy.

(1). Angel.  
(2). Beer.  
(3). Better.  
(4). Bottom.  
(5). Buoy.  
(6). Cannon.  
(7). Chair.  
(8). Con.  
(9). Diction.  
(10). Dog.  
(11). Easy.  
(12). Elk.  
(13). Eyes.  
(14). Feud.  
(15). Flasher.  
(16). Fodder.  
(17). Glass.  
(18). Grub.  
(19). Half.  
(20). Head.  
(21). Hop.  
(22). Hot.  
(23). Hound.  
(24). Indy.  
(25). Inter.  
(26). Jinn.  
(27). Kosher.  
(28). Leader.  
(29). Light.  
(30). Line.  
(31). Loss.  
(32). Main.  
(33). Male.  
(34). Man.  
(35). Old.  
(36). Orange.  
(37). Port.  
(38). Prim.  
(39). Rose.  
(40). Salt.  
(41). Scent.  
(42). Seat.  
(43). Sect.  
(44). Sheep's.  
(45). Slow.  
(46). Small.  
(47). Speak.  
(48). Star.  
(49). Stay.  
(50). Steak.  
(51). Vintage.  
(52). Water.  
(53). Wine.  

Winners will receive one of the following: the Collector's
Edition of Thomas H. Middleton's *Light Refractions* (retail
value, $30 or &pound;15); *English English* by Norman W. Schur
(retail value, $24.95 or &pound;12.50); three copies of *Wordsmanship*,
by Claur&eacute;ne duGran (retail value, $29.85 or &pound;14.85); twelve
copies of *Definitive Quotations*, by John Ferguson (retail value,
$35.40 or 18); *Word for Word*, by Edward C. Pinkerton (retail
value, $39.95 or &pound;20); four one-year subscriptions to VERBATIM
(retail value, $30 or &pound;15); any two of the following: *Verbatim
Volumes I &amp; II, Verbatim Volumes III &amp; IV, Verbatim Volumes
V &amp; VI, Verbatim Index: Volumes I-VI;* or a credit of $25 or
&pound;12.50 towards the purchase of any other title or titles offered
in the VERBATIM Book Club Catalogue.

Those living in the U.K., Europe, the Middle East, or
North Africa should send their answers to VERBATIM, 2 Market
Square, Aylesbury, Bucks, England.  All others should send
them to VERBATIM, Essex, CT 06426, U.S.A.

*You need send only the correct solution, not the answers to
all of the clues.  Please indicate your choice of prize along with
your answer*.

*N.B.:* To allow for the sloth of the various postal systems
and to make it fairer for those residing far from either office,
we shall arrange to collect correct answers for 21 days, starting
with the day the first correct answer is received, and to draw
one winner from each office.

## Paring Pairs No. 10 Answers

(a). Slacker is down on his luck.  (15,30) Feather Merchant.  
(b). Knowledge of what goes to waste.  (31,22) Navel Intelligence.  
(c). Early settlers first tend to these.  (33,43) Old Scores.  
(d). Roland choreographed this.  (35,37) Petit Point.  
(e). Openwork shoes.  (4,24) Boot Lace.  
(f). Corner the flour market.  (5,21) Button Hole.  
(g). Insane duvet.  (9,38) Crazy Quilt.  
(h). Gangster rubs out heroin dealer.  (45,42) Slay Ride.  
(i). Literarily, a healthy communist.  (51,40) Well Read.  
(j). Important dockmaster.  (23,28) Key Man.  
(k). Superior to the pound.  (34,50) Over Weight.  
(l). Nursing quadruplets.  (47,1) Two Abreast.  
(m). What a microcephalic, nanocerebral ninnyhammer ought to do.  (17,2) Get Ahead.  
(n). Huey's son.  (13,25) Ere Long.  
(o). What poor, sick Achilles wasn't.  (51,18) Well Healed.  
(p). Turned by inattentive one.  (10,12) Deaf Ear.  
(q). Tennis on the house creates judges.  Nein? (20,8) High Court.  
(r). Additional rendition adds to outgoing variety.  (14,48) Extra Version.  
(s). In this place, at present, but not in evidence.  (32,19) Now Here.  
(t). How to greet students in school for elite.  (20,7) High Class.  
(u). Woman jailor in armor.  (49,11) War Dress.  
(v). Crazy turnkey got away? (44,27) Screw Loose.  
(w). Quarry layout.  (16,36) Game Plan.  
(x). Site of Huey's seat.  (6,26) Chez Longue.  
(y). Haberdashery makes custom curse.  (29,46) Men Swear.  
(z). Lease on torture device is exorbitant.  (39,41) Rack Rent.  

The correct answer is (3) Baby.  The solutions are given below.
The winner of No. 10 was Roy K. Stevens, New York City.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...Mr. Simpson dies, as stated, three days later, and on
Tuesday of the following week.&rdquo; [From a 1932 opinion of the
Washington Supreme Court, Washington Reports, vol. 169.
Submitted by Mark Reutlinger, University of the Puget Sound
School of Law.  But what did he do for an encore?]


#### EPISTOLA {W.M. Woods}

Robert Devereux, in his very interesting article on words
of Southern Amerind origin [IX, 3], lists *papaw, pawpaw,
papaya, papaia* as variants of the same term.  This is doubtless
correct etymologically, but in present-day English *papaw,
pawpaw* designates the common name most generally used in
North America for *Asimina triloba*, either the tree or the fruit
it bears.  *Papaya*, on the other hand, is the common name for
*Carica papaya*, the fruit or the tree.  The distribution of A.
*triloba* is from New Jersey west to southern Michigan, thence
south to northern Florida and eastern Texas.  *C. papaya*, on the
other hand, is strictly tropical, occurring in the U.S. only in the
lower peninsula of Florida and the Keys.

While *papaw, pawpaw* is sometimes used to designate C.
*papaya*, and then pronounced p&ocirc;-p&ocirc;' (WNI-2nd marks), A.
*triloba* is never called anything but *papaw, pawpaw*, pronounced
p&ocirc;-p&ocirc;'.

This is a nice illustration of the need for scientific names
in precise discussion.

*[W.M. Woods, Oak Ridge, Tennessee]*


#### EPISTOLA {Bernard Witlieb}

Donald Drury's &ldquo;A Harvest of Heteronyms&rdquo; [IX, 3] pays
welcome attention to this bivocal word-category.  Other permutations
may derive from his list.

*Heterophone* may be coined for &ldquo;a word with two different
pronunciations each of which has its own homophone.&rdquo;
E.G.,

>sheik:   [sh&amacr;k]    &rarr;  shake;    [sh&emacr;K]  &rarr;  chic  
do:      [d&umacr;]      &rarr;  dew;      [d&omacr;]    &rarr;  doe, &rarr;  dough  
sow:     [s&omacr;]      &rarr;  so, sew;  [sau]         &rarr;  sough  
bow:     [b&omacr;]      &rarr;  beau;     [bau]         &rarr;  bough  
tear:    [t&imacr;r]     &rarr;  tier;     [tair]        &rarr;  tare

*Acrophone* may be coined for &ldquo;a word with the same
spelling as another but with a different pronunciation because
of a capital letter.&rdquo; E.G.,

>polish—Polish  
tangier—Tangier

*[Bernard Witlieb, Bronx Community College]*


#### EPISTOLA {Bryan A. Garner}

Mrs. Lillian Mermin Feinsilver writes [IX, 3] that I read
John Simon &ldquo;too hastily&rdquo; in countenancing his supposed errors.
I admire Mrs. Feinsilver's keen eye, but still maintain that it is
misdirected by a less keen knowledge of grammar and usage.

First, she adduces as further &ldquo;proof&rdquo; of Simon's &ldquo;stylistic
inadequacies&rdquo; &ldquo;confusion of *comprise* with *are comprised
of...*.&rdquo; Thus she misunderstands the correct use of *comprise*
(as opposed to *compose*), an elementary precept well illustrated
in Follett's mnemonic ditty:

>The whole comprises the parts;  
The parts are comprised in the whole;  
The whole is composed of its parts;  
The parts compose the whole.

Second, Mrs. Feinsilver writes of my comments on
Simon's &ldquo;What good is correct speech and writing...?&rdquo; that I
am &ldquo;unaware that *What good* is not the subject here but a
predicate nominative phrase.&rdquo;  Actually, *what* is an adjective
modifying the subject *good*.  *What good* is therefore the subject
phrase, arguably demanding a singular verb.  Evans treats the
problem well in his *Dictionary of Contemporary American
Usage* (1957).  But this discussion is really supererogatory, as
&ldquo;correct speech and writing&rdquo; may be seen as expressing a
single idea.

Third, although I might better have used the subjunctive
*could* instead of the indicative *can* in the sentence Mrs.
Feinsilver cites, she wrongly asserts that I misused *can for may*
here: &ldquo;But one who espies these linguistic peccadilloes should
not gloat over the discovery, nor can one really use such lapses
to discredit exemplary writers....&rdquo; This statement involves
objective facts about one's limitations in discrediting another
rather than what is permissible; thus *can* is correct.

Mrs. Feinsilver is quite right to attempt to point out
shortcomings in the prose of stylistic exemplars.  (One might
wish, however, that her batting average were better than .500!)
Still, if she is truly interested in combatting &ldquo;the decline of
standards,&rdquo; as all aficionados of language should be, she should
recognize the worth of Simon's writings in behalf of that cause.
And she should avoid writing, &ldquo;the decline of standards as
exemplified by two books which should have been unrepresentative
of that process...&rdquo; where *which* should be *that*.  And she
should refrain from using spurious *Timese* titles such as &ldquo;Man-of-letters
Kingsley Amis&rdquo; [VII, 4].

These tu quoques serve only to demonstrate what should
need no demonstration: the fallibility of even the most careful
writers.  Doubtless one might quibble with usages in this very
letter (the less-than-airtight *thus for therefore*, for example).  To
be sure, we must continue to fight the battle for excellence, but
we must also sometimes question whether we've chosen the
right battlefield.

*[Bryan A. Garner, Austin, Texas]*


#### EPISTOLA {Donald L. Husman}

In the penultimate paragraph of &ldquo;Some Interesting Characteristics
of Non-Indo-European Languages&rdquo; [IX 2] the meaning
of the third tone *ma* got my attention.  I have no
recollection of *ma*&sup3; meaning 'house.'  But I certainly do not say
that that 'house' is incorrect, because if there are some 40,000
Chinese ideographs, as is often estimated, and I am familiar
with only a couple of thousand, then some other *ma*&sup3; could
mean 'house.'  However, I believe it is more likely that the
translation was misread in the preparation of the article.  The
most common meaning of *ma*&sup3; is 'horse.'  Incidentally, the
classifier for ma&sup3; is &#92;?&#92; &#92;?&#92;

*[Donald L. Husman, N. Ft. Myers, Florida]*


#### EPISTOLA {James R. Bloomfield}

Here is an addendum to &ldquo;Negative Words,&rdquo; by Norman
W. Schur [IX, 1]: *impeccable/peccable*.  Although*peccable* is
listed in the dictionaries, it is, I believe, quite rarely
encountered.

*[James R. Bloomfield, Thiel College]*


#### EPISTOLA {Faye Levine}

I would like to reply to Mary Patterson's epistola [IX, 2]
concerning new terminology for the soon-to-be-outmoded *clockwise*
and *counterclockwise*.

The answer is simplicity itself.  Seen from the perspective
of the South Pole, our planet appears to rotate clockwise.  Seen
from the perspective of the North Pole, the world turns
*counter*- (or *anti*-) *clockwise*.

Thus, digital watch in hand, we may choose to speak,
simply, of south pole rotation (CW) versus north pole rotation
(CCW); for a fancier touch, and to confuse the initiated,
*conversio polo australeo* and *conversio polo borealo* would also
serve.

*[Faye Levine, Polytechnic Institute of New York]*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Actress said improved after wreck.&rdquo;  [From a headline for
an article on the accident that injured Janet Gaynor, in the
Paris (Tennessee) *Post-Intelligencer*, 8 September 1982.  Submitted
by Kirham Ford, Paris, Tennessee, who comments, &ldquo;Drastic
measure, but apparently effective.&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Russian Satirists Exploit Chink In Chinese Armor.&rdquo;  [from
a headline in the Baltimore Sun.  Submitted
by Mrs. Nathan L. Smith, Jr., Gibson Island, Maryland.]

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Follow the leader and lead the show at the track.  (4, 6)  
6\. Not a brief case for lawyers.  (4)  
10\. Did Columbus or Norsemen set record covering the New World?  (8, 7)  
11\. Disabled Knick, not out of his tree, despite occupational handicap. (5, 4)  
12\. Sundial indicator, out of fashion.  (5)  
13\. Nag in nude mess is an outrageous baggage... (7)  
14\. ...but, of course, oddly canters around in strange dreams.  (7)  
16\. Angered in the fog, this goes to blazes carrying wood.  (7)  
18\. A rude cheer about poor Dad becoming even more of a piker.  (7)  
19\. A poorer copy, made with less love.  (5)  
21\. Control government with return to the status quo ante.  (9)  
23\. With loose talk, coward dooms self under the classic blade.  (5, 2, 8)  
24\. An old bordello in the Wild West.  (4)  
25\. Note nearly garbled in the song of yesterday. (6, 4)

**Down**

1\. Acted as a younger son. (5)  
2\. Let Simon rise as a disciple to spread the Gospel.  (9)  
3\. Purtian punishment, with restraints, for the broker's share?  (6, 3, 5)  
4\. Wash cels in the can.  (7)  
5\. Love in earnest.  (7)  
7\. FYI the international set may yet move to get together.  (5)  
8\. Incoherent one, in disturbed rest, becomes crosser!  (9)  
9\. Pen war, sport?  Yes. Read all about it right here.  (9, 5)  
13\. Poor seed coming up in bad frost cuts the woodland growth.  (9)  
15\. Small firm heads clumsy appeals and gains concession in court. (4, 1, 4)  
17\. Fig fare could boggle this fellow, though his neck has a knack for it. (7)  
18\. This much I can offer, a heritage from old Mexico.  (7)  
20\. &ldquo;...forty years I've without knowing it.&rdquo; re, *Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme*.  (5)
22\. East of the changing sun on all sides.  Follow?  (5)

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. DI-A-t-R-i-BE;  
5\. Sconce;  
9\. MOON SITE;  
10\. HUN-G UP;  
11\. Intelligentsias;  
13\. RES-urged;  
14\. R-og-ER;  
15\. Mel-BA;  
17\. TRAM-car-S;  
20\. Foreign minister;  
21\. Lear-NS;  
22\. sIGN IT I ONly;  
23\. Rosary;  
24\. Polygamy.

**Down**

1\. Dimwit;   
2\. APOSTLE;  
3\. Rustle up a dinner;  
4\. BET-ti-N-g A ten;  
6\. Counteractivity;  
7\. NAG-gin-G;  
8\. Exposer;  
12\. En-dearing-TO;  
15\. Muffler;  
16\. Lariats;  
18\. RETSINA;  
19\. Brand-Y.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v9n4_Spring_1983)