--- 
title: "VOL X, No 1"
year: 1983
season: Summer
---

## Never Ask a Uruguayan Waitress for a Little Box: She Might Apply Her Foot to Your Eyelet
*John R. Cassidy, Clifton, Virginia*

The English-speaking nations may believe themselves to be
divided by their common language, but their plight
doesn't even approach that of the Spanish-speaking peoples.
The visiting American who says *bum* inopportunely or the
Englishman who urges Americans to *Keep their peckers up* may
perhaps suffer mild embarrassment, but neither of them will
experience the show-stopping thrill induced by a Cuban lady
who gratefully acknowledges to the Buenos Aires civic organization,
&ldquo;Yes, your welcoming committee fucked me right in the
door of the airplane.&rdquo;

Unless coached beforehand, any visitor from a northern
country of Latin America is likely to have at least one
experience like that before he learns that in the Rio de la Plata
area the elsewhere perfectly decent verb *coger* 'to pick up,
grasp, catch, gather' is taboo.  In those southern lands, *coger*,
which is the verb our Cuban lady used, has come to have only
one meaning, an obscene one, and the verb has therefore been
lost to the *rioplatenses* for civil discourse.  A comparable
situation might be for English to lose the use of the word *get*
because overemphasis on its minor generative meaning has
shouldered out all other uses.  It is difficult to imagine the ends
we would have to go to to avoid the use of the lost word, but it
is exactly that kind of a struggle that occurs every time
somebody in gaucho country has to express precisely what
*coger* would say if he could use it.

The northerners rail at this silliness, but in doing so they
forget the beam in their own eye.  The people of many of the
northern countries have inflicted on the verb *tirar* 'throw, pull,
stretch, discard, shoot, publish, etc.' the same fate that *coger*
has suffered around the Rio de la Plata.  In fact, when you
compare the space taken up in dictionaries, you are led to
conclude that *tirar* is an even greater loss to the language than
*coger*.

How is a traveler to know these things?  Having lived in
several Latin American countries and Spain and having traveled
in every one of them, I have suffered a few linguistic
bruises myself, and I conclude that no ordinary mortal can
foresee all the possibilities for embarrassment, especially since
most of the bothersome differences seem to be in the areas of
food and sex, neither of which boons one wishes to forswear.
One must eat.  But no matter how fluent one's Spanish, one
may find eating in restaurants an unexpected struggle during
the first few days in a new Hispanic country.  It might surprise
many Americans to know that, even without much knowledge
of Spanish, they would understand a typical Mexican restaurant
menu more readily than a Chilean would, because in Chile
a *taco* is the 'heel of a shoe or a billiard cue,' and the Chilean
never heard of *enchiladas, frijoles*, or *tamales*.  [The American
should not be complacent, however.  He or she may recognize
the word *tamales* on the menu, but if only one is wanted, the
customer must ask for a *tamal*, not a *tamale*.]  Our Chilean
visitor may see *tomates* on the menu and of course knows what
*they* are, but he or she may be in for a surprise, because it will
be green.  If you want a ripe tomato in Mexico, you must order
a *jitomate*.  If the Chilean complains, the Mexican might
justifiably claim a sort of proprietorship over the words, whose
structure implies their origin in the ancient world of the
northern part of what is now Hispanic America, along with
*aguacate, elote, ayote, pataste, zapote*, and *peyote*, to name but
a few, which are, respectively, an 'avocado,' an 'ear of corn,' a
'squash,' 'another variety of squash,' a 'fruit,' and a 'high.'

It is true that an American in England might stumble over
*treacle* or *corn* and might not have the faintest idea what a
*Cornish pastie* is, but he or she would at least recognize the
ingredients of the pastie if a Briton named them.  In contrast, if
a Uruguayan tried to describe to a Mexican the ingredients of
the beloved boiled dinner, the *puchero*, the Mexican would not
understand the words for *corn on the cob, sweet potato, beans*,
and *beef ribs*.

As far as I know, English speakers everywhere generally
agree on the words for *potato, tomato, bacon, sweet potato,
butter, lard, chops, grapefruit, strawberry, peach, banana,
pineapple, avocado, beans*, and *green pepper*.  (*Sweet potatoes*
are also called *yams*, of course, but most English speakers are
familiar with both names.)  Hispanics are not unanimous about
any of the words for those foods nor about many others too
numerous to list here, and as a general rule you will not be
understood if you use the wrong variant for your current
location.  As is the case with *tomate* and *jitomate* between Chile
and Mexico, so it is among the various nations with regard to
'potato' *patata, papa*; 'bacon' *tocino, panceta*; 'sweet potato'
*batata, boniato, moniato*; 'butter' *manteca, mantequilla*; 'lard'
*manteca, grasa de cerdo*; 'chop' *costilla, chuleta*; 'grapefruit'
*toronja, pomelo*; 'strawberry' *fresa, frutilla*; 'peach' *durazno,
melocot&oacute;n*; 'banana' *pl&aacute;tano, banana, guineo, m&iacute;nimo*; 'pineapple'
*pi&ntilde;a, anan&aacute;*; 'avocado' *aguacate, palta*; 'green bean'
*habichuela verde, jud&iacute;a, chaucha, haba*; 'beans' *habichuelas,
frijoles, porotos*; 'sweet pepper' *aj&iacute;, chili para relleno, pimienta*;
'corn on the cob' *elote, choclo*.

Sometimes the struggle for comprehension involves both
food and sex in the same word.  In many countries of Latin
America, *cajeta*, a creamy caramel spread, made from milk and
sugar, is used on pancakes or toast or as an icing or filling for
cakes, candies, and cookies; but woe to the sweet-toothed
Mexican who asks a waitress in Montevideo if she has *cajeta*.
She will not know he means *dulce de leche*: she will understand
him to be asking her if she has a cunt.  On the other hand, if
the Mexican slips and says *chingada*, which might burn the
ears of a Mexican waitress, the Uruguayan will not bat an eye,
because she will not know the word at all.  Many Americans
whose Spanish is a rudimentary Tex-Mex assume that &iexcl;*chingada!*
and its bowdlerized form &iexcl;*chihuahua!* are universal
expletives among Hispanic peoples, but it is not so.  Even where
a certain sexual allusion is common throughout the Hispanic
world, the words that express it may not be the same for all
regions.  Spanish speakers everywhere cite testicles both to label
a man a hero and to call him an idiot.  To say that a man has
*pelotas* or *bolas* 'balls' or *huevos* 'eggs' is to qualify him as a
brave and most admirable he-man.  [I never use the word
*macho* any more, because the English-speaking world has
adopted it and ruined its noble connotations.]  But if a man is
*pelotudo* or *boludo* or *huev&oacute;n*, it means he has outsized
testicles, i.e., he is stupid or subhuman.

Every region of the Hispanic world has its own collection
of words for human genitalia, and sometimes these words are
transferable to other regions, but more often they are not.  In
Buenos Aires, for example, the penis is known variously as *la
pija, la pistola, la poronga, el nabo* 'turnip,' or *el mongo*.  [Those
who assert that language can be sexist may note with perplexity
that the most commonly used words for penis, testicles, and
beard, attributes which characterize men as men, are of
feminine gender in Spanish, whereas the words for a woman's
breasts, except for the indelicate *tetas*, are masculine (*senos,
pechos*.)]  One can imagine the impact on the public of Buenos
Aires the day a careless or mischievous typesetter set up a
headline chronicling the doings of the famous General Slim,
known east of Suez as *Monghi Slim*.  The headline stood out
blatantly on the newsstands, and even those who spoke no
English could understand from the words MONGO SLIM
VICTORIOUS that he had won and what somebody thought
of him.

I have heard fewer names for female genitalia, and that
may be because the shape offers fewer opportunities for similes
than the male organs.  As noted, *cajeta* is used in one region.
Although in some other countries it means 'caramel syrup,' its
original Spanish meaning is a 'small box,' and the sexual
application is obvious.  *Concha* means 'shell' and is also apt.
*Vaina*, a descendant of *vagina*, is perfectly acceptable in most
Hispanic countries and means exactly what its Latin root
meant, 'sheath.'  Like *vagina* everywhere in the modern world,
*vaina* in Colombia has come to be used for one human organ;
but whereas *vagina* is clinical and acceptable in most circumstances,
*vaina* is obscene in Colombia.  Anyone who has spent
time there can testify that Colombian males use the word with
the same emphasis, intent, and effect as English-speaking males
of all nations use the word *fuck* in locker rooms and barracks.

Some years ago the State Department assigned a friend of
mine, who is fluent in Spanish, to a tour of duty in Bogot&aacute;, a
city he did not know.  He was accompanied by his wife, Vina.
Now, when one uses the word *se&ntilde;ora* as an adjective in
Spanish, it can have the meaning 'magnificent, grandiose'—as in
&iexcl;*Es una se&ntilde;ora casa!*  'It is a tremendous house!'  For many days,
my friend's new Colombian friends were either too embarrassed
or too mischievous to tell him that he was introducing
his wife (&ldquo;Se&ntilde;ora Vina&rdquo;) to Colombian society as &ldquo;my magnificent
cunt.&rdquo;

Anyone who has tried to enter into a foreign language in
another land has experienced or heard about those moments
when the innocent use of a word suddenly submerges the
speaker in a shocked silence.

It happened to me.  A group of close friends took me
partridge hunting in Uruguay, and I had an excellent day.  My
friends argued good-naturedly among themselves and with me
about whether this *yanqui* was really that much of a crack shot
or whether it was all *puro ojete.  Ojete* means 'eyelet,' but it was
obvious from the context that they were saying I was unbelievably
lucky.  *Pues bien,* at a cocktail party in Montevideo a few
days later, I was holding forth to a mixed group of Uruguayans
on the marvels of their country's game birds, and this kind of
praise invariably garners a sizeable and attentive audience.
After announcing the number of birds I had bagged, I
modestly admitted in a clear and ringing voice that it had been
nothing but *puro ojete*.

Reflexively, a friend standing nearby said, &ldquo;What did you
say?&rdquo;

And so, I said it again.

By now, the glassy eyes around me told me something was
wrong.  Later, I learned that in Uruguay, *ojete* means only one
thing —'asshole.'  In defense of my hunting companions, they
had not tried to play a trick on me.  They assumed that I knew
what the word meant, just as they assumed that I knew that
the most vivid way to call a man phenomenally lucky is to say
that he has a huge asshole.

Uruguay was also the scene of a slip that I think must
stand as an all-time classic.  A young woman from a northern
country (Ecuador, I think) was visiting a posh country club
near Montevideo.  She was of that green-eyed, blonde Spanish
type one sees so frequently and with such pleasure on the
streets of Madrid, and her face was matched in beauty by a
superb body.  The bikini had not yet shrunk to the string size of
today's models, but she was nonetheless giving the males
around the club pool a pleasant afternoon contemplating the
contents of a provocative bathing suit.  Needless to say, a large
number of young males had gathered to enjoy the spectacle.

In the midst of the almost palpable lust, she eased herself
gingerly into the water.  She wasn't serious about swimming; it
was simply a continuation of the show.  After paddling about
daintily and seductively for two or three minutes, she got out
and stood dripping divinely at the edge of the pool.  But when
she took off her bathing cap and fluffed her golden tresses, she
discovered that they were damp.  Whereupon she exclaimed,
*&ldquo;&iexcl;Ay, mira mi cabello!  &iexcl;Y apenas me moj&eacute; la concha!&rdquo;*

In her native region, *concha* means 'skin,' and so she was
not saying anything extraordinary from her point of view.  But
to the dumfounded Uruguayans, she had exclaimed, &ldquo;Darn it,
look at my hair!  And I just barely got my cunt wet!&rdquo;

I wonder if she still blushes when she remembers, as I still
feel embarrassed about having proclaimed the size of my
asshole at an Uruguayan cocktail party.  She and I belong to an
exclusive club from which any normal person would, in fact,
wish fervently to be excluded.  If I had any way to get in touch
with her, I'd tell her it helps to write about it.  Or, if she prefers
not to do that, then my advice, in her own dialect, would be to
relax and try to maintain a thick *concha*.

## The Failures of Success
*Laurence Urdang*

Large corporations elicit little sympathy in our society.
Despite their employment of large numbers of people, their
providing of income and security to many who are shareholders,
their contributions to charity and worthwhile causes, and
their other activities that directly and indirectly affect the lives
of many with whom they have no discernible connection, large
corporations are often criticized, chiefly because they tend to
be impersonal and offer little in the way of individuals with
whom the man-in-the-street can identify.  The days of Henry
Ford, DuPont, and the unfortunate theme, &ldquo;What's good for
General Motors is good for America,&rdquo; are behind us, replaced
by the instant millionaires of Silicon Valley.

This is not an apologia for corporations, large or small,
personal or impersonal; rather, it is to point out that all
companies share one concern: the protection of their rights and
property.  The governments of most countries that offer patent
and copyright registration make no claims of protection of
those registrations: it is the responsibility of every company to
protect itself, and the larger companies, with more resources at
their disposal, are generally better able to cope with what their
lawyers deem to be infringements.

This publication was first published in the spring of 1974,
and its name, VERBATIM, was immediately registered with the
U.S. Patent Office as a tradename.  That did not stop a western
manufacturer of computer media (mainly floppy discs) from
calling its product &ldquo;Verbatim&rdquo; several years later.  We filed a
formal protest attempting to block their registration of the
name, but we did not get very far because a quarterly
periodical on language was too remote from computer media to
be directly competitive.  (Thus, duPont cigarette lighters do not
&ldquo;interfere&rdquo; with DuPont chemicals or other products.)  A
settlement agreement was reached providing, basically, that
Verbatim media would not be sold containing any text or
information on them and VERBATIM would not go into the
computer media manufacturing business (at least, not using
that name).  (Several years after that agreement, we received a
firm note from the—evidently—new law firm for the manufacturer
who had just noticed our quarterly and wanted us to stop
using &ldquo;their&rdquo; name.  A quick note brought them up to date.  All
this is prompted by an advertisement in *Publishers Weekly* for
June 10, 1983, in which the Xerox Corporation (which, incidentally,
owns R.R. Bowker, the publisher of *PW*) reproduced a
part of a page from &ldquo;a leading Roget's Thesaurus&rdquo; in which
noun and verb synonyms for *duplicate* are given as &ldquo;Xerox.&rdquo;
The copyright notice indicates that the publisher is Doubleday
&amp; Company and, if I know anything about such matters, I can
vouch for Xerox's having written a firm but friendly letter to
Doubleday about the listings.  (The same listings appear in the
*Synonym Finder*, edited by someone named Laurence Urdang,
and published by Rodale Press, but those carry the label
&ldquo;*Trademark*.&rdquo;)  Protectors of trademarks insist that their
charges are adjectives.  Although people may say &ldquo;Make a
Xerox copy of this, Miss Phoebelfinger,&rdquo; when they do it is
likely that they are thinking about *Xerox* as a noun in
attributive position modifying *copy*, in much the same way as
one might analyze *house call, baby boom, paper profits,* or any
of the myriad other such combinations.  Yet the authors of the
Xerox advertisement write the following:

>... But we'd like to bring up a grammatical point.
>
>&bull; The Xerox trademark is not a noun.  Nor is it a verb.  It
is a proper adjective and should always be followed by
a word or phrase describing one of our products.  Such
as a Xerox copier, Xerox word processor, Xerox electronic
printing system, etc.
>
>&bull; So please check your Thesaurus and, if necessary, make
these corrections.  And please feel free to use Xerox—the
proper adjective—as a part of your speech.
>
>&bull; That way you can be sure that when you ask for a
Xerox product, you'll get only a Xerox product.  And not
just a synonym.

Sympathetic though we may be toward the protection of
trademarks and copyrights and patents, it seems obvious to all
that the entire matter, whatever its legal weight, is merely a
trivial token of protest: language cannot be legislated (except,
perhaps, in France) nor can its grammar or even its &ldquo;grammatical
points.&rdquo;  It is unlikely that any analysis by a grammarian or
other linguist would yield the information that *Xerox* is only a
proper adjective.  Moreover, adjectives are identified not by
legislation but by analysis of text; in such circumstances
*English* is a proper adjective in *English muffin, French* is one in
*French letter*, and *American* is one in *American English*.  But
*English* is a noun in *He speaks English* and *French* is a verb in
*Let's French Oswald's bed*.

Besides all this, language is usually considered as essentially
spoken, written language being merely an adjunct form.
To be sure, writing has been around long enough to have
acquired various styles of its own (in the sense that we have
formalized certain kinds of writing so that they differ from
what almost anyone is likely to say, viva voce), but that is not
at issue here.  The proverbial fly on the wall would probably be
able to cite *Xerox* as a verb and as a noun millions of times a
day in offices all over the world.

That fact dismays trademark lawyers.  Imagine starting a
company that manufactures a particular product.  Surely, your
dream would be to make the name of that product a &ldquo;household
word,&rdquo; uttered by anyone in preference to any other term
that might exist for the product or the process it performs.  In
this way, the British use *hoover* for *vacuum* (verb) and *vacuum
cleaner*, and Americans use *thermos* for *vacuum bottle*.
(Although *Thermos* is still a trademark of the Thermos Company,
it is also a generic used to describe a Pelican vacuum
bottle.)  As the story goes, *Cellophane* was once a trademark, a
status that was lost when, at a legal proceeding, the company's
attorney was asked, &ldquo;If this product were not called 'Cellophane,'
then what would you call it?&rdquo;  At a loss to offer a
suitable generic, the case was lost, and *cellophane* became a
generic name.

Such is not the problem with *Xerox*, for there are generics
that can be substituted—*machine copy* or just *copy*.  The
difficulty arises because the Xerox Corporation has been so
successful in promoting its copiers that the word *Xerox* is on
everyone's lips, even for copying done on machines that do not
employ the xerographic process.  Trying to remove a word from
everyone's lips is like trying to persuade women everywhere to
stop wearing lipstick.  Such are the vicissitudes of success.

## Language Etiquette
*Sterling Eisiminger, Clemson University*

At the age of fifteen, George Washington wrote his &ldquo;Rules
of Civility&rdquo; (1747), which included the following admonition,
&ldquo;In Speaking to men of Quality, do not lean nor look them full
in the face.&rdquo;  This was not the first advice that Americans got
on the etiquette of oral and written language, for books on
manners and morals had long been in heavy demand from both
European and domestic authors.  Arthur Schlesinger in *Learning
How to Behave* (1947) summarizes the advice of pre-Civil
War writers on language etiquette as follows, &ldquo;When conversing...pains
should be taken not to remind one's companions
of their plebeian origins....  On the other hand, you mustn't
put on airs....&rdquo;  Such democracy, however, did not extend to
the use of dialects.  The author of *The Habits of Good Society*
(1858) (&ldquo;A matron&rdquo;), advised, &ldquo;Good society uses the same
language everywhere, and dialects ought to be got rid of in
those who would frequent it....  Localism is not patriotism,
and therefore until the Union is dissolved, we must request
people to talk English in English society.&rdquo;  On the other hand
she argued that dropping &ldquo;that eighth letter of our alphabet&rdquo; is
far better than bad grammar.

Though no pre-Civil War book of etiquette that I have
seen prescribes conversational guidelines between whites and
blacks, a 1937 study reconstructs what they must have been.
Bertram W. Doyle in *The Etiquette of Race Relations* in the
*South* (1937) notes that &ldquo;in some instances, if addressed by the
master, the servant might enter into the conversation 'as if he
were a family friend, better informed on some local and
domestic points' than the master.  He did not, however, initiate
or enter into a conversation unless addressed.&rdquo;  In private, there
were undoubtedly exceptions to the above, but when several
whites were gathered, blacks generally stood, hat in hand, and
remained silent.

While social intercourse between whites and blacks was
apparently ignored by the standard bearers of etiquette, the
discourse of young ladies was not.  In 1859 Miss Elisa Leslie
offered some very specific advice concerning &ldquo;the phraseology
of females,&rdquo; who had evidently fallen under the influence of
&ldquo;nurses and servants.&rdquo;  Miss Leslie suggests that one avoid
&ldquo;monstrous glad&rdquo; when one means &ldquo;very glad&rdquo;; avoid &ldquo;turn
out the tea&rdquo; when one means &ldquo;pour the tea,&rdquo; and avoid &ldquo;braid
the eggs&rdquo; when one means &ldquo;beat&rdquo; them.  The list below
summarizes her advice.

| AVOID                              | USE                                 |
| ---------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| admire                             | like                                |
| beat out                           | tired                               |
| cunning                            | pretty, dainty                      |
| down cellar                        | down in the cellar                  |
| drunk                              | awry                                |
| dump                               | put down                            |
| emptyings                          | yeast                               |
| floored                            | disconcerted                        |
| gale                               | fit of laughter                     |
| ice-ball                           | snow-ball                           |
| &ldquo;I love oysters.&rdquo;      | &ldquo;I like oysters.&rdquo;       |
| Kate (etc.)                        | Katherine (etc.)                    |
| &ldquo;I live to Newark.&rdquo;    | &ldquo;I live at Newark.&rdquo;     |
| mayhap                             | perhaps                             |
| muss                               | mess                                |
| pin-ball                           | pin-cushion                         |
| &ldquo;Pork is not healthy.&rdquo; | &ldquo;Pork is not wholesome&rdquo; |
| rich                               | comic                               |
| seedy                              | faded                               |
| snooze                             | nap                                 |
| stoop                              | porch, door-step                    |
| trade                              | exchange                            |
| ugly                               | bad-tempered                        |

The post-Civil War era saw prescribers of etiquette turning
much of their attention to affected elegance, though certain
indelicacies were still proscribed.  Schlesinger summarizes the
post-war advice saying that long words, high-sounding phrases,
&ldquo;and other ways of showing off should be sternly repressed if
one wish[es] to avoid the *faux pas* of the lady who, being asked
whether she had seen the Dardanelles while abroad, replied,
'Oh, yes; we dined with them several times.' &rdquo;

Concerning the use of slang during this time, Richard A.
Wells in *Manners, Culture*, and *Dress* (1894) counsels that &ldquo;all
slang is vulgar&rdquo; and should not be mistaken as &ldquo;a substitute for
wit,&rdquo; for it lowers &ldquo;the tone of society and the standard of
thought.&rdquo;  Concerning the double entendre, &ldquo;A well-bred person
always refuses to understand a phrase of double meaning.&rdquo;
Should one chance to hear an indelicate word, &ldquo;Then not the
shadow of a smile should flit across the lips.&rdquo;  And should a
gentleman converse with a lady, he should pay her &ldquo;the
compliment of seeming to consider [her] capable of an equal
understanding with gentlemen.&rdquo;

Such condescension receives some comeuppance in Francis
W. Crowninshield's *Manners for the Metropolis* (1908).
Crowninshield, who edited *Vanity Fair* for many years and
who was an urbane member of New York society, nimbly and
succinctly deflates the stuffed-shirt snobbery and pretensions of
the smart set.  Among his ironic aphoristic pieces of advice are
&ldquo;Try to remember that there are only two kinds of plays and
novels—they are either 'bully' or 'rotten,' &rdquo; and, &ldquo;It is not
modish to speak kindly to the servants....  In addressing them,
simply say: 'Where the devil are my boots?'...Remember
that they get even' in the servants' hall.&rdquo;  Tongue in cheek,
Crowninshield advises finally that a man should avoid calling
the wine &ldquo;the fizz,&rdquo; and his wife &ldquo;his mother.&rdquo;  Other phrases
to be dutifully avoided are &ldquo;Pardon my glove&rdquo; and &ldquo;Pray rest
your cane.&rdquo;

Following the First World War, there was a great relaxed
sigh that permeated the stuffest of etiquette books, which
continued to be in demand; over sixty were published in the
1920s alone.

As typical of the new relaxed mood, Schlesinger cites the
following as representative, &ldquo;As for men swearing before ladies,
one college youth adjured his fellows, 'Try not to,' while
another observed, 'If they say *damn*, so do I, when useful.&rdquo;'
Still, while some post-war guides sanctioned *swell, sweetie pie,
taxi, flivver, movies, hunch, flapper*, and *the blues*, others
remained quite prescriptive.  The list below, drawn from Martens's
*The Book of Good Manners*, Richardson's *Standard
Etiquette*, and Eichler's *The New Book of Etiquette*, all published
during the 1920s, gives a representative sample of words
and phrases to be avoided.

| AVOID                          | USE                              |
| ------------------------------ | -------------------------------- |
| beastly                        | nasty                            |
| bred and born                  | born and bred                    |
| bum                            | waster                           |
| chin music                     | talk                             |
| dander                         | anger                            |
| dinge                          | Negro                            |
| dippy                          | foolish                          |
| durst                          | dare                             |
| elegant house                  | handsome house                   |
| fresh                          | impudent                         |
| geezer                         | elderly man                      |
| genteel                        | well-bred                        |
| &ldquo;He's a case.&rdquo;     | &ldquo;He is odd.&rdquo;         |
| murderous                      | deadly                           |
| nerve                          | independence                     |
| &ldquo;No flies on her.&rdquo; | &ldquo;She's very clever.&rdquo; |
| sheeny                         | Jew                              |
| show                           | play                             |
| tony                           | stylish                          |
| vest                           | waistcoat                        |

Frederick H. Martens in *The Book of Good Manners*
(1924) goes a step beyond the above general proscriptions and
forbids the following &ldquo;vulgar elegancies&rdquo;: *alleviated poverty,
banquet, effluvium, felicitate, lassitudinous, lineament, liquid
refreshment*, and *ventilate* in the sense of 'explain.'

Since the 1930s, writers of etiquette books have generally
avoided specific recommendations of diction like those above
and offered instead very general advice that few would quarrel
with.  Llewellyn Miller in *The Encyclopedia of Etiquette* (1967)
does inveigh against euphemisms like &ldquo;in a family way,&rdquo;
&ldquo;expectorate,&rdquo; and &ldquo;lavatory&rdquo; and such gobbledygook as, &ldquo;finalize
an undertaking.&rdquo;  But Charlotte Ford is more typical of
recent writers.  She states that &ldquo;conversation is like a dance, in
that one partner leads and the other follows, the difference
being that the roles of leader and follower shift continuously.&rdquo;

Of all the contemporary etiquette advisers, Elizabeth L.
Post seems to be the most prescriptive, yet compared to Miss
Leslie, she is mild indeed.  Concerning pronunciation, &ldquo;cherce&rdquo;
for *choice* is not acceptable, while &ldquo;wawsh&rdquo; for *wash* is.  &ldquo;A
markedly local accent,&rdquo; she warns, might suggest to some &ldquo;a
mind limited to that particular locality and uninformed about
the broader issues.&rdquo;  And while &ldquo;coarse or profane words are
unnecessary,&rdquo; slang, she notes, can be an asset to your
conversation.  A few terms are proscribed (&ldquo;drapes&rdquo; for *draperies*,
&ldquo;reckon&rdquo; for *think*, &ldquo;folks&rdquo; for *family*, and &ldquo;party&rdquo; for
*person*), but generally she advises, &ldquo;Everything that is simple
and direct is better form than the cumbersome and
pretentious.&rdquo;

Of course every generation would agree with this last
statement by Ms. Post, but each has its own definition of the
cumbersome and pretentious.  To be sure, linguistic codes
quickly outlive their usefulness, but reviewing them can throw
much light on the growth and direction of contemporary
language.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;We treated between 70 and 71 people.&rdquo;  [Mary Zeigler,
assistant director of nursing at Coshocton County Memorial
Hospital, quoted in *The Columbus Dispatch* 27 March 1983.
Submitted by Dorothy Brauson, Columbus, Ohio.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...the test of the MG Turbo Metro revealed the achilles'
heel of mixing old and new wines.  By this I mean the 'A series
engine' has been coupled to a Turbo.&rdquo;  [&ldquo;Road Test,&rdquo; by Denzil
Angoves, in *Somerset &amp; West*, April 1983.  Submitted by John
Brunner, South Petherton, Somerset.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Handbook of Good English*](https://www.simonandschuster.ca/books/The-Handbook-of-Good-English/Edward-Johnson/9780671707972)
Edward D. Johnson (Facts on File, 1982), x + 309 pp.

Time was when one could write or publish a dictionary or
other book dealing with language, reasonably secure in the
knowledge that those who bought it and used it would be
guided by the information it contained on spelling, pronunciation,
meaning, usage, and so on.  Increasingly, we receive letters
from teachers complaining about students who are so ignorant
that (a) they haven't even the foggiest notion that there might
be something awry in their spelling, grammar, or usage, and (b)
even if they have doubts are so ill equipped that they are
incapable of spelling a word correctly, hence cannot look it up.
There is nothing wrong with the book under review except the
following assumptions on which it is based:

1.  The user suspects that something may be wrong with
what he has written.

2.  The user—if he does suspect something amiss—can find
the part of the book relating to his question.

3.  The user—if the two foregoing prove true—is capable of
understanding the advice given.

Of what use is it to write of adjectives and adverbs when
many—those, in fact, who need most to know—haven't the
slightest idea of what adjectives and adverbs (or, for that
matter, nouns and verbs and prepositions, etc.) are?  The good
advice, &ldquo;Do not put a comma between an adjective or adverb
and a following word or phrase that it modifies.  When an
adjective or adverb follows the modified word, usually set off
the adjective, but not the adverb, with a pair of commas&rdquo; is
totally lost on those who are unfamiliar with the terms used.
Can you imagine such people dealing with words like *adjectival,
compound*, and *participle*?  This book abounds in such
nasty terms.  Even though there is a glossary (in which *adjective*,
but not *adjectival*, is defined), that can be of little help to
those who do not know the alphabet.

It is a pity that the sound advice given in this book is not
likely to reach those who need it.  Those of you who do not
need it may wish to buy it because it contains direct, easy-to-follow
counsel based on the philosophy expressed by the author
in the opening line of the Introduction: &ldquo;This book is strict
rather than permissive, because it assumes that those who
consult it want to be protected from criticism.&rdquo;  I have no
quarrel with that.  If I must nitpick, it is with the sparse
treatment (Rule 1-7) of the possessive with the gerund (vs. the
objective with the participle).  That is a fine point, and the
author, who is certainly not incorrect in his view, would have
prepared his argument better had he adduced more examples
instead of writing, &ldquo;But often there is a difference in meaning,
and then the distinction [between possessive + gerund and
objective + participle] is worthwhile.&rdquo;

Another matter on which I should take issue is the
comment, &ldquo;Do not usually consider *the* part of a periodical's
name.&rdquo;  Examples follow, including a set showing the results of
the author's own judgment.  In my opinion, the article is either
part of the proper name of the periodical or it is not: when it
is, it should be treated as the title is treated (underlined or
italicized); when it is not, it shouldn't be.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Everyman's Good English Guide*](https://www.abebooks.co.uk/book-search/title/good-english-guide/author/harry-fieldhouse/)
Harry Fieldhouse (J.M. Dent, 1982), xiii + 270 pp.

The first item served up for criticism in this book is the
pronunciation system: without wasting much time on it, I
should point out that it is awful, though undoubtedly it would
have not been quite so bad had the book designer kept his
itchy fingers off it and set it in a serif face, not sansserif, as it
appears in the book.  If the reader does not know how a word is
pronounced before checking it in the Guide, he is likely to
learn little from the information provided.

I am confused, too, as to why Dent thought that this book
would (or could) do well in America.  Its orientation is British;
though American English is occasionally mentioned, the punctuation
of the text is British in style, and the language and style
described is mainly British.  For instance, *classified* is described
as &ldquo;a contraction of classified as secret&rdquo;; in American English
(at least), it means &ldquo;classified as confidential, secret, top secret,
etc.&rdquo;  The comment under *differ from/with* concerning *different/differently*
with *to/from* illustrates a typically British usage:
Americans may say &ldquo;different than,&rdquo; but they are rarely heard
to say &ldquo;different to,&rdquo; which is British.  The pronunciation of
*muezzin*, given as rhyming with &ldquo;Dewey's in,&rdquo; is not verifiable
in any American dictionary I checked or in *Collins English
Dictionary*.  Other pronunciations are also odd: that of *crochet,*
for instance; the comment that *depot* is pronounced in American
English as DEE'POE (how about the WWII *repple-depot*?);
*mezzanine* is never pronounced *metsa-* in the U.S.; only British
*r-*less pronunciations (HAWD for *hoard/horde*) are shown.  Other
problems: *Celluloid* is still a trademark (in the U.S.), where
*hoover* for 'use a vacuum cleaner' is not used; the objection to
*hopefully* is by no means confined to Britain; *alternate* is not
stressed on the second syllable (when used as a verb) in
America.

There are many other matters that could be taken up here.
Were it not for the publication of this book in America (where
it contains too many inaccuracies to be useful), it might be
passed off as unworthy of comment.  But the inaccuracies about
American English are a serious disservice to British readers, as
well, making the work of dubious value on either side of the
pond.

*Laurence Urdang*

## Light Refractions
*Thomas H. Middleton*

Credits

Remember the old days when movie credits told us who
produced the film, who wrote it, who directed it, who recorded
the sound, and who acted in it?  Even that was a bit more than
most of us wanted to know; but today, credits have taken on a
life of their own, and we are treated to a cornucopia of names
and titles rivaling the Manhattan telephone directory.

My wife and I saw *Sophie's Choice* a few weeks ago, and
when the final scene had faded and the credits started to roll,
we slowly rose and threaded our way across the row of raised
seats, then up the aisle, all the while looking back at the screen,
on which an interminable list of positions and the names of the
people who filled them was being projected at a reasonably fast
clip.  The names were still rolling as we left the theater.

A few days later, I thought it might be interesting to
investigate this phenomenon, so I called my friend Bert Freed,
who is on the executive committees of three separate branches
of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.  (Bert is
one of those many fine actors whose names are unfamiliar to
the average movie-goer, but whose work on stage, the big
screen, and the television screen is consistently excellent and
whose face you would surely recognize.)  He arranged to have
the Academy send me several of the official folders distributed
by the studios for the important preview showings of their
biggies.  Among the batch they sent were the credits for
*Sophie's Choice* and *E.T.*

*E.T.* is a dilly.  Not counting cast and stunt men, I figure
one hundred seventy-seven credits.

*E.T.*, of course, is a special case, what with all the special
effects.  Nevertheless, the list includes the names of scores of
people who worked on the film who fifteen years ago wouldn't
have received screen credit and whose jobs could have been
done by anyone.  Now they're getting their names on the screen
in a sort of &ldquo;egos-bustin'-out-all-over&rdquo; display of publicity.  We
would certainly expect to be given the names of the producer,
director, writer, and actors.  We might reasonably expect the
names of the cinematographer and the editor; but the first
assistant editor?  the second assistant editor?  &ldquo;E.T. Eyes
Design&rdquo;?  &ldquo;Matte Photography Assistant&rdquo;?  What the hell is
that?

How about &ldquo;Best Boy&rdquo;?  As Laurence Urdang says,
&ldquo;Sounds like a catamite!&rdquo;  Having acted, with extraordinary
skill and a plethora of anonymity, in dozens of films, I've
known a few &ldquo;best boys,&rdquo; and most of them have been very
close to the time of life for Social Security.  A best boy is an
assistant, either to the gaffer, who is the head electrician, or
lighting man, or to the key grip, who is the head of the grips-the
grips being the guys who move equipment around a movie
set.  I asked Robert Wise, the producer and director (*Sound of
Music, West Side Story, The Sand Pebbles*, etc.), about the
specifics of &ldquo;Best Boyhood,&rdquo; and he said that the best boy is
not simply the first assistant to the gaffer or the key grip, but
the one who's in charge of maintaining the equipment.  A job
entailing considerable responsibility, surely, but hardly one
meriting space on a crawl, I should think.  The fact is that
probably no more than a dozen people in the universe give a
best boy's bum about who filled the position of gaffer, key grip,
lighting best boy, grip best boy, transportation captain, first
aid, or &ldquo;Harvey's owner and trainer,&rdquo; whatever the hell that
means.  (I suppose if I had the time, money, and strength to sit
through *E.T.* again, Harvey's identity would come back to me
in a flash, but you mustn't expect martyrdom.)

In the *E.T.* credits, they also list the &ldquo;Dolly Grip.&rdquo;  That's a
special category I'd never heard of, though I've seen many of
them.  They're not, as you might surmise, Barbie-holders, but
the guys who are skilled in moving the camera dolly at exactly
the pace the director has called for in a &ldquo;dolly shot.&rdquo;  It seems
to me like the sort of thing any idiot could do, but, never
having tried it, I could be quite wrong.

&ldquo;Dolly Best Boy&rdquo; would be an intriguing title, but the *E.T.*
bill doesn't list it as one.

&ldquo;Script Girl&rdquo; is a credit that used to raise leers and
chuckles among the lay audience.  I mean, everyone knew a
script girl was a lay for the director or the producer, right?

&ldquo;Script-Girl&rdquo; might have appeared as a credit on French
films before it did on American films.  I've seen &ldquo;Script Girl&rdquo; on
American films, but it was a short-lived credit on this side of
the Atlantic.  The feminist movement did it in.  The title is now
&ldquo;Script Supervisor,&rdquo; and I think it's about time.  The Script
Supervisor is now often a man.  And back in the days when a
script girl was a script girl, she was almost always a woman of
some maturity, however tender her years, and, unless the film
was a bad joke, she was someone of considerable competence.
I've worked on many a film in which the script girl contributed
infinitely more of value than the director.  The script girl is
usually responsible for making sure that dialogue, costume,
hairdo, facial smudges, and all the other essential minutiae
match from take to take, and the coordination of those
minutiae can mark the difference between a good scene and a
mess.

*E.T.*, as everyone knows, was directed and produced by
Steven Spielberg.  Not everyone knows that it was also produced
by Kathleen Kennedy, and you'd be hard pressed to find
a man-in-the-street who knows or cares that the production
supervisor was Frank Marshall.

The reason I mention these folks is that their assistants
also get billing.  The Assistant to Mr. Spielberg was Janice
Pober; the Assistant to Ms. Kennedy was Denise Durham; and
the Assistant to Mr. Marshall was Patty Rumph.  This would
hardly be worth mentioning except that Robert Wise, who is
an old-timer, tells me that &ldquo;Assistant to&rdquo; is the latest term for
&ldquo;Secretary to.&rdquo;  He said he was on one of the major lots a few
months ago and he ran into a young woman whom he knew as
a fellow producer's secretary.  He introduced her to a friend as
&ldquo;So-and-so's secretary&rdquo; and was corrected on the spot.  &ldquo;Assistant
!&rdquo; said the young woman; &ldquo;I'm his assistant!&rdquo;  As his
assistant, she probably doesn't make any more money than she
would as his secretary, but at least she gets screen credit to
make her parents proud.

&ldquo;DGA Trainee&rdquo; is an interesting credit.  The DGA Trainee
on *E.T.* was a guy named John Flynn.  DGA is the Director's
Guild of America, and a DGA trainee is someone who gets
paid a minimum wage to hang around the set and sort of help
out.  Robert Wise tells me that they do things like showing
visitors around.  He says he was quite startled when, after a film
of his had been released, a DGA trainee wrote him to complain
bitterly that he hadn't received film credit.

I guess that tells us precisely what film credits are all
about.  They're not for the film-going public.  They're for the
people credited, who evidently get a kick out of seeing their
own names flash past fleetingly in a brief display of light and
shadow on a screen.  Talk about the bubble reputation!  This
one vanishes without a trace, and yet someone's ego has been
fed.  I think that must say something about something, but I'm
damned if I know what it is.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;THE LOS ALAMOS SCHOOLS SUMMER SCHOOL PROGRAM
WILL NOT DISCRIMINATE AGAINST ANY PERSON BECAUSE OF
RACE, CREED, NATURAL ORIGIN, SEX, AGE OR HANDICAP.&rdquo;—*Los
Alamos Schools Summer School, General Information*.  [Submitted
by Barbara DuBois, Los Alamos.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;U.S., France, and Germany Take First Steps Against U.S.
Technoleurephobia...Israel Jumps on Anti-Technoleurephobia
Bandwagon&rdquo;—*Defense Electronics:* April 1983, page 14.  [Submitted
by Robb L. Hoover, Bellevue, Nebraska.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;You almost expect people to fall on their knees and
genuflect when they come here.&rdquo;  [Carl Graziano, executive
assistant to the State Supreme Court (N.Y.), quoted in *The New
York Times*, 23 May 1983.  Submitted by M. Jordan, Ardmore,
Pennsylvania.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Ristorante 75, N.Y.C., offers &ldquo;Toastada Italiano—w/
Amaretto Butter Syrup&rdquo; and &ldquo;Sankaccino—Sanka, steamed
milk &amp; cinnamon.&rdquo;  [Submitted by Dennis Wepman, Bronx.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Child grows into sweater.&rdquo;  [From a headline in the *New
York Daily News*, 30 November 1982.  Submitted by Bernard
Witlieb, White Plains, New York, who comments, &ldquo;*Perhaps his
bones began to knit*.&rdquo;]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Slow Down...Children Playing Sleeping Drunks on
Road.&rdquo;  [From a road sign in Newnes, Australia in the *National
Enquirer*, 5 October 1982.  Submitted by Fairfax Stephenson, Seal Beach, California.]

## Quasi Malediction: The Case of Linguistic Malentendu
*D.G. Kehl, Arizona State University*

One of the anecdotes to come out of Bernard Malamud's
twelve years of teaching at Oregon State recounts how
the yet-unpublished novelist concluded his first class by leaning
over the lectern and saying, &ldquo;It has been brought to my
attention that many of you people here today are practicing
celibacy.  I have nothing against this practice and will not
penalize you for it.&rdquo;  When a few nervous giggles issued from
the back of the room, Malamud pointed his finger at the
gigglers and said, &ldquo;I have documents in my possession which
show that each one of you back there matriculated within the
last two weeks.  One as recently as this morning.&rdquo;  It is rumored
that when the session ended with the sound of more nervous
laughter, most of the class stole forth to consult dictionaries or
roommates.

When the same linguistic ploy was used a year later,
allegedly by Claude Pepper's opponent in the 1950 senatorial
election in Florida, the provincial rural listeners either had no
dictionaries and roommates or felt no need to consult either.
The remarks, which had a considerably more devastating
effect, were as follows: &ldquo;Are you aware that Claude Pepper is
known all over Washington as a shameless extrovert?  Not only
that, but this man is reliably reported to practice nepotism with
his sister-in-law, and he has a sister who was once a thespian in
wicked New York.  Worst of all, it is an established fact that Mr.
Pepper before his marriage habitually practiced celibacy.&rdquo;[^a1]
Pepper was soundly defeated by 67,000 votes.

These two anecdotes illustrate what might be called quasi
malediction—fancy but unfamiliar, sinister- or risque-sounding
words somewhere between paronomasia and malapropism.  Like
the pun and double-entendre, quasi malediction is based on
similarity of sound between two words with vastly different
meanings, but, unlike the pun, it is less a play on words than a
confusion between words: linguistic *malentendu*.  Like the
malapropism, quasi malediction involves similarity in sound
between words, but, unlike the malapropism, it is not used
incorrectly, nor does it express an untruth.  Rather, the confusion
results from a kind of linguistic short-circuiting through
phonetic association.

If it seems hard to believe that the example Malamud used
in 1949 would work effectively on today's more sophisticated
freshmen, here is a suggested update: &ldquo;It has come to my
attention that many of you are openly practicing altruism.
Furthermore, I know for a fact that there are numerous
thespians on campus and a great deal of unabashed homogeneity.
As if that weren't incredible enough, there are openly
acknowledged philatelists, Saturnians, and practitioners of Satyagraha
! To those of you tittering in the back, let me say that I
have seen students on this campus openly defenestrating and
can assert unequivocally that you people have been masticating
up to three and four times a day—and even doing it openly in
groups.&rdquo;

It would not be hard to imagine Senator Sludgebottom,
reactionary member of the state legislature's Appropriations
Committee, speaking in opposition to the proposed budget for
State U.  &ldquo;I wonder if you, my esteemed colleagues, and the
morally upright taxpayers of this state, realize what is going on
at State U., supported by our tax dollars!  On a recent visit to
the campus, I saw students openly festinating on the malls,
conjugating in the halls, and even lucubrating in library stalls
till all hours of the night!  Altruistic professors are teaching
things like syntactics, synonymy, syncretism, and synergism.
And, incredible as it may seem, professors make a habit of
examining students' theses!  Furthermore, I have documented
proof that several have openly advocated polysyndeton!  One of
the custodians told me that he has found used phylacteries
around the campus.  English professors actually teach their
students to conjugate, even providing demonstrations, and talk
about copulative verbs and genitive case, about rising action,
climax, and falling action!  Because of such a paradisaic atmosphere,
which spawns lustration and plenipotent activity among
students, tax monies are now being expended on such things as
CLEP examinations and herpetology!  If we don't put our foot
down now, next thing we know the administration will be dispensing
phylacteries in the Student Union!&rdquo;

Unlike the punster, who relies on his audience's awareness
of the two words' denotations, the user of quasi malediction
relies on his audience's ignorance of the denotation and
confusion over connotation through phonetic association.
Unlike Mrs. Malaprop and her kin, who confuse the denotation
of two words and substitute one for the other on the basis of
connotative confusion, the user of quasi malediction, fully
aware of both, chooses an erudite but pejorative-sounding
word, intending the false connotation to short-circuit the
correct denotation.

One of the few belletrists to make use of quasi malediction
in fiction is Peter De Vries.  Perhaps his favorite example, at
least the most often recurring (appearing in four of his twenty
novels) is this one: &ldquo;I have just found out my husband is
heterosexual.&rdquo;[^a2]
Another version occurs in *Madder Music*, when
a character announces at a fashion-show luncheon hosted by
his wife, &ldquo;Hi.  I'm a closet heterosexual.&rdquo;[^a3]

In De Vries's *Through the Fields of Clover* there is this
interchange:

>&ldquo;He's a famous philatelist.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;I suppose the theater is full of those....  Well in that
case I suppose a girl is safe from him at least....  Has
he ever undergone treatment for it?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;It's hopeless.  He's up all night with the things.  Some
rare specimens in his collection.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;I can imagine.  Can you tell me something about his
background?  Where is he from?&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Walla Walla.  His father was the town podiatrist.&rdquo;
>
>&ldquo;Then it runs in the family.  My, this sort of thing is
on the increase....&rdquo;[^a4]

When Cotton, the confused character, finally gets it all
straight—or thinks she does—someone tells her that So-and-so is
a well-known pederast, and she says, &ldquo;Tell me, does he have a
large practice?&rdquo;  —an example of true malediction unrecognized.
Later in the same novel, another character says to Cotton,
&ldquo;You're still interested in monads.&rdquo;  Cotton's mother, Mrs.
Marvel, replies, &ldquo;Well, intellectual often goes with high-sexed.&rdquo;[^a5]

Another example occurring in two of De Vries's novels
uses *charisma* as quasi malediction: &ldquo;They tell me you have
charisma.  You certainly don't look well.  Are you taking anything
for it?&rdquo;[^a6]

Another example occurring in two of De Vries's novels
uses *charishma* as quasi malediction: &ldquo;They tell me you have
charishma.  Tou certainly don't look well.  Are you taking anything
for it?&rdquo;[^a7] Then there is the woman who fed her husband
oysters &ldquo;because she'd heard they were good for virility—
thinking that was something to be cured&rdquo;[^a8]
the woman who thinks *afro* is short for *afrodisiac*, having something to do &ldquo;with
colored people being so highly sexed&rdquo;;[^a9] the character who thinks &ldquo;exhibitors&rdquo; are &ldquo;preverts&rdquo;;[^a10]
the character who thinks a penal colony is a place where male chauvinists should be
incarcerated[^a11] and the character who says, &ldquo;I seemed to have an animus—I didn't know what that meant, but it sounded
dirty.&rdquo;[^a12]

Quasi malediction is innocent language which *sounds
dirty*.  Sometimes the connotative short-circuiting is completely
unintentional on the part of the speaker or writer.  Any English
teacher who has attempted to teach Emily Dickinson's poem
&ldquo;There Is No Frigate Like a Book&rdquo; to a class of undergraduates
has been introduced to the effect of unintentional quasi
malediction in the classroom!  The same nervous giggles can be
heard when one uses such innocuous words as *fructifying,
frigorific, feckless, scrutable*, and *copulative verb*.

Examples of quasi malediction with anatomical associations
are: *Regina/reginal, K&uuml;nstlerroman, cochlea, cochinal,
cockchafer, cockshy, cocksure, penal* and *penology, titillate,
titivate, tit for tat, asinine*, and *assonance*.  Associations with
bodily functions and scatology (a word sometimes confused
with *eschatology*, thus rendering the latter, in those cases, quasi
malediction) have produced such examples as: *crapulence/
crapulous, shittah, piscine, pisiform, piscatology, epistemology,
fasces, infarct/infarction*, and *mensuration*.  Sensitive speakers
will be wary of talking about *seminal influences, Pithecanthropus
Erectus, cunning lingua franca*, and in the case of
Catholic theology, *ejaculatory prayers*.

When words are used with full reliance on the audience's
knowledge of denotations and awareness of, with no confusion
over, the connotations, the result is a form of paronomasia.  For
example, the movie &ldquo;E.T.&rdquo; used a pun on *Uranus*.  Similarly,
such titles as Jerzy Kosinski's *Cockpit* and Mickey Spillane's
*Erector Set* are double entendres, whereas Robert Coover's
*Pricksongs and Descants* could validly be called an example of
quasi malediction—if for no other reason than the fact that
relatively few would be acquainted with those forms of
medieval music.

Humorless readers of C.S. Lewis might summarily dismiss
as unintentional quasi malediction what is more likely an
effective double entendre.  In his Preface to *The Screwtape
Letters*, Lewis, discussing the depiction of angels in visual art,
refers to &ldquo;the frigid houris of a teatable paradise.&rdquo;  Both
adjectives can be read as effective puns: the beautiful, black-eyed,
seductive, Persian nymphs are not only stiff and formal
but also sexually cold, just as the &ldquo;paradise&rdquo; is characterized
not only by an atmosphere of people sitting at tea but also by a
profusion of ample, abundant, and available teats!  Such a reading
hardly conflicts with the attitudes of a writer who argued
eloquently in *The Four Loves* for humor in the bedroom!

More than most linguistic modes, such as paronomasia and
malapropism, quasi malediction has diametric force.  On one
hand it can be used perniciously for propagandistic manipulation
and even character assassination—the linguistic form of
guilt by association—but on the other hand it can be used
beneficially in the cause of Thalia—to create effective humor.
Perhaps more widespread knowledge of the mode will decrease
manipulation and increase and enhance the humor.

***

[^a1]: *Time* (April 25, 1983), p.29.

[^a2]: *The Tents of Wickedness* (Boston: Little, Brown, &amp; Co., 1977), p. 223.

[^a3]: *Madder Music* (Boston: Little, Brown, &amp; Co., 1977), p. 196.

[^a4]: *Through the Fields of Clover* (New York: Popular Library, 1961), pp. 42-43.

[^a5]: Ibid., p. 170.

[^a6]: *Madder Music*, p. 193.  (See also *Mrs. Wallop*, New York: Popular
Library, 1970, p. 76).

[^a7]: *Maddler Music*, p. 193. (See also *Mrs. Wallop*, New York; Popular Library, 1970, p. 76).

[^a8]: *Mrs. Wallop*, p. 113.;

[^a9]: *The Glory of the Hummingbird* (New York: Popular Library, 1974), p. 103.

[^a10]: *Madder Music*, p. 74.

[^a11]: *I Hear America Swinging* (New York: Popular Library, 1977), p. 149.;

[^a12]: *Reuben, Reuben* (New York: Popular Library, 1964), p. 16.

## More Heteronyms: Addenda &amp; Corrigenda
*Donald Drury, Long Beach, CA*

Thanks to the response of VERBATIM readers north, south,
east, and west, the original &ldquo;Harvest of Heteronyms&rdquo; [IX, 3] has
now been greatly augmented in all previous categories.  There
have also been many useful suggestions, corrections, and even
proposals for new classifications.  Additions and changes are
listed separately by category, with some explanatory notes for
each section.  To save space, however, I omit pronunciations
and definitions.  Readers may consult appropriate dictionaries
for these—but are advised that some &ldquo;heteronymic&rdquo; words may
be found only in certain sources (the *OED* or the *Second New
International*, for example).

The numerical superscripts in the lists that follow identify
the contributors of these addenda and corrigenda; their names
are listed numerically at the end of this article.  Where more
than one person is credited, contributions arrived in the same
mail or were postmarked on the same date.  (Other correspondents
subsequently offered a number of the same heteronyms,
but recording all the duplications would be too cumbersome.)
Entries not otherwise acknowledged were supplied by the
author.

*I.  Pure Heteronyms*

(Same spelling, different meanings and pronunciations,
different origins)

*are*[^b1]           
*as*[^b2]             
*ay*             
*barrage*[^b2]        
*boule*          
*chela*[^b2]          
*colon*[^b3]         
*denier*         
*dingy*[^b4]          
*do*[^b2]             
*evening*[^b5]        
*flower*[^b5] [^b6]        
*gibber*[^b7]         
*gin*[^b7]         
*glower*[^b5] [^b8]        
*grave*         
*hades*[^b7]         
*he*[^b2]            
*kine*[^b9]          
*lamed*[^b2]         
*lied*[^b10]          
*lunged*        
*lunger*[^b5]        
*mamma*         
*morel*         
*mow*[^b23]            
*nun*[^b2]         
*peaked*[^b12] [^b7]         
*sheave*11[^b4]  
*perpend*        
*placer*         
*poll*[^b9]           
*pussy*[^b5]          
*rather*         
*re*             
*real*[^b23]           
*river*          
*rugged*[^b5]         
*salve*[^b13]          
*seer*           
*severer*[^b5]  
*shin*[^b2]  
*sin*[^b2]  
*singer*[^b5]  
*skied*  
*sol*[^b5]  
*supply*  
*tales*  
*tier*  
*titi*  
*viola*  
*winding*

*II.  Quasi-heteronyms*
(Same spelling, different meanings and pronunciations, common
derivation)

*abuse*[^b15]         
*addict*[^b16]        
*address*[^b16]       
*affect*        
*aged*[^b5]          
*alternate*[^b5]     
*anathema*[^b17] [^b18]         
*appropriate*[^b23]   
*associate*[^b20]     
*attribute*     
*bathing*[^b21]       
*blessed*       
*bustier*[^b22]       
*confines*[^b23] [^b5]  
*close*[^b23]         
*collect*[^b3]      
*combat*[^b23]        
*combine*[^b1]       
*commune*[^b23]      
*compact*[^b5]       
*complex*[^b5]       
*compound*[^b23] [^b1]      
*convert*[^b23] [^b5]  
*compress*[^b23] [^b5]  
*concert*[^b23]  
*conflict*[^b23] [^b5]   
*conscript*[^b23]  
*consort*[^b23] [^b5]  
*construct*[^b23]  
*contest*[^b23] [^b5]  
*contrast*[^b23]  
*converse*  
*convict*[^b23] [^b5]       
*cursed*        
*defect*[^b23]        
*delegate*[^b5]      
*deliberate*[^b5]    
*digest*[^b5]        
*dogged*        
*envelope*[^b26]   
*excuse*[^b5]        
*forte*[^b22]         
*frequent*[^b5]      
*hinder*[^b3]       
*house*[^b5]         
*impact*[^b5]        
*import*[^b5]        
*impress*       
*imprint*[^b23]       
*impugnable*[^b25] [^b18]    
*incense*       
*incline*       
*insult*[^b23]        
*integral*[^b7]      
*intimate*
*invalid*       
*invert*[^b5]        
*learned*[^b20]       
*live*[^b23] [^b5] [^b26]          
*liver*                            
*minute*[^b23] [^b5] [^b27]        
*moderate*      
*mouth*[^b23]          
*object*         
*occult*        
*palatine*       
*perfect*[^b5]       
*permit*[^b23] [^b5]        
*pervert*[^b5]       
*pontificate*   
*precedent*     
*precipitate*[^b20]   
*premise*       
*present(s)*[^b5]    
*proceeds*[^b3]  
*produce*  
*progress*  
*project*  
*prospect*  
*protest*[^b23]  
*putting*[^b28]  
*read*[^b23] [^b5] [^b24] [^b15]  
*rebate*[^b23]  
*rebel*[^b23] [^b5]  
*recall*  
*refund*[^b5]  
*reject*[^b23]  
*replay*[^b23]  
*route*  
*second*[^b21]  
*separate*[^b5]  
*shive*[^b7]  
*subject*[^b23]  
*suspect*[^b5]  
*ultimate*  

*III.  Heterostructural*[^b29] *Heteronyms*
(Heteronymous pairs involving hyphenation or accent marks)

*charge/charg&eacute;*[^b5]        
*coax/co-ax*[^b5]           
*coop/co-op*[^b5]           
*cure/cur&eacute;*            
*expose/expos&eacute;*[^b5]        
*file/fil&eacute;*            
*instate/in-state*[^b16]     
*lame/lam&eacute;*[^b5]            
*mate/mat&eacute;*            
*pate/p&acirc;t&eacute;*[^b23]            
*pave/pav&eacute;*[^b23]            
*pique/piqu&eacute;*         
*rebound/re-bound*     
*recite/re-cite*       
*recollect/re-collect*[^b23]   
*recount/re-count*       
*recover/re-cover*       
*redress/re-dress*[^b16]       
*reform/re-form*  
*relent/re-lent*[^b23],[^b5]  
*remark/re-mark*  
*repose/re-pose*  
*repress/re-press*  
*resent/re-sent*[^b23] [^b5]  
*reserve/re-serve*[^b30]  
*resign/re-sign*[^b31]  
*resort/re-sort*[^b23] [^b5]  
*resorter/re-sorter*  
*resound/re-sound*[^b23]  
*restrain/re-strain*  
*resume/r&eacute;sum&eacute;*[^b23] [^b5]  
*rissole/rissol&eacute;*  
*rose/ros&eacute;*[^b5]  
*sundry/sun-dry*[^b16]  
*unionized/un-ionized*[^b5] [^b32]  
*vise/vis&eacute;*[^b7]

Other correspondents had questions and comments: Richard R.
Centing (Columbus, OH), David Lemmon (Sydney, Australia), Sheffey
Gregory (Norfolk, VA), Mrs. Arthur M. Bettman (Cincinnati, OH), and
Mrs. K.M. Brown (Woodcliffe, NJ).

Still others suggested somewhat marginal types of heteronyms
outside the scope of my article: those involving dialect words, words
with apostrophes, or proper nouns and adjectives.  W. Oliver[^b4] noted
two Lowland Scots words, *know* and *row* (both rhyming with *cow*),
respectively meaning *knoll* and *roll*.  Dr. Oliver adds, &ldquo;Both of these
words are in my trusty old *Webster's New International*, ed. of 1931.&rdquo;
Al Oestreich (Cincinnati, OH) offered *as/a's, is/i's, os/o's* and *us/u's*.

Both the previously cited J. Rockwell[^b1] and Charles M. Newman
(New York City) sent in lists of lower-case/upper-case pairs.  Mr.
Rockwell noted the following &ldquo;Semi-proper Heteronyms&rdquo;: *barre/Barre,
liege/Li&egrave;ge, mobile/Mobile, natal/Natal, nice/Nice, polish/Polish*[^b33] 
*rainier/Rainier, said/Said,* and *seine/Seine*.  Others he listed do not
qualify as heteronyms, however, because of virtually identical pronunciation:
*bled/Bled, palatine/Palatine*, and *tyre/Tyre*.

In addition to *Nice, Polish*, and *Said*, Mr. Newman's list included
*job/Job, levy/Levy, lima/Lima*, and *reading/Reading*.  To these the
author has since added *acre/Acre, afar/Afar, air/Air, berry/Berry,
chosen/Chosen, colon/Colon, deli/Deli, lanai/Lanai, maria/Maria,
ravel/Ravel, scotia/Scotia, spree/Spree, tanka/Tanka*, and *worms/
Worms*.

Finally, I must confess to having misplaced or lost a letter from
yet another correspondent proposing *multilingual* heteronyms.  Where
will it all end?

***

[^b1]: John B. Rockwell (New York City)

[^b2]: George Meyer, M.D. (Pompano Beach, FL)

[^b3]: Mary Lane Stevens and Tom Hard (Portland, OR)

[^b4]: W.A. Oliver, M.D. (Napa, CA)

[^b5]: Joel Chinkes (Atlanta, GA)

[^b6]: James Storrow (New York City)

[^b7]: Dave Chambliss (New Orleans, LA)

[^b8]: W.M. Woods (Oak Ridge, TN)

[^b9]: John B. Rockwell (New York City)

[^b10]: Prof. Maurice Tatsuoka (Champaign, IL)

[^b11]: Barbara M. Elesh (Rockville, MD),

[^b12]: I had originally listed this one with the quasi-heteronyms.  D. Chambliss called attention to the fact that *peaked* (v.) and *peaked>* (adj.) are not from the same source.

[^b13]: Even before the original article appeared in VERBATIM, Georgia Gaspar (a friend in Long Beach, CA) directed my attention to this quadruple heteronym.  And W. Woods was the first to note that *lather*, which I had listed with just two meanings and pronunciations, is actually another &ldquo;triple&rdquo;; to these should be added the word rhyming with *bather*, meaning lathe-operator.

[^b14]: Joel Chinkes (Atlanta, GA)

[^b15]: Mary Louise Gilman (Hanover, MA)

[^b16]: Prof. Maurice Tatsuoka (Champaign, IL)

[^b17]: Here are two elegant examples of what could be called *controheteronyms* 'heteronymous words of contrary meanings.'  This term is—logically, I trust—derived from Jack Herring's coinage of *contronyms* (in *Word Study*, XXXVII, 3) to designate homographs of opposite meanings.  *Anathema*, in its familiar guise of &ldquo;a-NATH-ema,&rdquo; has such meanings as 'accursed, excommunicated'; as &ldquo;AN-a-THEME-a&rdquo; it means 'consecrated to divine use, votive offering.'  *Impugnable* as &ldquo;imPYOO-nable&rdquo; means 'liable to be impugned (attacked, assailed)'; as &ldquo;im-PUG-nable,&rdquo; however, it means 'that cannot be assailed or overcome.'

[^b18]: J. Bryan III (Richmond, VA)

[^b19]: Barbara M. Elesh

[^b20]: S.E. Wilkinson (Charlotte, NC).

[^b21]: Harry Cohen (Brussels, Belgium)

[^b22]: Words in boldface were incorrectly listed as &ldquo;pure&rdquo; instead of &ldquo;quasi&rdquo; in the original article.  Correspondents who first called attention to their misclassification were M. Stevens and T. Hard, Mary Lane Stevens and Tom Hard (Portland, OR) H. Cohen, T. Webb, Prof. Thompson Webb (University of Wisconsin) and N. Seico. Noel H. Seico, M.D. (Rye, NY).

[^b23]: Barbara M. Elesh (Rockville, MD)

[^b24]: Ama D. Rogan (New Orleans, LA)

[^b25]: Here are two elegant examples of what could be called *controheteronyms* 'heteronymous words of contrary meanings.'  This term is—logically, I trust—derived from Jack Herring's coinage of *contronyms* (in *Word Study*, XXXVII, 3) to designate homographs of opposite meanings.  *Anathema*, in its familiar guise of &ldquo;a-NATH-ema,&rdquo; has such meanings as 'accursed, excommunicated'; as &ldquo;AN-a-THEME-a&rdquo; it means 'consecrated to divine use, votive offering.'  *Impugnable* as &ldquo;imPYOO-nable&rdquo; means 'liable to be impugned (attacked, assailed)'; as &ldquo;im-PUG-nable,&rdquo; however, it means 'that cannot be assailed or overcome.'

[^b26]: Ama D. Rogan (New Orleans, LA)

[^b27]: Larry S. Myers (Elizabethtown, KY)

[^b28]: Noel H. Seico, M.D. (Rye, NY)

[^b29]: At the suggestion of M. Tatsuoka, I employ this term in place of the &ldquo;semi-demi&rdquo; designation previously used.  As he pointed out, many pairs in this category have different origins and are thus more nearly &ldquo;pure&rdquo; than those in the &ldquo;quasi&rdquo; section.  Although some recent dictionaries have dropped the former hyphen in many words, other authorities (happily) insist on retaining it wherever there is any likelihood of confusing two different words.  B. Elesh proposed that the same rule be applied to impure heteronyms involving diacritical marks.

[^b30]: Gracia Drury (Long Beach, CA)

[^b31]: Thomas L. Bernard (Springfield, MA)

[^b32]: David H. Spodick, MD. (Worcester, MA)

[^b33]: Many other correspondents mentioned *polish/Polish*, but without exploring the l.c./u.c. byway any further.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;*TOPIC:* Common Genital Heart Lesions in the Child &amp;
Adult.&rdquo;  [Title of a Conference held 8 March 1983 at the
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia Medical
School.  Submitted by Johannes Veldhuis, Charlottesville,
Virginia.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Orders and inquiries are mostly welcome.&rdquo;  [Advertisement
of the China National Native Produce &amp; Animal By-Products
Imp. &amp; Exp. Corp.  Liaoning Animal By-Products
Branch, 139 Stalin Road, Delian, China, in *Financial Times*, 14
March 1983.  Submitted by C. Black, Malm&ouml;, Sweden.]

## Antipodean English: *Harmless Drudgery*
*G.W. Turner*

&ldquo;Revising a dictionary?&rdquo; my friends say, &ldquo;That must be a
pretty straightforward sort of job.&rdquo;  In some ways it is;
dictionaries feed on other dictionaries.  Daniel Fenning's *Royal
English Dictionary* in 1761 inadvertently omitted the word
*uncle* and a succession of dictionaries after his had the same
tell-tale gap.  A revision is of course even more openly derivative.
But it is not without its problems.

Take one example.  *The Australian Pocket Oxford Dictionary*,
which I am currently revising, has as a definition of
*quinine-tree* 'horse-radish tree (*Petalostigma quadriloculare*) or
native quince, with bitter bark.'  Seems straightforward enough.
Need to check a couple of cross-references—and the Latin
name.  These scientific names in Australia seem to be almost as
unreliable as vernacular names.  Snakes called *Demansia* a while
ago are *Pseudonaja* now.  A pretty little green bird called a
*greenie* or *chickowee* used to be officially *Meliphaga* and is now
*Lichenostomus*, and three species of Australian magpies,
because they were found to interbreed, are now one species
with the old specific names retained as varietal names, so that
South Australia's emblem, the white-backed magpie, *maggie* to
his friends, is in full dress *Gymnorhina tibicens hypoleuca*.  So
back to *Petalostigma quadriloculare*.

First we put to one side, as a separate problem, the
*quinine bush (Alstonia constricta)* and concentrate on the
quinine-*tree*.  A useful up-to-date guide to botanical names is
Jean Galbraith's *Collins Field Guide to the Wild Flowers of
South-East Australia*, so we try that for *quinine-tree*.  It is there
along with another alternative name, *cracker-bush*, but the
botanical name is given as *Petalostigma glabrescens* (not
*quadriloculare*); there is no mention of horse-radish trees.  We
go to the new *Macquarie Dictionary*.  It does include *horse-radish
tree* but identifies it as *Moringa pterygosperma*; it does
not mention quinine-trees or cracker-bushes.  *The Australian
Encyclopaedia* (the older and fuller 1956 edition) is probably
the source of the entry for *quinine-tree* in the first edition of
my dictionary; it also identifies *Petalostigma quadriloculare* as
*quinine-tree* but adds the names *crab-tree, native quince*, and
*emu-apple*, mentioning that all these names are shared by other
plants.  *The Australian Pocket Oxford Dictionary* already has an
entry for *emu-apple* but calls it *Owenia acidula* (also called
*native nectarine* or *native peach*).  It doesn't have *crab-tree*.  The
*Macquarie* agrees with it about *emu-apple* but doesn't have
*crab-tree* either.  Galbraith can't be referred to for *Owenia*
because it is not a south-eastern plant.

*Webster's Third New International Dictionary* gives *quinine-tree*
as an alternative name for three separate trees.  One is
the *horse-radish tree* (which is where we came in), but
reference to its entry reveals that it refers to two trees.  One of
them does have the generic name *Moringa*, but it is an East
Indian tree *(M. oleifera)*; the other is Australian, but it has the
generic name *Codonocarpus*.  The other two references are to
*hop tree* (an American tree) and *native quince*—which does
indeed lead us back to the Australian tree and the name
*Petalostigma quadriloculare*.  But is their information up to
date?  The search goes on.  There are botanists to write to,
library lists of taxonomical names to consult.  But sooner or
later a decision must be reached and all the available information
condensed into an allowable line or two before the next
word is attacked.

And, similarly condensing my newsletter in a line or so,
you will be patient next time you find one of those apparently
vague but in fact very precise dictionary definitions of the kind
'any of various Australian trees or shrubs.'

## Television Advertising and the Language of Myth
*Robert E. Ziegler, Montana College of Mineral Science and Technology*

When Bill Cosby appears for Coca-Cola on TV, he derides
the competition for engaging in &ldquo;taste tests&rdquo; and &ldquo;challenges.&rdquo; He implies that Pepsi and Royal Crown Cola still have
to prove that people really prefer the way they taste.  For the
nation's number-one soft drink, however, there is no such need
for demonstration: &ldquo;Coke is the real thing.&rdquo;

Why does no one think to ask what the thing is that Coke
purports to be?  Because, to borrow from Roland Barthes, the
ad employs mythical language that uses Coke as an empty
signifier and then fills the significance with evidence of the
product's authenticity.  It awards to Coke the status of a
&ldquo;predicative nature.&rdquo;  Thus the only suitable response to the ad
that dresses its claim in the guise of truth is simple acknowledgment,
silent acquiescence.  Of course, Coke carries with it the
memory of the other functions it has served.  It has acted as a
socializing agent for those who &ldquo;shared a Coke and a smile.&rdquo;  It
has even been presented as a force for world peace, as in the
Christmas card commercial that shows young people from
different cultures holding candles and coalescing into a single
living tree, whose parts come together &ldquo;in perfect harmony.&rdquo;
Barthes writes of the character of the mythical concept that it
&ldquo;appears in global fashion, it is... the condensation... of a
certain knowledge.&rdquo;  So as a product that has absorbed its own
advertising history into the mythical status it enjoys, Coke is
freed from the need for self-description.  Everybody knows
what Coke is.  &ldquo;Coke is it.&rdquo;

Viewers of massive amounts of television advertising function
alternately as readers and decipherers of the myths they
are exposed to.  They feel they are inoculating themselves
against the efficacy of the medium by presupposing a lack of
artistic merit in the presentation of the message.  As Jeffrey
Schrank observes, &ldquo;the personally immune... consider most
ads silly...and generally a waste of time....  The problem is
that the belief in personal immunity from the influence of
advertising is the... group's greatest weakness.  A person who
believes himself... immune will not take defensive actions,
will not protect against exposure.  The result of this weakness is
a hidden susceptibility.&rdquo;  [Jeffrey Schrank, *Snap, Crackle, and
Popular Taste*, New York: Dell, 1979, pp. 84-85.]

This presumed immunity exists most often with regard to
advertising conventions that are so familiar to the viewer that
he imagines any reading of them as entailing a demystification
of the product claim.  Thus the buyer feels that beneath the
statements the advertisement makes he can see an advancement,
an insinuation of the sponsor's own self-interest.  This
recognition of the commercial's motivation discredits the commercial's
message, he thinks.  The meaning is that it is the
advertiser's advantage that is furthered by the product's sale,
not the consumer's.  Commercials that lend themselves most
readily to this kind of cynical decoding emphasize the performance
of the products they propose.  Their language, even when
self-serving, is informational and transitive, explaining what the
product does, unlike the metalanguage of myth, in which the
product is defined, revealed for what it is.

The most effective of these action-focused ads attend less
to the transmission of the message than to its reception by the
viewer, less to causes than effects.  They depict an ameliorated
state of things already brought about by the product's purchase
and consumption.  Hemorrhoids shrunk, carpet clean, glasses
spotless, headache gone: the mythologist of the language of the
television ad often finds verbal actions in commercials instantly
resolved into a set of statal adjectives.  Thus the slimness of the
models in the ads for diet soft drinks presumes a history of
their product use.  Fat adult men and women are never seen
consuming on TV the colas that are light or free or the beers
that are less filling.  Only adolescents with fast metabolisms are
shown partaking of the calorie-laden sodas of other, sugared
brands.

There are also products meant to work on problems that
arouse such anger in consumers that it is not the absence of an
evil but the forcefulness of its eradication that interests viewers
in the ad.  Rodents, germs, insects, dirt, and pain: the penetration
of the consumer's body, clothes, or home is a prospect so
distasteful that he takes at first for granted his exemption from
all illnesses and infestations.  But when he finds himself a
victim, his shock and indignation are relayed by the shrillness
and intensity of the advertising message.  &ldquo;Ralph, we've got
rats!&rdquo;  a distraught housewife screams in horror to her husband,
and at that point, no product is too violent, no ad too loud in
offering a cure.  Frequently personified by sneering animated
figures, these nuisances require harsher treatment from the
sufferer than their benevolent removal.  They invite a retribution
as unpitying as the scouring corrosiveness of bathroom
cleansers and Listerine's medicinal astringency.  In matters of
soil, vermin, and discomfort, the product's own combative
energy is transferred to the buyer.  As Patricia Neal for Anacin
asserts, &ldquo;The world belongs to the fighters.&rdquo;

In the interest of giving further proof of the competence
and power of these products, the ads must also tell how far the
problem they will remedy can otherwise ultimately spread.  One
rat or roach detected in a home betokens hosts of others out of
sight, behind the floorboards and in cellars.  Only d-CON can
definitively purge the rodents; insects must be treated with the
aggressive redundancy of Raid, which &ldquo;kills bugs dead.&rdquo;  A
simple tension headache may escalate into one that only
analgesics of maximum arthritis strength can root out and
destroy.

Unlike ads that document a buyer's satisfaction with
merchandise he used some time before, the commercial for a
pain reliever or detergent will stress its working now.  Barthes
allows that advertisements like those for the French soap
powder Omo, which frees the garment of its occupation by oily
ground-in dirt, to some extent still indicate the performance
and effects of the product.  But chiefly, he observes, they
&ldquo;reveal its mode of action;... they involve the consumer in a
... direct experience of the substance, make him the accomplice
of a liberation rather than the mere beneficiary of a
result.&rdquo;  These ads will therefore show the product &ldquo;acting
things&rdquo; more than they will celebrate its understood
achievements.

Even in commercials that concentrate on praxis, one can
see how language often functions as the medium by which the
results that one desires are finally attained.  Instead of having
famous personalities or actors explain how well the product
works, the advertisement confers a certain volubility upon the
symptom the item claims to cure.  Thus nagging backaches can
be silenced by Doan's pills and tell-tale odors squelched by
Carpet Fresh or Glade.  Sometimes the enemies of consumers'
peace of mind are invested with an ability to talk, only to be
drowned out, overpowered by the higher volume of the speech
with which the product is endowed.  &ldquo;Want a tough stain out?&rdquo;
one bleaching agent asks.  &ldquo;Shout it out!&rdquo;

Clearly, though, most commercials try conferring on their
products the status of myth, so the merchandise they sell, like
Band-Aids, Sanka brand, or Kleenex, acquires an absolute
generic fullness and identity.  When asking for a product, the
consumer cannot even name the competition, thereby consigning
it to a state of nonexistence.  If, as Barthes contends,
myth is a kind of language robbery, then the theft that takes
place in an ad is that of language as prospective buyers use it
to identify and then describe the goods that they have chosen.
This appropriation of evaluative language from consumers
takes place most basically and first of all on the level of the
product's name.  Thus when asking for Good and Plenty candy
from a movie house concessionaire, the patron cannot help but
state that in each box he discovers quality and that it is
abundant.  Such instances of language usurpation by the product,
in which to name an object is to praise it, are too
numerous to mention.  In past years, however, the function of
television advertising language as a manner of doxology has
extended to whole sentences as well.  (Gregor Goethals explains
that while advertising involves a trivialization of the sacred, it
uses the same methods practiced by religion, only substituting
commercial values for spiritual ones.  &ldquo;This transformation is
accompanied by a metamorphosis of both images and faith:
from gods to goods, from salvation to soaps.&rdquo;  [Gregor T.
Goethals, *The TV Ritual: Worship at the Video Altar*, Boston:
Beacon, 1981, p. 138.])  In this way, the I Can't Believe It's A
Girdle girdle addressed the skepticism of the queen-sized
woman who wanted to be comfortable and shapely all at once,
as did the Support Can Be Beautiful bra.  Gee, Your Hair Smells
Terrific shampoo went so far as to elaborate on the declarative
remark contained in other product names and made of it the
end point of a dialogue, an exchange with an imaginary person
whose compliments attested to the benefits the product
claimed to bring about.  Today cats run up the stairs to talk on
telephones and win pet food contest prizes by giving answers
their owners are too ill-informed to know.  But, as with their
human counterparts, the repertory of their sounds and recall of
brand names is limited.  They are echoes of the advertising
messages they have previously witnessed and are therefore
reduced to asking for Meow Mix since there is nothing else that
they can say.

In ads for products that pretend to the status of myth,
there is meant to be an adequacy between the signifier and the
signified, between a product and the satisfaction its use
allegedly delivers.  Because of this relationship, consumers are
intended to infer that no other brand will do, that the fullness
of the advertising message can be extended to the commodity
itself.  Yet sometimes the product's value outdistances the
expressiveness of the language that describes it.  Thus shoppers
are informed that &ldquo;Safeway is everything you wanted in a store
and a little bit more.&rdquo;  On the other hand, the item's action
may itself include a verbalizing of performance standards that
still transcend the words used to convey them.  &ldquo;The Pine Sol
signal says more than clean.&rdquo;  As with the lengthiness of brand
names made into testimonials, there is an overflow of meaning
here as well, so that advertising language must admit its
inability to say how good the product really is.  It is this that
Barthes describes as &ldquo;the silent garrulity of myth.&rdquo;

While much in advertising still relies on the numbing
repetition of rhyming slogans and incantatory jingles, there are
other spots where messages are hushed, their speech intentionally
muted, the better to elicit the interest of a mass of jaded
listeners.  &ldquo;If you want to catch somebody's attention,&rdquo; a Coty
commercial used to say, &ldquo;Whisper.&rdquo;  And in fact it is most often
in the advertisements for perfumes that the language is lightened
by a certain airiness.  Its message ventilated by the
agreeable elusiveness of meaning, the speech already can be
seen becoming rarefied to suit the nature and the substance of
the product.  In the end the messages are vaporized, suffused
with a faintly sweetened vagueness so that they waft into the
subconscious and permeate it with their soft mnemonic power.
&ldquo;I can't seem to forget you,&rdquo; a lover haunted by the memory of
his woman's scent recalls: &ldquo;Your Windsong stays on my mind.&rdquo;

Long saturated by the prolixity of ads that told of the
advantages of product use and promised satisfaction with
results, the consumer allows himself to be more open to
commercials that work simply on the level of an invocation.
Henceforth he becomes the reader of a metalanguage that does
not &ldquo;act the things,&rdquo; as Barthes declares, but rather &ldquo;acts their
names.&rdquo;

Already in commercials for Windsong and Chanel, for
Essence Rare, the message was subtilized, expressing a need for
less expression.  Unlike the ads that rhapsodized over what their
products did, these others began evincing a convenient manner
of amnesia.  They have consciously and willfully forgotten their
own explanatory history, their obligation to define an item as
better than the other leading brands, because the buyer cannot
help remembering the product's name and apparent value.  The
advertisement takes the vicious world in which a product has
to fight the competition for its rightful market share and then
subjects it to the magic language of myth.  It in turn creates an
image &ldquo;that comes out of myth as a harmonious display of
essences.&rdquo;  As merchandise comes closer to attaining to this
privileged, exalted state, the commercials become ever more
laconic, their language marked by growing signs of complacent
reticence.

In 1983 a television ad for Michelob consisted of several
close-up shots of beer being poured slowly into glasses.  Each
was crowned by an ample head of foam, and the whole piece
was accompanied by majestic strains of music.  At the end, a
man's voice delivered the only line of text in the ad: &ldquo;Some
things speak for themselves.&rdquo;  From the plenary language of
commercials that state a product's name as proof of its
naturalized superiority, there is but a short step to the commercial
from which speech is altogether absent.  Consumers' participation
in the ad becomes a manner of commemoration, in
which the only thing remembered is the evidence of the
timeless excellence of the products.  Myth takes things, Barthes
avers, and &ldquo;purifies them,... makes them innocent... gives
them a natural and eternal justification,... a clarity which is
not that of an explanation but... of a statement of fact.&rdquo;  The
economy of language in television ads, therefore, depends upon
its having only to reinforce an earlier consensus, to take a
product whose goodness it posits as already acknowledged, and
then assert again that it is good.  The purpose of the ad is to say
the things that go without saying.

This substitution of essential speech for more operational
speech can be found in almost every ad that reveals its product
at the same time it envelops it in the mantle of myth.  It is
language as disclosure, articulated in a variety of figures, from
the false antithesis of Parkay margarine that says it isn't butter
to the tautology of the soft drink ad that says that Coke is
Coke.

When products start to talk in place of salesmen, one can
be assured that they will soon be talking less, their need for
explanation beggared by a meaning that is both ineffable and
obvious.  The product has assumed the value of an icon whose
cause for veneration has long been lost in the eternity of its
established value.  Ideally the ad need only re-present a logo,
reiterate a name in its performing of the liturgy of orthodox
consumerism.  Having raised the product to the level of myth,
the ad can then depict a world that &ldquo;wallow[s] in the evident,
... establishes a blissful clarity,&rdquo; whereby things, like
Michelob, &ldquo;mean something by themselves&rdquo; [Barthes].  In the
end, the nation's best-loved products are sold in commercials
where the meaning of the item is enriched by the impoverishment
of the language that describes it.  Speech then verges on
the brink of silence, as sponsors and audiences alike concede
that, in the context of the ad, their words are superfluous and
insufficient all at once.  Thus *TV* ads use language whose sole
function is to celebrate its own exhaustion.  They say Budweiser
and then declare, &ldquo;When you say Budweiser, you've said it
all.&rdquo;

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Oxford Dictionary of English Eymology*](https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-oxford-dictionary-of-english-etymology-9780198611127?cc=us&lang=en&)
C.T.Onions et al., eds. (Oxford University Press, 1982), xiv + 1024 pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

For those who cannot afford the *OED* and find the
etymologies given in college and unabridged dictionaries inadequate,
the *ODEE* is an ideal companion.  The etymologies
provided are not, of course, as full or as thorough as those that
can be found in larger works, but they are probably adequate
for most use beyond the casual.  Cognates and reflexes in other
languages are provided, as well as the century in which the
earliest evidence places them.  About 24,000 basic etymologies
are listed; with derivatives, more than 38,000 forms are treated.
Entries are succinct and contain glosses for the various stages
of semantic change undergone by the word.  To pick a typical,
well-known example of this genre, here is the entry for *nice*:

>*nice* nais &dagger;foolish, stupid XIII; &dagger;wanton XIV;
&dagger;coy, shy XV; fastidious, dainty; difficult to
manage or decide; minute and subtle; precise,
critical; minutely accurate XVI; dainty,
appetizing; agreeable, delightful XVIII. -
OF.  *nice* silly, simple = Pr. *nesci*, Sp. *necio*,
It. *nescio* :- L. *nesciu-s* ignorant, f. *ne*- NE +
*sci*-, *sc&imacr;re* know (see SCIENCE).  So *nice*TY
nai.s&#92;?&#92;ti.  XIV. - OF. *nicet&eacute;*.

As can been seen, various obvious symbols are used to indicate
obsoleteness (&dagger;), and dated matter (small capital Roman numerals);
other, less self-evident symbols (:— which signifies 'normal
development';— 'adoption of', etc.) are clearly set forth in the
front matter.

The only shortcoming of the *ODEE* is its pronunciation
system, which repeats, in part, the curious system used in the
*OED*.  Moreover, the key is of little help for it contains
examples like the following:

> &#92;?&#92; *moral* (m&#92;?&#92;r&#92;?&#92;l), *priority* (prai&#92;?&#92;r&#92;?&#92;ti).

Do you say the first vowel in *moral* to rhyme with that in *shot*
or in *short*?  The clue comes in

> &#92;?&#92; *oft* (&#92;?&#92;ft), *broth* (br&#92;?&#92;p),

I suppose.  But why give *boreen* and *cocotte*, which can scarcely
be said to be everyday words, as the key words for the
pronunciation of the symbol o?  Other sample words listed in
the &ldquo;Key to the Pronunciation&rdquo; (ix) are *Marathi, loofah, borax,
gatling, discrepant, bodega, opulent, endue, and frustrum*—not
exactly words you find around the house.  It comes as some
consolation that the *ODEE* is a dictionary of etymology, not of
pronunciation.

Notwithstanding this criticism, the *ODEE* is a serviceable,
workaday reference that offers much useful and interesting
information in usable form.

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Kathy Miller of Scottsdale, Ariz., and her mother will
discuss how the young teenager recovered after being handicapped
in an accident during a luncheon sponsored by
Bender's Christian Supplies.&rdquo;  [From the *Buffalo Pennysaver &amp;
Community News*, n.d.  Submitted by Joan Murray, Buffalo.]

## Traduttore Traditore
*Marcy S. Powell, Oxford, Ohio*

Consulting a bilingual dictionary, all of us have doubtless
had the experience of choosing the wrong translation of a
given English word.  Looking up the word *ball* for instance, the
student is likely to find several French equivalents, but unless
he also checks the French-English section (or better, a *Petit
Larousse*), he may not know that *un bal* is 'a dancing party,'
*une balle* 'a tennis or golf ball' (as well as baseball, cricket or
hockey ball, and bullet), *un ballon* 'a football,' *une bille* 'a
billiard ball' (or ball bearing or marble), and *une boule* 'a
croquet or bowling ball'—not to forget *boulet* 'cannon ball,'
*boulette* 'meatball,' *pelote* or *peloton* 'ball of string,' and *couille*
'testicle.'  Translating into one's own language is of course less
difficult, but the context may not always indicate whether to
render *esprit* as 'spirit,' 'ghost,' 'inspiration,' 'mind,' or 'wit.'

A university colleague of mine, upon receiving a Christmas
greeting from a Chilean student that ended with the pious
phrase &ldquo;May the Lord bless and can you,&rdquo; easily surmised that
the lad must simply have taken the first dictionary meaning of
Spanish *preservar* 'to can, preserve.'  A French teacher, correcting
a student's composition, was puzzled by the expression
*plateau de fr&circ;ne*, until it occurred to her that he had probably
looked up *ashtray* as two words in the dictionary, then put
them together.  Some English schoolboy was responsible for
interpreting Cibber's *Love's Last Shift* as *La derni&egrave;re chemise
de l'amour*, another for translating Shakespeare's &ldquo;Out, out,
brief candle&rdquo; as *&ldquo;Sortez, courte chandelle*.&rdquo;  When Chateau-briand
began putting Milton's *Paradise Lost* into French, he
came to the lines &ldquo;Siloa's brook that flow'd/Fast by the oracle
of God,&rdquo; and translated *fast* as *rapidement*.  In a French
magazine article devoted to the early works of Daniel Chester
French, a picture of his Minuteman statue was labeled *Le Petit
Homme*.  In the French adaptation of Terence Rattigan's amusing
*French Without Tears*, a character asks how one would
translate &ldquo;Red designs on China&rdquo; and gets the reply, &ldquo;*Eh bien,
des motifs en rouge sur la porcelaine*.&rdquo;  A keen-eyed proofreader
on an American newspaper wondered why a bomber should be
christened *Shadow Theory*, and discovered that the reporter
had misheard the real name, *Ch&acirc;teau Thierry*.  Such blunders
corroborate the observation of Maimonides that the translator
must know three things: the genius of the language from which
he translates, the genius of the language into which he
translates, and the subject matter.

American travelers have not generally excelled in their
command of foreign languages.  One, bound for Paris, was
asked if he understood French, and replied, &ldquo;I do, when I
speak it myself.&rdquo;  On his return he was asked whether he had
had any difficulty with the language while in France, and
answered, &ldquo;No, but the French did.&rdquo;  When the Assistant
Secretary of the Treasury, James Reynolds, was about to leave
for a trade conference in Paris, he assured Senator Root that he
spoke enough French to make waiters and cab drivers understand;
whereupon the Senator wondered aloud, &ldquo;Suppose there
should be no waiters and cab drivers at the conference?&rdquo;  An
American couple dining in a French restaurant, impressed by
their French-speaking companion, failed to understand that he
was instructing the waiter to give the check to the monolingual
husband.  And in the ladies' room, when the wife tried the
water tap marked C she got scalding-hot water—for of course
the C stood for *chaud* rather than the expected &ldquo;cold.&rdquo;  Any
traveler who hasn't learned to think in the host language is
likely to find himself translating word by word, as did the
American who, seeing his bus rapidly disappearing down the
street without him, made a wild effort to translate &ldquo;I am left
behind!&rdquo;  by shouting, &ldquo;*Je suis gauche derri&egrave;re!*&rdquo;

Two of my favorite stories concern Americans traveling
with a paucity of linguistic luggage.

Mr. Smith, visiting Paris, passed by a church where a
wedding was taking place, and approaching a policeman, asked
who was getting married.  *&ldquo;Je ne sais pas,&rdquo;* replied the *flic*.  The
next morning the visitor, passing by the same church, noticed
that a funeral was in progress and stopped a woman to ask who
had died.  *&ldquo;Je ne sais pas,&rdquo;* she responded.  &ldquo;Well!&rdquo; exclaimed
Mr. Smith, &ldquo;he didn't last long, did he?&rdquo;

Mr. Goldberg registered at a French *pension* and went in
to his first dinner.  Presently he was joined at his table by a
Frenchman who, before sitting down, bowed politely and said,
*&ldquo;Bon app&eacute;tit.&rdquo;* With equal formality Mr. Goldberg rose, bowed,
and said &ldquo;Goldberg.&rdquo;  This ceremony was repeated at each
meal for a couple of days, until Mr. Goldberg consulted an
acquaintance in the lounge, explaining how &ldquo;the Frenchman
tells me his name—Bon App&eacute;tit—and I tell him mine—
Goldberg; but why keep it up day after day?&rdquo;  &ldquo;Oh, you don't
understand, Mr. Goldberg,&rdquo; was the reply, &ldquo;*Bon app&eacute;tit* isn't
his name; it means 'I hope you have a pleasant meal.' &rdquo;  Mr.
Goldberg thanked his friend, and arriving late for dinner,
found the Frenchman already at the table.  Before sitting down,
Mr. Goldberg bowed formally and said, *&ldquo;Bon app&eacute;tit.&rdquo;*  The
Frenchman rose, smiled, and murmured, &ldquo;Goldberg.&rdquo;

So, in the land where, as someone has said, one man's fish
is another man's *poisson*, the French make similar errors when
venturing into English.  A French tycoon, addressing a group of
American journalists, was asked what detail of American life
had made the greatest impression on him.  Wishing to be
gallant, he replied, &ldquo;The ladies' toilets&rdquo;; and it took the
journalists a while to realize that he was merely pronouncing in
English the word *toilettes* in the sense of 'dresses.'  Another
Frenchman sought to attract the attention of a shapely English
girl by exclaiming, &ldquo;Oh, what a beautiful corpse!&rdquo;  A Belgian
manufacturer, wanting to advertise his wares in English newspapers
as highly durable, translated the French word *inusable*
as 'unusable.'  And in a military bulletin in World War II, a
similar—and potentially serious—error was made by confusing
*des villages inhabit&eacute;s* and 'inhabited villages.'

Still another story has the Macmillans lunching with the
de Gaulles in Paris.  Mrs. Macmillan asks Mme. de Gaulle, in
English, &ldquo;What are you looking forward to now?&rdquo;  Mme. de
Gaulle replies simply, &ldquo;A penis.&rdquo;  A chill falls upon the table,
until the silence is broken by M. de Gaulle saying softly to his
wife, &ldquo;My dear, I don't think the English pronounce the word
quite like that.  It's not 'a penis' but &ldquo;appiness.' &rdquo;

Imagination often leads the translator astray.  One recalls
the irrepressible Hyman Kaplan, who explained to his night-school
class that the &ldquo;R.S.V.P.&rdquo; he'd tacked onto his composition
meant &ldquo;Reply, vill you plizz?&rdquo;  Another youthful American
defined *mal de mer* as a French expression meaning 'mother-in-law,'
and his girl friend thought a *t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te* was a 'doubleheader.'

During the Korean war, a comedian on a USO tour was
addressing an audience of Korean soldiers who did not understand
English, so a Korean officer volunteered to translate his
jokes into Korean.  After each joke, the Korean spoke into the
microphone and the audience collapsed in laughter.  The whole
routine was a howling success, and afterwards the comedian
thanked the Korean for translating his jokes so successfully.
&ldquo;Sorry,&rdquo; said the officer, &ldquo;but I wasn't translating; you talked
so fast I couldn't follow you.&rdquo;  &ldquo;But what were you saying into
the mike?&rdquo;  With a sly grin, the Korean replied, &ldquo;I was telling
some jokes of my own.&rdquo;

An American technician employed in a Russian plant
received a distressing wire from home about his only daughter:
&ldquo;Harriet hung for juvenile crimes.&rdquo;  He discovered that the
telegram had been translated into Russian, then retranslated
into English—the original message had been &ldquo;Harriet suspended
for minor offenses.&rdquo;  Someone else had the idea of
testing a computer by having it translate an English phrase into
Russian and then back into English.  He fed in the English
maxim, &ldquo;Out of sight, out of mind,&rdquo; and a moment later got
back &ldquo;Invisible insanity.&rdquo;

Samuel Johnson insisted that a man should not &ldquo;let
himself down&rdquo; by speaking a foreign language imperfectly, and
so spoke only Latin when he was in Paris.  The rest of us do our
best with the native tongue.  When my wife and I were living
in Paris, we spent an enjoyable evening in a French home
where only French was spoken.  Reminiscing about the past,
my wife meant to say, *&ldquo;Je suis n&eacute;e &agrave; Cleveland,&rdquo;* but it came
out *&ldquo;Je suis nue &agrave; Cleveland&rdquo;*—which brought to my mind an
earlier occasion when I had referred to a middle-aged man as
*&ldquo;Un homme du moyen &acirc;ge.&rdquo;*

In conducting 30 tour groups through 60-odd countries
around the world, I have enjoyed the services of many local
guides, most of whom spoke commendably good English.
However, even the best of them were likely to slip up
occasionally, and as a language teacher I was interested in the
kind of mistakes they made.  In the Holy Land the guides
frequently referred to the &ldquo;seplucher&rdquo;; in Cairo they must
have been influenced by Arabic verb tenses when they
informed us that &ldquo;in Egypt it is very seldom raining.&rdquo;  In
Kashmir, riding ponies up a mountain trail to Gulmarg, we
halted to let a train of porters pass down; after watching four
men plod past carrying a woman on a litter, my guide said in a
low voice, &ldquo;That's for inv&aacute;lid old ladies.&rdquo;  Our Russian guides
handled English very well, but I decided that they must all use
the same textbook, after noting, in the course of ten tours over
the years, that they consistently referred to public figures as
having &ldquo;perished&rdquo; rather than &ldquo;died&rdquo;; and one guide in
Leningrad must have wondered why the group laughed when
he described the dome of St. Isaac's Cathedral as &ldquo;the third-largest
erection in the world.&rdquo;


### OBITER DICTA

*Either* usually means 'one or the other,' so *Insert a washer
at either end of the axle* can easily mean '... at one end of the
axle or the other' rather than '... at each end.'  In constructions
like *the train had a baggage car at either end*, the ambiguity
becomes plain silliness.  Avoid this ambiguity by avoiding the
use of *either*: use either(!) *each*, or *both*, or *one or the other*,
depending on the meaning.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;Our quality temporaries can do your employees' work
while they enjoy a deserved rest.&rdquo;  [Advertisement for Burnett
Temporary Personnel in *The Houston Post*, 15 June 1983.
Submitted by Frederick W. Harbaugh, Houston.]

## Paring Pairs No. 12

*The clues are given in items lettered (a-z); the
answers are given in the numbered items, which must be
matched with each other to solve the clues.  In some cases, a
numbered item may be used more than once, and some clues
may require more than two answer items; but after all of the
matchings have been completed, one numbered item will
remain unmatched, and that is the correct answer.  Our answer
is the only correct one.  The solution will be published in the
next issue of* VERBATIM.

(a). Does he slide on a rug?  
(b). Act of affectionate podiatrist.  
(c). Penultimate test of topless show.  
(d). Cockney beauties at the prow?  
(e). Needed for crystal-gazing.  
(f). Film clips about Atlantic resort.  
(g). Is this where to keep escape stash?  
(h). Complete reversal by Briton of treatise on seabird.  
(i). Caravanserai for aggressive youngsters.  
(j). Amazing but not shocking that older actresses demand it.  
(k). Three kings and famous pair find no room at the inn.  
(l). Are these kids clockwatchers?  
(m). Bury the delegation between the acts.  
(n). Footwear for fisherman in the Serpentine.  
(o). Jazzy means for cleaning cathouse.  
(p). When the windows are bare.  
(q). No more than is expected from Avis, rara or not.  
(r). Diet food.  
(s). Wheelwright.  
(t). Depart after the third.  
(u). You chaps practise pretense.  
(v). Counterfeiter in flimsy airport building.  
(w). Besotted beneficiary.  
(x). Dammit!  The sluice.  
(y). Farmer's play with a camel.  
(z). Needed to elevate U.S. composer's tunes?

(1). Eye.  
(2). Tern.  
(3). House.  
(4). Bottle.  
(5). Time.  
(6). Rehearsal.  
(7). Mission.  
(8). Pink.          
(9). Slipper.            
(10). Shorts.            
(11). Brain.            
(12). Gang.              
(13). Moccasin.            
(14). Belles.           
(15). Rag.            
(16). Hostile.                    
(17). Kiss.      
(18). Bow.               
(19). Surprise.              
(20). Flee.           
(21). Curtain.         
(22). Bird.              
(23). Carpet.  
(24). Bermuda.  
(25). Inter.  
(26). Youth.  
(27). Sole.  
(28). Hour.  
(29). Glass.  
(30). Undress.  
(31). Full.  
(32). Water.  
(33). About.  
(34). Tiger.  
(35). Bag.  
(36). Vanity.  
(37). Man.  
(38). Dairy.  
(39). Heir.  
(40). Felloe.  
(41). Forth.  
(42). Fare.  
(43). Go.  
(44). Guys.  
(45). Polluted   
(46). Chute.  
(47). Air.  
(48). Paper.  
(49). Berlin.  
(50). Drama.  
(51). Lift.  
(52). Youse.  
(53). Eau.  
(54). Hanger.

## Paring Pairs No. 11

(a). Febrile cerebral.  (22,20) Hot Head.  
(b). B.P.O.E. fanatic wears deerstalker.  (12,23) Elk Hound.  
(c). Most deeply in the red.  (31,28) Loss Leader.  
(d). Bragging gets flimflam artist the chair.  (8,42) Con Seat.  
(e). Caution!  Fruity exhibitionist.  (36,15) Orange Flasher.  
(f). Sojourn in Kennebunkport for person of substance.  (32,49) Main Stay.  
(g). Illegal whispering gallery.  (47,11) Speak Easy.  
(h). Greek soldier has flea?  (21,29) Hop Light.  
(i). Flower yields proper wine.  (38,39) Prim Rose.  
(j). Navigate through this network till your ship comes in. (35,5) Old Buoy.  
(k). Head of Eames Company.  (7,34) Chair Man.  
(l). Tyre or Sidon, e.g.  (51,37) Vintage Port.  
(m). Mideast delicacy draws adoring glances.  (44,13) Sheep's Eyes.  
(n). Disarmament on the up-and-up.  (27,40) Kosher Salt.  
(o). Cause of the Fall: just dessert.  (1,14) Angel Feud.  
(p). Restaurant investment.  (18,50) Grub Steak.  
(q). Slothful spirit in Islam?  (45,26) Slow Jinn.  
(r). Lassie—are you serious?  (10,48) Dog Star.  
(s). Basically revealed by tight jeans.  (4,30) Bottom Line.  
(t). Smell of the pitstop is rude.  (24,41) Indy Scent.  
(u). Tumbler of phenolphthalein.  (52,17) Water Glass.  
(v). Cross the line by burying the faction.  (25,43) InterSect.  
(w). Man-talk is a curse.  (33,9) Male Diction.  
(x). Catafalque for a midget.  (46,2) Small Beer.  
(y). Gambling spouse.  (3,19) Better Half.  
(z). Big (shot) daddy.  (6,16) Cannon Fodder.

The correct answer is (53) Wine.  The solutions are given
below.  The winner of No. 11 was Ms. Helen L. King, Dallas,
Texas.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Well-Tempered Sentence: a Punctuation Handbook for the Innocent, the Eager, and the Doomed*](https://www.thriftbooks.com/w/the-new-well-tempered-sentence-a-punctuation-handbook-for-the-innocent-the-eager-and-the-doomed_karen-elizabeth-gordon/277861/#edition=3402551&idiq=3925868)
Karen Elizabeth Gordon, (Ticknor &amp; Fields, 1983), 93pp.

The subtitle may be a bit arch, and one may be given to
wonder how only 13 marks of punctuation can possibly merit
coverage in about 84 pages, but the secret is that there are a lot
of attractive, amusing illustrations and the type is large.  The
book is, moreover, fun to read and is populated (in some of the
example sentences) by people who might be close relations of
those who populate *Wordsmanship*, by Claur&egrave;ne duGran:
Charmiane, Nobiscus Kahn (professor of Angst), Charlotte
Tingle (a sophomore), Saint Fracas, Lady Zipworth, et alii.
Books *(Om, Om on the Range)*, place names (the Nismer-East
Blagundia Express), and friendly nonsense abound.

All this helps to relieve the boredom of examples usually
encountered in such material.  For instance, in the brief treatise
on the comma, subsection dealing with introductory participial
or infinitive phrases, we find,

*Menacingly bopping down the road, the thug consulted
his horoscope and decided to take the day off*.

Under &ldquo;A question mark can turn a declarative or imperative
sentence into an interrogative one,&rdquo; we find,

*You don't mind playing croquet in the mud?*

Mind you, this is not the *Chicago Style Manual*, but for many
the usually odd and often off-putting examples will serve as
useful mnemonic devices for recalling an arcane instruction.
The book has verve, panache, cachet: an ideal gift for a
perspiring writer, though the donor is likely to wish he'd kept it
for himself.

*Laurence Urdang*

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Oxford Latin Dictionary*](https://www.abebooks.com/book-search/title/oxford-latin-dictionary/author/glare/)
P.W. Glare, ed. (Oxford University Press, 1982), 2126 pp.

[A VERBATIM Book Club Selection]

For more than a century Latinists have relied on *A Latin
Dictionary* by Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short, published
by Oxford, as their first and best choice for a comprehensive,
one-volume Latin-English lexicon.  Based ultimately on Freund's
Latin-German dictionary of 1834, subsequently revised and
enlarged in English editions (the last in 1879), the &ldquo;Lewis and
Short&rdquo; is a venerable tome but has long since begun to show
signs of its advanced age.  Nevertheless, it has remained the
standard for reading and rudimentary research while the
community of Latin scholars awaited a fit replacement.  Now
the *Oxford Latin Dictionary*, which has been appearing bit by
bit in fascicles since 1968, is complete and available in a single,
weighty volume.

This is a truly fine and handsome dictionary.  Far more
than merely a modernized replacement for the Lewis and
Short, the *OLD* is founded on a thorough-going re-evaluation of
the ancient sources, all in the light of the past century's
significant scholarly advances and refinements in textual criticism,
grammar, paleography, epigraphy, and, of course, lexicography.
 The principles of the *Oxford English Dictionary* have
been employed in doing the *OLD:* articles are laid out in clear
sections and subsections (a vast improvement over the crabbed
appearance of the type in Lewis and Short), with different
senses treated individually, each supplemented by chronologically
arranged citations.  Coverage includes Latin texts dating
from the earliest known through the second century A.D.  The
treatment of individual words is extensive, with major and
minor senses sharply defined and illustrated in context, the
selections drawn from as great a variety of periods as possible.
Some users may be disappointed at the exclusion of Late Latin
words and sources, many of which (especially from Christian
authors) are in Lewis and Short; but the superb treatment of
the period covered, embracing the majority of the great Latin
stylists, more than justifies the editors' decision to set A.D. 200
as the terminus.

A close comparison with Lewis and Short quickly reveals
the significant differences between the books and the superiority
of the *OLD*.  The *OLD* contains about 30% more text than
its predecessor (based on character, line, and page counts), not
only a sizable advantage per se, but indicative of the much
deeper coverage everywhere in evidence, all concentrated on a
somewhat narrower span of the history of the language.  As a
result, the *OLD* is a fair bit bulkier, but still quite manageable
in one volume.  Another major advantage is the very readable
and attractive typography and layout, making the *OLD* very
pleasant to use, even over a long sitting.  Etymologies are brief
(the editors suggest reference to a standard etymological source
for full treatment) but far more accurate than the woefully
outdated ones to be found in Lewis and Short.  In a justifiable
move for consistency and accuracy, consonantal and vocalic
forms of *i* and *u* are not distinguished (Lewis and Short
distinguished *i* from *j*, *u* from *v*), except for use of V for capital
*u*, with capitalized entries interfiled (*Vaticanus* between *vatia*
and *vaticinatio*).  The *OLD* treats only those proper nouns and
adjectives that the editors deemed literarily or historically
significant, a departure from the more encyclopedic approach
of the Lewis and Short but in keeping with much modern
lexicographical practice, which urges the use of other, more
appropriate sources for historical and biographical information.

We might expect this thoroughly modern dictionary to be
less squeamish than its Victorian era counterpart in defining
matters venereal, but such is not always the case.  *Mentula*, a
vulgar word for 'penis,' is straight forwardly defined, (Lewis
and Short, typically, has 'membrum virile'), but *irrumo*, another
infamous Catullan word, is defined 'to practice *irrumatio* on.'
Under *irrumatio* one reads 'the action of an *irrumator*.' *Irrumator*
is given as 'one who submits to *fellatio*.'  But there is no
entry for *fellatio*, despite the the editors' use of italics in the
entry for *irrumator*; indeed this is correct, as the word was not
used in Latin during the period in question.  Strangely, under
*fellator* is the definition 'one who practices fellatio' (with no
italics).  This is just a small inconsistency, apparently for the
sake of decorum.

In other regards, the *OLD*, in further contrast to its
ancestor, defines derivative formations as separate headwords,
gives full principal parts for verbs, shows the irregular comparative
and superlative forms for adjectives, and generally has
more—and more useful—contextual examples for the different
senses of a word.  For the first time in Latin lexicography,
suffixes are treated as headwords, a welcome innovation and
one that balances with the traditional treatment of prefixes as
such.  From many points of view, the *OLD* reveals itself as a
tool for reading and scholarship that is far more convenient and
reliable than any other Latin-English dictionary.

Some minor criticism: definitions are set in the same
typeface as descriptive information, which can be disconcerting;
synonyms and usage notes have been eliminated; early
bound copies are made up from unsold fascicles, which were
printed at different times and on different stock: when
trimmed, the outside edges have an uneven appearance; page
1918 has an incorrect running head.  Clearly these are minor
points, even taken together, not enough to detract seriously
from the outstanding merit of this dictionary.

Another formidable example of historical lexicography
from Oxford, *OLD* deserves acceptance as the standard in the
field, which it will probably become in years hence.  It proudly
carries on the legacy of the *OED*, and at the same time is an
example of that uncanny (British?) knack of creating a reference
book which incorporates the best parts of serious scholarship
while still acknowledging the important considerations of
convenient size and scope, ready accessibility, and sound
synthesis.  While not recommended for the casual or novice
student, the new *OLD* is indispensable for the serious student
or anyone reading or doing research in the Latin language
beyond the most basic level.

*Frank R. Abate*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;At least one bullet broke the pen in half, ricocheted
through Sarmiento's heart and lodged in his lung.  'If it wasn't
for the fountain pen in his pocket,' Chambers said, 'he'd be
dead now.' &rdquo;  [From the *Daily Hampshire Gazette*, June 10,
1983, p. 6.  Submitted by Anon.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;For every Marilyn Monroe admirer, a remarkable life-size
reproduction of the beautiful actress.  Handpainted vinyl doll
wears a red gown, feather boa, necklace and spiked heels.  18&rdquo;
tall.  #E927.  85.00 (4.85).&rdquo;  [From a mail-order catalogue
published by Esplanade, Colonia, New Jersey.  Submitted by
Nancy B. Watson, Colebrook, New Hampshire.]

## English English
*Philip Howard*

We have a new Chambers over here.  No, not chamber pot,
dope; the dictionary.  It is one of our oldest, and most
idiosyncratic, and most endearing word-books.  The Chambers
family of Edinburgh has been a scholarly cottage industry
producing dictionaries for more than a century.  In 1868 the
Chambers family published a small etymological dictionary.  In
1898 they published an *English Dictionary*.  George Bernard
Shaw was a fan of it.  He wrote in a PS to the firm: &ldquo;My
*Chambers Dictionary* (my favourite of half a dozen) is dated
1898.  Is there a later edition—unspoiled?&rdquo;  We cannot take this
commendation entirely on its face value: he was possibly
hoping for a free copy.

The first edition of *Chambers* was published in 1901 and
the next two in 1952 and 1972, with a supplement in 1977.
This year we have the new edition, which makes it a red-letter
year for us wordsmiths and logophiles.  The firm is still run from
Thistle Street, Edinburgh, by Tony Chambers, great-great-grandson
of one of the founding fathers.  The dictionary is
edited by Betty Kirkpatrick, a sharp, witty Edinburgh woman,
with an editorial staff of six, concentrated on the company's
reference books.

The new edition has two and a quarter million words, of
which ten per cent are new material.  The opposition to
*Chambers* over here in the medium, single-volume dictionaries
are principally the *Concise Oxford, Collins*, and the *Longman
New Universal Dictionary*.  So let us ask ourselves what is
special about *Chambers*.  For one thing, its Scottish bias.  You
are more likely to find an obscure Scottish dialect word in
*Chambers* than in the others.  For another, its habit of grouping
words in clumps derived from the same source, so that, *par
exemple, Theosophical Society* comes before *Theocritean*,
because it is grouped with words derived from *theo*-.  When
looking for a word in a hurry, I have been known to curse this
habit.

That is a minor carp or quibble.  *Chambers* is much
favoured by our native crossword compilers and is the official
reference dictionary for the National Scrabble Championships:
do you still play Scrabble over there?  *Chambers* is good on
obscure words.  Only the other day I found in it *theriac*,
meaning an old-fashioned antidote to venomous bites, which I
deduced must exist for *The Times* jumbo crossword.  *Oxford
Concise* has it; but not *Collins* or *Longman's*.  Characteristically,
*Araceous*, which I also needed for the crossword (some
rubbish about &ldquo;lords and ladies in a race round America&rdquo;), was
in Chambers, but listed under *Arum*.

By definition, because it is the latest dictionary, the new
*Chambers* gets first crack at a number of new words in
BritEnglish; for example, *ra-ra skirt, multilateralist, total
allergy syndrome, kidology*, and *yomp*, the verb meaning to
march across country with bag and baggage, as the British
paras and other infantry did so devastatingly in the Falklands.
*Chambers* suggests that to *yomp* is in its derivation imitative,
alias onomatopoeic.  I thought that there was a possibility that it
was derived from a skiing term for slogging across flat snow in
one of the Scandinavian languages.  (British troops, particularly
paras, frequently train in Norway.)  I must look into the matter.

Another endearing characteristic of *Chambers* is its taste
for whimsical, not to say humorous, definitions, which suits its
connection with crosswords.  For example, we have *picture-restorer*:
&ldquo;one who cleans and restores and sometimes ruins old
pictures&rdquo;; *Pict:* &ldquo;one of an ancient people of obscure affinities,
in Britain, esp. north-eastern Scotland; in Scottish folklore, one
of a dwarfish race of underground dwellers, to whom (with the
Romans, the Druids and Cromwell) ancient monuments are
generally attributed&rdquo;; *perpetrate*: &ldquo;to execute or commit (esp.
an offence, a poem, or a pun)&rdquo;; and *eclair*: &ldquo;...long in shape
but short in duration.&rdquo;  New in this edition is the definition of
*man-eater*: &ldquo;a woman given to chasing, catching and devouring
men.&rdquo;

Alas and dammit, *Chambers* has dropped the last three
words of its definition of *ghost-word*: &ldquo;a word that has
originated in the blunder of a scribe or printer—common in
dictionaries.&rdquo;  Boo to that.

As you see, it is a good book of words.

## What's Your Phobia?
*Richard Lederer*

Do you have a pet phobia?  No?  Think again.  Does your
stomach want to scream when it and you arrive at the
zenith of a ferris wheel?  Does your head sink turtlelike into
your body when the lightning flashes and the thunder cracks?
Or do you tremble at the sight of a snake or cat or dog?

Such fears are called phobias.  If you are afflicted with a
few of these syndromes, don't worry.  Studies show that the
average man has 2.21 phobias and the average woman 3.55.
Things could be worse: count your blessings that you are not a
victim of *pantophobia*—the morbid dread of everything.  Then
you would be stuck with *verbaphobia*, and you wouldn't be
able to enjoy VERBATIM.

Humankind is beset with a host of fears, and there is a
name for practically every one of them.  Phobos, 'fear' was the
son of Ares, the god of war, and was the nephew of Eris,
goddess of discord, and brother to Deimos, 'terror.'  The names
for our deepest dreads generally include the Greek root *phobia*,
meaning 'fear or hatred,' affixed to another root, which is
usually also Greek.

The two most common human phobias are *acrophobia*, ('a
morbid dread of heights,' and *claustrophobia*, 'a morbid dread
of enclosed spaces.'  Look for your deepest dreads among the
following lists.  By assigning names to these terrors you may be
taking the first step in overcoming them.

Let us start with our fellow creatures who run, walk,
creep, fly, and swim upon this planet.  From time immemorial,
some of these organisms have inspired fear and even terror in
the human breast.  Each of these dreads has a label.  Fear of
animals is called *zoophobia*, of birds *ornithophobia*, of fish,
*ichthyophobia*, of reptiles *herpetophobia* (not &ldquo;fear of herpes&rdquo;),
and of insects *entophobia*.

Here are names for the fears of more specific organisms.
In each case, I leave it to the reader to supply the words &ldquo;fear
of.&rdquo;

>*acarophobia* mites, parasites   
*aelurophobia* cats              
*apiophobia* bees                
*arachnephobia* spiders          
*bacilliphobia* bacilli          
*bacteriaphobia* bacteria        
*batrachophobia* frogs, toads    
*cynophobia* dogs                
*eisoptrophobia* termites        
*entonophobia* ticks  
*galeophobia* sharks  
*hippophobia* horses  
*musophobia* mice  
*myrmecophobia* lice  
*soleciphobia* worms  
*swinophobia* swine  
*taeniophobia* tapeworms  
*taurophobia* bulls

A much smaller cluster of fears is centered on the plant
world.  Evidently, plants are regarded as much more docile and
less threatening than other organisms:

>*anthophobia* flowers, plants   
*dendrophobia* trees            
*hylophobia* forests, woods  
*lachanophobia* vegetables

(Hence, if you despise eating spinach or broccoli, you are a
*lachanophobe*.)

For some of us, it is other people who inspire in our hearts
the greatest palpitations—*anthropophobia*.  If you fear men, you
are afflicted with *androphobia*, if you fear women, *gynephobia*.
If it is your relatives who most irritate you, you have *syngenescophobia*.
 More specifically, if you hate or fear your mother-in-law,
you are burdened with *pentheraphobia*, and if you hate or
fear your stepmother, *novercaphobia*.

If you are possessed by an irrational aversion to politicians,
you have *politicophobia*, if to thieves, *kleptophobia*, if to
foreigners, *xenophobia*.  If those foreigners are English, you've
got *Anglophobia*, if French, *Gallophobia*, if German,
*Teutophobia*, and if Russian, *Russophobia*.  And, if you break
out in a cold sweat at even the thought of going to the dentist,
you share with me a condition called *dentophobia*.

In addition to the various fears of people, humankind is
fraught with terrors of natural phenomena:

>*acousticophobia* noise          
*aerophobia* air                 
*anemophobia* cyclones, hurri-canes, winds   
*antlophobia* floods             
*aquaphobia* water               
*astraphobia* lightning, thunder         
*astrophobia* stars              
*auroraphobia* northern lights   
*blennophobia* slime             
*brontophobia* thunderstorms     
*cheimaphobia* cold              
*chionophobia* snow              
*cometophobia* comets            
*cyrophobia* frost, ice          
*dinophobia* whirlpools          
*elektrophobia* electricity      
*eosophobia* dawn                
*heliophobia* sun  
*homichlophobia* fog, humidity  
*hylephobia* wood  
*lilapsophobia* tornadoes  
*metereophobia* weather  
*nephophobia* clouds  
*nyctophobia* darkness  
*ombrophobia* rain  
*phengophobia* daylight  
*photophobia* light  
*potamophobia* rivers  
*pyrophobia* fire  
*selaphobia* flashing light  
*skiaphobia* shadows  
*thalassophobia* the sea  
*thermophobia* heat  
*xerophobia* dry places, like deserts

When Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden of
Eden, God said to the serpent, &ldquo;I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed.&rdquo;  During
our post-Edenic existence, humankind has acquired not only
herpetophobia, but so many other fears that up to this point I
have listed fewer than half of our named dreads.  Naming these
terrors may be a kind of magic for holding them at bay.  For
example, enough people fear the number 13 that many buildings
pretend not to have a thirteenth floor.  Still, we assign this
affliction a name—*triskaidekaphobia: treis* (three), *kai* (and),
*deka* (ten), *phobia* (fear).

In the pages of my local newspaper appeared a story
about a woman who for thirty years was held prisoner in her
apartment by *agoraphobia*, an intense fear of the outdoors and
open spaces that affects nearly 2,000,000 Americans.  Here are
120 more words that describe the terrors that go bump in our
minds:

>*acrophobia* heights             
*aichurophobia* being touched by pointed objects    
*algophobia* pain                
*alychiphobia* failure           
*amathophobia* dust              
*amaxophobia* riding in vehicles         
*ambulophobia* walking  
*asthenophobia* weakness  
*ataxiophobia* disorder  
*automysophobia* being dirty  
*ballistrophobia* being shot  
*basophobia* standing (for fear of falling)  
*bathophobia* depth  
*bibliophobia* books               
*blenophobia* pins and needles            
*bogyphobia* demons and goblins           
*bromidrosophobia* body smells         
*cainophobia* novelty            
*cardiophobia* heart disease     
*cathisophobia* sitting          
*catopthrophobia* mirrors        
*cherophobia* gaiety             
*chrematophobia* wealth          
*chromophobia* colors            
*chronophobia* time              
*cibophobia* food                
*claustrophobia* enclosed spaces        
*coitophobia* sexual intercourse            
*coprophobia* excrement          
*cremnophobia* precipices        
*crystallophobia* glass          
*deipnophobia* dining and dining conversation        
*demophobia* crowds              
*diplopiaphobia* double vision   
*diplychiphobia* accidents       
*dromophobia* crossing streets   
*dysmorphophobia* deformity      
*ecophobia* home                 
*emetophobia* vomiting           
*ergasophobia* work              
*erotophobia* sexual feelings    
*erythrophobia* blushing; the color red    
*eurotophobia* female genitals   
*febriphobia* fever              
*gamophobia* marriage            
*gephyrophobia* crossiing bridges                                     
*gerascophobia* growing old      
*glossophobia* speaking in public      
*graphophobia* writing           
*gymnophobia* nudity             
*hagiophobia* saints and the holy    
*halophobia* speaking            
*hamartophobia* error or sin     
*haphephobia* touching, being touched   
*hedenophobia* pleasure          
*hodophobia* travel              
*homilophobia* sermons           
*kopophobia* mental or physical examination    
*laliophobia* talking            
*lepraphobia* leprosy            
*linonophobia* string            
*lygophobia* dark                
*lyssiophobia* becoming mad      
*macrophobia* long waits         
*maieusiophobia* childbirth      
*mehalophobia* large things  
*merinthophobia* being bound  
*metrophobia* poetry  
*molysomophobia* infection  
*monophobia* being alone  
*motorphobia* motor vehicles  
*musicophobia* music  
*nosophobia* becoming ill  
*odontophobia* teeth, especially those of animals  
*odynophobia* pain  
*oenophobia* wine  
*olfactophobia* smells  
*onomatophobia* a certain word or name  
*ophthalmophobia* being stared at  
*papaphobia* the pope or the papacy  
*paralipophobia* responsibility  
*paraphobia* sexual perversion  
*parthenophobia* young girls  
*peccatiphobia* sinning  
*pedophobia* dolls  
*peniaphobia* poverty  
*phagophobia* eating or swallowing  
*pharmacophobia* drugs  
*philophobia* falling in love or being loved  
*pnigophobia* choking  
*ponophobia* fatigue  
*rhabdophobia* criticism, punishment, being beaten  
*rhytiphobia* getting wrinkles  
*scriptophobia* writing  
*siderodromophobia* train travel  
*sociophobia* friendship, society  
*sophophobia* knowledge  
*spectrophobia* looking in the mirror  
*staurophobia* cross or crucifix  
*stenophobia* narrow places  
*tacophobia* speed  
*taphephobia* cemeteries, being buried alive                                    
*tapinophobia* small things  
*teleophobia* religious ceremonies  
*telephonophobia* using the telephone  
*thanatophobia* death, dying  
*thassophobia* sitting idle  
*theatrophobia* theaters  
*theophobia* God  
*tomophobia* surgical operations  
*topophobia* certain places  
*trichophobia* hair  
*uranophobia* homosexuality  
*vaccinophobia* vaccines  
*verbaphobia* words

When Franklin Delano Roosevelt said, in his 1933 inauguration,
&ldquo;The only thing we have to fear is fear itself,&rdquo; he was
warning us against *phobophobia*, the fear of being afraid.  Now
that you know your phobias have names, you may experience
less fear about your fears and about fear itself.

## Return to Grose
*John Ferguson, Selly Oak Colleges*

Francis Grose, antiquary and artist, was born in Greenford,
Middlesex, in the early 1730s.  His father, an immigrant
from Switzerland, was a successful jeweler, and was responsible
for the crown of George III.  Young Francis received a sound
classical education, but instead of university went to Shipley's
drawing school, and became a moderately successful artist.  He
was adjutant and paymaster, and later captain, in the Hampshire
militia, but, to judge from the prodigal way he ran
through his father's fortune, one wonders about the state of the
regimental finances.  He himself declared that his only account
books were his pockets.  He paid into the right and out from the
left.

In his day he was probably best known for his *Antiquities
of England and Wales*, which he illustrated.  It was while
collecting for his *Antiquities of Scotland* that he ran into
Robert Burns, who wrote &ldquo;On Captain Francis Grose&rdquo;:

>The Devil got notice that Grose was a-dying,
So, whip!  at the summons old Satan came flying;
But when he approached where poor Francis lay
moaning,
And saw each bed-post with its burden a-groaning,
Astonished, confounded, cried Satan, &ldquo;By God!
I'll want him, ere I take such a damnable load!&rdquo;

Burns immortalized Grose in two other poems.  One is kindlier,
though it gives us the same impression of Grose's size—an
antiquarian Falstaff.  It begins:

>Hear, Land o' Cakes, and brither Scots,  
Frae Maidenkirk to Johnny Groat's;  
If there's a hole in a' your coats,  
I rede you tent it:  
A chiel's among you, taking notes  
And, faith, he'll prent it.  
If in your bounds, ye chance to light  
Upon a fine, fat, fodgel wight,  
O' stature short, but genius bright,  
That's he, mark weel  
And wow!  he has an unco slight  
O' cauk and keel.

*Fodgel* is 'plump'; *cauk and keel* are 'chalk and pencil.'  The
other is a little squib, written on the envelope of a letter, and
beginning:

>Ken ye ought o' Captain Grose?  
Igo and ago,  
If he's amoung his friends or foes?  
Iram, coram, dago.  
Is he south, or is he north?  
Igo and ago,  
Or drowned in the river Forth  
Iram, coram, dago.

It continues in the same vein.  These are jokes between friends.
Noble called Grose &ldquo;an inimitable boon companion.&rdquo;

Grose wrote much, including, somewhat surprisingly, *A
Guide to Health, Beauty, Riches and Honour*.  He may have
known about honor, but not too much about the rest.  His most
lasting book was delightfully entitled *A Classical Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue*, and first appeared in 1785.

Grose has a charming passage in his introduction:

>To prevent any charge of immorality being brought
against this work, the Editor begs leave to observe, that
when an indelicate or immodest word has obtruded
itself for explanation, he has endeavoured to get rid of
it in the most decent manner possible; and none have
been admitted but such, as either could not be left out,
without rendering the work incomplete, or, in some
measure, compensate by their wit, for the trespass committed
on decorum.  Indeed respecting this matter, he
can with great truth make the same defence that Falstaff
ludicrously urged in behalf of one engaged in
rebellion, viz. that he did not seek them, but that, like
rebellion in the case instanced, they lay in his way, and
he found them.

A pleasing example of reticence is

>*NICKUMPOOP,* or *NINCUMPOOP,* a foolish fellow; also
one who never saw his wife's ****.

Another is

>*HODDY DODDY,* all a-se and no body, a short clumsey
person, either male or female.

More complex is:

>*A BITER,* a wench whose **** is ready to bite her a-se
with a pound of butter.
>
>A lascivious rampant wench.

Slightly more surprising are:

>*PAY*...*(sea term)* also to beat; I will pay you as Paul
paid the Ephesians, over face and eyes, and all your
d-d jaws.
>
>*SIR REVERENCE,* human excrement, a t-d.

Pleasant is

>*DAB,* an adept; a dab at any feat or exercise; dab,
quoth Dawkins, when he hit his wife on the a-se
with a pound of butter.

*LARKING,* is tantalizingly defined as &ldquo;a lascivious practice that
will not bear explanation.&rdquo;

The dictionary is at its liveliest in its improprieties, and
terms relating to sex or excretion.  There are plenty of words for
bawd (ABBESS, or LADY ABBESS, AUNT, BUTTOCK BROKER,
MOTHER, SHE NAPPER, MACKAREL), and brothel (ACADEMY, or
PUSHING SCHOOL; BORDELLO; NANNY HOUSE; NUNNERY; SERAGLIO;
VAULTING SCHOOL; CAVAULTING SCHOOL).  One of the
most delightful of all entries is

>*ATHANASIAN WENCH, or QUICUNQUE VULT,* a forward
girl, ready to oblige every man that shall ask her.

Another is:

>*CARVEL'S RING,* the private parts of a woman.  Hans
Carvel, a jealous old doctor, being in bed with his
wife, dreamed that the devil gave him a ring, which,
so long as he had it on his finger, would prevent his
being made a cuckold, waking he found he had got
his finger the Lord knows where.

Another is:

>*THINGSTABLE,* Mr. Thingstable, Mr. Constable, a ludicrous
affectation of delicacy in avoiding the pronunciation
of the first syllable in the title of that officer,
which is found has some similarity to an indecent
monosyllable.

BITCH is said to be the &ldquo;most offensive appellation that can be
given to an English woman,&rdquo; and a regular answer was &ldquo;I may
be a whore, but can't be a bitch.&rdquo;  *To stand bitch*, however, is
'to make tea.'  A seaman catching venereal disease abroad is
said to have been &ldquo;sent out a sacrifice, and came home a
BURNT offering.&rdquo;  COCK LANE is the private parts of a woman.
FART CATCHER is a valet or footman, from his walking behind
his master or mistress.  FLAYBOTTOMIST is defined as &ldquo;a bum
brusher, or school master.&rdquo;  PLUG TAIL is one of various phrases
for the penis.  PROUD is &ldquo;desirous of copulation&rdquo;; SALT is
similarly used.  PUREST PURE is &ldquo;a courtezan of high fashion.&rdquo;
*Two* STONE *under weight* is a eunuch.  TEA VOIDER is a
chamber pot, as is MEMBER MUG.  URINAL OF THE PLANETS is
Ireland, because of the rain.  WAGTAIL is a lewd woman.
WOMBLETY CROPT is the indisposition of a drunkard.  A girl
who is got with child is said to have *sprained her* ANKLE, or *to
be* POISONED.  A STAR GAZER is a hedge whore.  A THOROUGH
GOOD-NATURED WENCH is &ldquo;one who being asked to sit down,
will lie down.&rdquo;

There is a variety of words for a *simpleton* (itself derived
from *Simple tony* or *Simple anthony*) or silly fellow.  Such are
NICK NINNY; NIGMENOG; NINNYHAMMER; NICKIN, NIKEY or
NIZEY; NIGIT (apparently &ldquo;an idiot&rdquo;); DOODLE; BUZZARD; CAKE
or CAKEY; CLUNCH; CULLY; MR. CUNNINGHAM; DRUMBELO;
GOOSECAP; GULL; HONEY MOON; NOCKY; NODDY; NOKES, NUPSON;
NUMBSCULL; OAF; PAPER SCULL; PUT; JOLTER HEAD;
RALPH SPOONER; SAPSCULL; SHALLOW PATE; SIMPLE SIMON;
SINGLETEN; TONY; WINDY; ADDLE PATE; BOTTLE HEAD; CLODPOLE;
COD'S HEAD.  There are various adjectives also, such as
BEETLE HEADED; BUFFLE HEADED; CHUCKLE HEADED; PUDDING
HEADED; and the like.

*Drunk* is another word with plenty of synonyms, such as
DISGUISED, BOOSEY, FLUSTERED, FUDDLED, WRAPPED UP IN
WARM FLANNEL, IN HIS ALTITUDES, CHIRPING MERRY, CORNED,
CUT, DROP IN THE EYE, FLAWD, MAUDLIN, MELLOW, NAZIE,
SUCKY.

*Hanging* is another, as WRY MOUTH AND A PISSEN PAIR OF
BREECHES.  CHATES or SHERIFF'S PICTURE FRAME is the gallows.
NOOZED or CRAPPED or SUS. PER COLL. is 'hanged.'  So is
*died of a* HEMPEN FEVER; a hanged man leaves a HEMPEN
WIDOW.  DERRICK, DUN, GREGORY BRANDON, and KETCH were
famous hangmen; you could say of a criminal *Derrick must be
his host*, and *Gregorian tree* was a familiar phrase.  *To go up the*
LADDER *to rest* is another phrase for being hanged; so is *to go
with the fall of the* LEAF: so is *to dance the* PADDINGTON *frisk*;
so is TRINE or TYBURN.

There is quite a lot of ecclesiastical slang: AMEN CURLER 'a
parish clerk'; AMINADAB 'a Quaker'; CRAW THUMPER 'a Roman
Catholic' (beating the breast in confession of sin); CROW(E)
FAIR 'a visitation of clergy'; DIPPERS 'Anabaptists'; NON-CON 'a
nonconformist'; PANTILE HOUSE 'a dissenting meetinghouse;
also a cockpit'; POT CONVERTS &ldquo;proselytes to the Romish
church, made by the distribution of victuals and money&rdquo; (like
the more recent phrase *rice Christians*); MUM BOX or PRATTLING
BOX 'pulpit'; PRIEST CRAFT &ldquo;the art of awing the laity,
managing their consciences, and diving into their pockets&rdquo;;
RED LETTER MEN 'Roman Catholics'; RIB 'wife' (from Adam's
rib); SOLOMON 'the mass'; SOUL DOCTOR, SOUL DRIVER, or
SPIRITUAL FLESH BROKER 'parson'; also UNGRATEFUL MAN
(since at least once a week he abuses his best benefactor, the
devil); THOROUGH CHURCHMAN &ldquo;a person who goes in at one
door of the church and out at the other without stopping&rdquo;; TUB
THUMPER 'Presbyterian parson'; *to come home by* WEEPING
CROSS 'to repent'; YEA AND NAY MAN 'a Quaker'; JAPANNED
'ordained' (from the black collar); CHUCK FARTHING or SOLFA
'parish clerk'; HUMS 'people in church.'  Pleasing also are
ANABAPTIST &ldquo;a pickpocket caught in the fact and punished
with the discipline of the pump or horse-pond,&rdquo; BAPTISED or
CHRISTENED &ldquo;Rum, brandy, or any other spirits that have been
lowered with water.&rdquo;  Port wine is KILL PRIEST.  A PANTER is a
'hart' (which pants after the water brooks).  *She* PRAYS *with her
knees upwards* is used of a woman &ldquo;given to gallantry and
intrigue.&rdquo;  RESURRECTION MEN are, familiarly, persons
employed by the students in anatomy to steal dead bodies out
of churchyards.  STEWED QUAKER is 'burned rum with a piece
of butter,' an American remedy for a cold.  A SUNDAY MAN is
'one fearful of arrest' (who appears in public on Sunday only).
CHURCH WARDEN is a 'shag or cormorant' (probably from its
voracity).  ST. LUKE'S BIRD is an 'ox.'

Some familiar phrases there are.  *My eye*, BETTY MARTIN
(without *and*) is an answer to an attempt at humbug.  In
Grose's day one licked the BLARNEY STONE. BLINDMAN'S BUFF
and HIDE AND SEEK were played by children.  To BLUBBER is to
'cry,' and to *look* BLUE is to 'be disappointed.'  BOG HOUSE is
&ldquo;the necessary house.&rdquo;  A woman who governs her husband
*wears the* BREECHES.  One in a reverie is *in a* BROWN STUDY.  To
*kick the* BUCKET is to 'die.'  A CAT'S PAW is an instrument to
accomplish another's purpose.  DOG LATIN is 'barbarous Latin.'
EYE SORE (two words) is a 'disagreeable object.'  To *take*
FRENCH LEAVE, GIFT OF THE GAB, GREENHORN, HENPECKED,
to *be left in the* LURCH, to *sow his wild* OATS, PIN MONEY,
SLEEPING PARTNER, all have their modern meaning.  GLUM is
'sullen': curious to think of it as vulgar.  PHYZ is given for 'face,'
but without the derivation from *physiognomy*.  POT HUNTER,
which one used as a schoolboy for an athlete seeking a trophy,
is 'one who hunts more for the sake of the prey, than the
sport,' presumably *pot* meaning the 'contents of the stew-pot.'
ROUND ROBIN has its familiar meaning and is given a naval
origin: the circle of signatures prevented the identification of
the *ring leader*.  SPUNK is figuratively 'courage,' derived from a
kind of fungus (*punk*) prepared for tinder.  A BAKER'S DOZEN is
fourteen, not thirteen.  POTATO TRAP is mouth, now shortened
to 'trap.'

A few curiosities.  CAPTAIN LIEUTENANT is 'meat between
veal and beef.'  A CHERRY COLOURED CAT is a 'black cat' (there
being black as well as red cherries).  CROAKUMSHIRE is 'North-umberland'
(from the accent).  FUBSEY is a pleasing word for
'plump.'  GENTLEMAN COMMONER is an 'empty bottle' (from a
head empty of learning); GIMCRACK is a 'spruce wench or a
person who has a turn for mechanical contrivances' (very
different from the modern meaning).  A schoolmaster is a
HABERDASHER *of pronouns*.  To 'tumble about' is to JERRYCUMMUMBLE.
 JOBBERNOLE is the 'head.'  LILLEY WHITE is a
'chimney sweeper.'  LOLLPOOP is a 'lazy idle drone.'  MUNDUNGUS
is 'bad tobacco.'  NICKNACKATORY is a 'toyshop.'  NIMGIMMER
is a 'physician.'  To *fly a blue* PIGEON is to 'steal lead off a
church.'  The 'youngest child' is a PIN BASKET.  PLUMB is a
'hundred thousand pounds.'  PONTIUS PILATE is a 'pawnbroker.'
A PRIGSTAR is a 'rival in love.'  PUFF GUTS for a 'fat man' is
obvious but pleasing.  Persons dipped in the river SHANNON are
forever cured of bashfulness.  A SHE HOUSE is a 'house where
the wife rules.'  A 'profligate' is called a SQUIRE OF ALSATIA.
STARVE 'EM, ROB 'EM, and CHEAT 'EM are soldiers' and sailors'
names for Stroud, Rochester, and Chatham &ldquo;and not without
good reason.&rdquo;  STUBBLE IT means 'Hold your tongue.'  VAMPERS
are 'stockings.'  WHITHER-GO-YE is a 'wife' (who is always
asking the question of her husband).  'Tea' is SCANDALBROTH.

Grose may have been a fubsey cull, but he was also a rum
duke.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;*Game Theory*, second Edition, by G. Owen, Navel
Postgraduate School.&rdquo;  [From a business reply card order form
distributed by Academic Press, Inc.  Submitted by Eduardo
Rodriguez, Los Angles.  *Presumably, one arrives at game theory
through omphaloskepsis*.]


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;...Albania, a country of two and three-quarters million
people about the size of Maryland....&rdquo;  [From *The Wall Street
Journal*, 6 June 1983.  Submitted by Kenneth J. Pulliam, Pfafftown, North Carolina.]

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Crossword Words*](https://www.abebooks.com/9780894802218/Illustrated-Encyclopedia-Crossword-Words-Zuni-0894802216/plp)
Michael Donner and Norton J. Bramesco, (Workman Publishing, 1982), 384 pp.  

Millions of people have delighted in solving crossword
puzzles ever since their introduction in the 1920s—the first
successful book published by Richard Simon and George
Schuster was a collection of crossword puzzles, and look at
Simon and Schuster today!  From the beginning, solvers were
taught about 'volcanic lava,' 'bitter vetch,' 'Persian fairy,'
'young salmon,' and other esoterica dredged from the nether
reaches of the language by the compilers who needed odd bits
and pieces to fill in the gaps with *aa, ers, peri*, and *smolt*.

British puzzles, which came later, require little of this
linguistic detritus because only alternate characters in horizontal
words are crosskeyed to vertical words (and vice versa);
besides, British puzzles tend more toward the kinds of clues
found in America in the &ldquo;puns and anagrams&rdquo; puzzles, though
recent imports from Britain are called &ldquo;cryptic&rdquo; crosswords.
(For a rather easy American version, see our Anglo-American
Crossword on page 24.)

This book defines and, in many instances, illustrates the
odds and ends of (mainly) the English found in crossword
puzzles.  One omission noted is *parr* 'young salmon,' but for all
I know, that may be a common word on everyone's lips and,
hence, has no place in this collection.  Mercifully, the compilers
have avoided listing the kinds of nonsense appearing in so
many puzzles today: '—go home' as the clue for *I wanna*,
'Pierre's nail' for *ongle*, etc.  Such items are used by bad puzzle-makers
(and published by worse puzzle editors): the English
lexicon is sufficiently replete and solvers should not be expected
to know French, German, or Swahili; multiword combinations
have long been standard in cryptic puzzles (where the arrangement
of words and the number of characters of each is usually
given), but they have only recently begun to creep into
American-style puzzles, where they have no place.

American puzzles—some, at least—have become tricky but
more in the wiseguy mode than by becoming clever.  Also, more
and more of them contain outright errors of fact, which is
inexcusable.  These shortcomings are to be laid at the door of
the editors who seem increasingly less capable or less energetic
in checking for accuracy.

All that criticism has nothing to do with *The Illustrated
Encyclopedia of Crossword Words*, which is good fun and
should be in the library of every puzzle-solver if only to inform
him about what he has been doing all these years.  [If copies are
not readily available from your bookshop, send $10.95 (including
postage) to Workman Publishing, I West 39th St., New
York, NY 10018, mentioning VERBATIM, and a copy will be sent
to you.]

*Laurence Urdang*


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

Suggested slogan for Kentucky Fried Chicken (Col. Sherlock
Sanders): Murder Most Fowl.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!
*Closet Quean:* a prostitute who turns her tricks in a
Murphy bed.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!
The woman who used Listerine for slimming because she
heard it would cure bad breadth.


### OBITER DICTA: *O, TEMPORA!*

There is only one &ldquo;*The Times*,&rdquo; and that is the newspaper
published six days a week in London.  *The Sunday Times*,
published weekly, also in London, and *The New York Times*,
published seven days a week in You-know-where, are not the
same.

*The Times* takes some pride in the care with which it is
written and edited, and the results are quite obvious most of
the time.  As Lord Deming remarked at a recent awards dinner
for journalists, the journalistic tradition is strong in England,
where every effort is made to uphold a high standard of
language style and usage.  My second clue that something might
be awry was revealed when I distinctly heard Lord Deming say
&ldquo;viligent&rdquo; (presumably for *vigilant*).  The first clue came a few
days earlier, when *The Times* reported:

>Sandra Jackson, aged 19, who is expecting her second
child in three months' time...  [16 February 1983]

Can it be, I asked myself, that the birth rate in Britain (which,
I noted earlier in January, stood at zero) is in for a change?  Or,
perhaps, Mrs. Jackson had been got to by the test-tube baby
crowd?

Clues continued to accumulate.  On 18 February appeared
the information:

>There was a plastic bag over his head when Sir Trevor
[Dawson], aged 51, was found by his chauffeur.  An
inquest will be held, but the police said there was [*sic*]
no suspicious circumstances.

The interesting point here is not the singular verb/plural noun
problem, but what the police in England might consider
&ldquo;suspicious circumstances&rdquo; to be.  Perhaps it is/they are something
like &ldquo;Mr. A—is helping the police in their enquiries,&rdquo;
usually translated into real English as &ldquo;Mr. A— is under
suspicion of [whatever the crime might be].&rdquo;

Maintaining the talent for curious juxtapositions of information,
*The Times* (again on 18 February) reported:

>[Peter Bird] will have broken the world record for
staying at sea in a rowing boat when he celebrates his
37th birthday tomorrow.

That must, indeed, be a record.

&ldquo;PHS,&rdquo; author of &ldquo;The Times Diary,&rdquo; a regular feature of
the page facing the editorials, is not known to be above
apostrophizing.  Yet the column for 28 February carries the
following:

>Those whose interests David has now bought include
his brothers, Jonathan and Nicholas.

Those who live in or have visited England are aware of
the weight of the coins one accumulates in a jacket pocket or a
purse; notwithstanding the parlous state of the pound these
days, a pocketful of change worth &pound;1 would appear to weigh at
least 18 ounces, giving male residents and visitors to that
seafaring nation a perceptible list to starboard.  Always sensitive
to the comforts of the commoner, the House of Lords, as
reported in *The Times* of 4 March, has heard debate on the
Currency Bill suggesting that, because of this financial burden
carried by citizens, trouser pockets should be free of VAT
(value added tax) charges.  Lord Lyell, in response to this
suggestion, pointed out that, as people in Scotland carried their
money in sporrans when they were not wearing trousers, the
proposal should be extended to highland dress.

A photograph in the same issue of the newspaper shows
workers contemplating strike at the Citro&euml;n plant in France, a
country recently plagued by workers' walkouts.  *The Times*
captions the photo, &ldquo;The French Disease?&rdquo;  Perhaps someone
will send in a French letter explaining what the French disease
is.

In the caption on another photograph, we learn that the
tarsier is a &ldquo;member of a little-known zoological group called
Asiatic profimians,&rdquo; prompting us to wonder whether that
group, if in favor of &ldquo;fimians,&rdquo; is anti something.  In any event,
it is probably a fringe group and, in fact, so little is known as to
be nonexistent.

## Crossword Puzzle Answers

**Across**

1\. Come second;  
6\. Suit;  
10\. Disc-over America;  
11\. TR-ick-kn-EE;  
12\. Style;  
13\. DUN-nag-E;  
14\. TRANCES (CANTERS);  
16\. F-ired-OG;  
18\. CHE-aP-ER;  
19\. REPRO (Poorer);  
21\. Rein-state;  
23\. SWORD OF DAMOCLES (Anagram COWARD DOOMS SELF);  
24\. STEW;  
25\. Memo-RY LANE (NEARLY).

**Down**

1\. CADET;  
2\. MIS-si-ON-er;  
3\. Stocks and bonds;  
4\. C-le-AN-se;  
5\. NEAREST (EARNEST);  
7\. UN-IFY;  
8\. Traver-SER;  
9\. NEWSPAPER STORY (Anagram PEN WAR SPORT YES);  
13\. DE-for-E-st-S;  
15\. Co-PS A PLEA (APPEALS);  
17\. GIRAFFE;  
18\. (mu) CH I CAN O(ffer);  
20\. Prose;  
22\. E-nsu-E.

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v10n1_Summer_1983)