--- 
title: VOL X, No 2
year: 1983
season: Autumn
---

## Yiddish for Fun and Profit
*Lillian Mermin Feinsilver, Easton, Pennsylvania*

[First Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

In my smalltown community, some friends used to have a
pekipoo named *Mentsh* 'Fine Person.'  Others have a miniature
poodle that for years has appeared in their &ldquo;Season's
Greetings&rdquo; family pictures as *Shana Maydellah* [*sheyne
meydele* 'pretty little girl'].  I was not unprepared when a
canine puppet on TV's *Sesame Street* was called *Farfel* 'bits of
noodle' or when race horses were discovered with playful
Yiddish tags.  According to the *Jewish Digest*, a horse that ran
in 1967 was *Nisht Amool* [*nisht a mol* 'not sometime'—now!].
In at least one case a vulgar appellation—*Alter Kocker [Alter
Kaker* 'Old Crapper,' commonly euphemized bilingually as
*A.K.* or (since about 1960) &ldquo;Alter Coyote&rdquo;—caused disqualification
of the nag until his name was changed.

Boats, too, have been treated to Yiddish monickers.  There
was in 1970 (and may still be) in Black Rock Harbor off
Bridgeport, Connecticut, a boat named *Mahia [mechaye* 'pleasure']
and another (owned by a Gentile), *L'Chayim* 'To Life.'

On other levels, announcers on WWDB FM radio in
Philadelphia have given billing to a psychologist as &ldquo;Murray
Needelman with his hour of *tsuris* [var. of *tsores* 'troubles']&rdquo;;
and New York Republican Paul Slotkin in his campaign for
Congress used the slogan &ldquo;Don't Plotz [*plats* 'explode'], Vote
Slots.&rdquo;  In further bilingual fun, Lucille Ball on an old Jack
Benny TV show (rerun Sept. 24, 1981) dubbed lumbering John
Wayne &ldquo;El Klutzo&rdquo; [*kluhts*, var. of *klots* 'log'].  Abigail van
Buren in 1980 referred to the man who sorts her Dear Abby
mail as her &ldquo;faithful Jewish 'schleppercaun' &rdquo; [*shlepper* 'lugger,
tramp'].

As we're told in the McDavid edition of Mencken's *The
American Language* (1963), a Chinese Noshery [*nasheray*
'snackables'] was established c. 1955 in the nation's capital.
What do you suppose the New York catering service specializing
in kosher Chinese food is named?  Shang-Chail In Philadelphia
a restaurant offering kosher Italian cuisine is (what else?)
The Kosher Noshtra.  (These are reminiscent of the joke
recently quoted in VERBATIM about the mixture of Manischewitz
wine and tomato juice, an &ldquo;Oyvay [*oy vey* 'woe is
me'] Maria.&rdquo;  Last year I met a woman from an Italian Catholic
family who is married to a Jew; she told me, &ldquo;He's a *Litvak*
[Jew of Lithuanian origin], and I'm a Litwop.&rdquo;)

In the twenties and thirties, Jewish high-school students
used to clown around with nonsense French and Yiddish:
&ldquo;Chevrolet coupe,/ a vu tut dir vey?  [.../'where does it hurt
you?'].&rdquo;  Today, as mature adults, such persons have been heard
to comment tolerantly, &ldquo;Chacun &agrave; son mishugas ['wackiness']&rdquo;
or to exclaim critically, &ldquo;Quel chutzpa [*chutspe* 'gall']!&rdquo; or to
inquire smilingly of a new acquaintance, &ldquo;Qu'est-ce que c'est
dayn chazer'she ['your filthy'—lit., 'swinish'] business?&rdquo;  There's
of course a New York eatery named Bagel Delox, and it may be
pertinent that Mimi Sheraton, food critic of *The New York
Times*, on Aug. 31, 1976 described the service at most bagel
restaurants in New York as &ldquo;haute schlock&rdquo; [*shlak* 'stroke,'
hence 'disaster,' 'junk'; *schlacht* 'slaughter'; *shlogn* 'to hit']—
without quotation marks or italics.

The students who used to spoof Spanish with Yiddish—in
&ldquo;Vi est a qui una mesa?&rdquo;  [*Vi est a ki* (var. of *ku) on a meser?*
'How does a cow eat without a knife?']—now quip about the
Mexican woman who serves her Jewish husband &ldquo;enchilatkes&rdquo;
[*latkes* 'pancakes'].  Moreover, the old Latin-Yiddish conjugation
*amo, amas, amat, a mames, a tates, a kind* '...a mother's and
father's child' has been followed by modern twists on Latin,
like the line from a wag in my family about the girl who checks
her suitor's astrological sign and finds that it is *Tsores*.  (Interestingly
enough, a Latin-Yiddish term appears in American black
slang: *mater mazuma [mezumen* 'ready cash'] 'female college
teacher,' reported in 1970 from southern black college student
use of the 1940s.)

Reportedly, Jewish residents of Hawaii have been known
to welcome visitors with &ldquo;Alohaleichem&rdquo; [*aloha* combined with
the greeting *sholem aleichem* 'peace be with you'].  And comic
strips have shown bilingually named personalities like the
plastic surgeon Dr. Poonim [*punim*, var. of *ponim* 'face'], the
matchmaking mother Ma Zeltov [*mazel tov* 'good luck, congratulations'],
and various others.

Especially fascinating have been the word-playing antics
in Sid Caesar's TV skits over the years.  Witness his Japanese
characters *Gantse Mishp&umacr;chah [gantse mishpuche* (var. of
*mishpoche)* 'whole clan']; *Taka Mitziah [takeh, matsie&#92;?&#92; 'really,* 'really,
bargain'; presumably a further play on the name of Japanese
composer Takemitsu]; *Shmatsay [shmatte* 'rag']; or Princess
*Tushy Tushy* [bilingual children's diminutive (recorded in 1962
as *tushie*), from *tuchas*, var. of *toches* 'rump,' these being
sources of English *tochas, tuchas, tuckis, tookis, tukis* (and the
comment *tough tukis* 'tough luck,' dating to the 1960s), *tokis,
tokus, dokus*, and possibly of both the underworld term for a
'lifer,' *tocker* (he sits on his rump), and the British terms for
'administering or receiving a thrashing,' *give* (or *get* or *catch)*
*toco or toks*].  Author Sol Weinstein, in his parodies of mystery
fiction, probably paved the way for Caesar's writers with his
war between Israel and TUSH—the Terrorist Union for Suppressing
Hebrews!

It may not be too surprising that a Miss Tushy beauty
contest was mentioned in the *Los Angeles Times* May 31, 1982,
as a project of a bar near the L. A. airport, or that syndicated
columnist Earl Wilson on April 16, 1982, concluded his
remarks on the shapeliness of Pia Zadora with these words:
&ldquo;Indeed, said the photographer, Pia's derriere will out-tushy
Bardot's.&rdquo;  Most striking is the annual Miss Tush of the Year
pageant, inaugurated in 1979 by a California women's apparel
shop with outlets in Hermosa Beach and San Pedro.  The name
of the shop?  The Tushery!

The colorful alphabetical expressions of Jewish Americans,
first recorded in the 1940s, persist and grow.  Although these
have included alphabetizing of English (M.O.T. 'Member of the
Tribe' and the more recent *J.A.P.* 'Jewish American Princess'—
the latter the cause of a brouhaha this year at a midwestern
university), they are more often Roman letters for Yiddish
expressions, as in the aforementioned *A.K.* or the old *T.O.T.*
'cash on the line' [*Toches Oyfn Tish* 'Arse on the Table'] and
*T.L. [Toches Leker* 'Arse Licker'], which (as recorded in 1970)
has bred *T.L.er* and *T.L.ing*.  Other forms of the past twenty
years or so (also recorded in 1970) are the bilingual play on the
pharmacy degree *Ph. G.: Papa Hot Gelt* 'The father has money'
and on *A.M.: Able Mamzer* ['bastard'].

What a boost Yiddish has given to commercial enterprise!
It has shown up in the names of various food emporiums:
*Eppes Essen* 'Something to Eat' delicatessens in Indiana,
Florida, and elsewhere; a *Ye Noshery* hotel snack bar in Florida
and a *Nosh Bar* delicatessen in London; *Bagel Mavin [meyvn*
'connoisseur'] and *Bagel Nosh* restaurants in New York; the
*Mavins New York Scene Restaurant and Deli* in San Diego, etc.
It has also spiced up food-product names like *Ba Tampte
[batamte* 'tasty'] *Pickles; Tam Tam* [Flavor Flavor] crackers;
*Noshies*, a Japanese (!) type of snack by Tem Tee; and so on.

Other products capitalizing on Yiddish have ranged from
the *Nebbish* 'Poor Fool' gift items and the *Bupkis [buhpkes,*
var. of *bopkes* 'beans,' 'trifle'] Family of zany dolls, to
imprinted aprons (&ldquo;Any shnook [*shnukel* 'sap'; *shnuk* 'trunk,
snout'] can cook&rdquo;) and shopping bags (&ldquo;Schlep!,&rdquo; &ldquo;Son of
Schlep,&rdquo; and &ldquo;Super-Schlep&rdquo;), to the Remco game called *Shmo*
[supposed euphemism for vulgar *shmok* 'prick,' source of
*shmuck* and *shmucky* (increasingly used without awareness of
their vulgarity) and probably of the low-level British forms
*shmook, schmock, smock*, and (anti-Semitic) *shmog* and
*smoggy*].  Not only has there been a board game by Parker
Bros. named *Plotz!;* but a card game by Originals Only Co. is
named *O. Shlemiel* ['Lummox']; and a widely selling ladies'
panty-liner from Poirette Corsets, Inc., is dubbed *Gotke [gatke*
'drawer'].

Bemusing, too, is the variety of entrepreneurs that have
taken advantage of Yiddish in their business titles.  Two seem to
have built on a Sid Caesar joke mentioned earlier: *Mitsia
Motors*, a Toyota dealer on Long Island, and *Takamitziah*, a
New York resort hotel with Japanese architecture and a
Samurai lounge (!).  Among many others, there are the *Lewis
Imaginative Ippsy-Pippsy Photographers* in Los Angeles; *Rent-a-Kvetch
[kvetsh* 'whiner'], Inc., a New York firm handling
consumer complaints; the *Chutzpah [sic]* Phone Service in a
number of cities, making challenging calls on assignment; as
well as authors and publishers of such volumes as the *Organic
Yenta [yente* 'gossip'] *Cook Book* and the *Book of Buffs,
Masters, Mavens [sic] and Uncommon Experts*.

As several writers have observed, science fiction seems
particularly hospitable to Yiddish word-play.  Corrupt cops on a
transgalactic planet, for example, are *Ganavim [ganeyvim*, pl.
of *ganef* 'crook']; interplanetary visitors to Venus who look like
little brown pillows with tentacles are *Bulbas [bulbe* 'potato']; a
character named *Milchik* ['dairy' adjective relating to dietary
laws] has an uncle named *Fleischik [fleyshik* 'meat,' adj.], etc.

Other fiction, as well as political cartoons, greeting cards,
movies, and stage productions have also utilized Yiddish.  One
adoption that has surfaced in all these and other places is the
deprecating *shm-* phoneme (discussed by several authors in the
fifties).  It became famous in the old quip, &ldquo;Cancer, shmancer,
*abi gezunt* ['as long as you're healthy']&rdquo; and in the adjective
*fancy-shmancy*.  Typical are such examples as the classic Herblock
cartoon about the Atomic Energy Commission a generation
ago &ldquo;Mutations, Shmutations, Long as You're Healthy&rdquo;;
the dramatic ad of the oil industry in *The New York Times* Nov.
25, 1979, concerning the windfall-profits tax, headed &ldquo;Windfall-Schmindfall
[*sic*],&rdquo; to the tesselated puzzle recently produced
by Professor Sam Savage of the University of Chicago, wryly
named *Shmuzzles*.

In direct translation, too, Yiddish has been exploited in the
marketplace and in various media—in several versions of &ldquo;Wear
it in good health&rdquo; on Misty Harbor raincoat labels; in the
defiant question or exclamation &ldquo;Who needs it?  (!)&rdquo; in advertising
of Union Oil Co. and Mutual of New York, among other
companies; in the ironic &ldquo;That's all I need&rdquo; in radio commercials
for Bayer aspirin; in the versatile question &ldquo;Where is it
written that...,&rdquo; etc.  Significant are the widely adopted
translations that affect—besides intonation as seen in the
foregoing—syntax and even meaning: &ldquo;Hurt, it can't&rdquo;; &ldquo;What's
with him?&rdquo;  [*What's with* for *What's the matter with*], &ldquo;What's
to argue?&rdquo;  [*What's to for What is there to...about*]; &ldquo;O.K. by
me&rdquo; [*by* for with—recorded in 1962]; &ldquo;I don't want to know
from...&rdquo; [*know from* for *know or know about*—recorded in
1970—a usage established by the old translation &ldquo;He don't
know from nothin',&rdquo; recorded in 1943]; the ironic &ldquo;Go know&rdquo;
and &ldquo;Go figure&rdquo; [*Go* for *How could I* or *Just try to*—recorded
in 1955]; the shrugging &ldquo;I should worry&rdquo; ['Why should I' or
'I'm not about to'—first recorded as a Yiddishism in 1914]; the
destiny-invoking &ldquo;You should be so lucky&rdquo;—a headline in *Punch*
Dec. 17, 1980 [an expression recorded in 1962, its close
relative, &ldquo;I should live so long,&rdquo; having been recorded in 1943],
etc.

Also seen and heard, of course, are jaunty bilingual
adjectives like *shmaltzy* 'sentimental,' *shlumpy* 'slovenly,'
*klutzy* 'awkward,' etc., and inventive bilingual verbs like *to
hoo-ha* 'to make an issue' [*hu-ha*, n. 'to-do'; exclam.  'Oh boy!',
'Fancy that!'], and others like the one a White House transcript
credited to President Nixon in 1972: *to get schnookered [sic]*, an
apparent combination of *shnook* and the pool term *snookered*.

Inevitably, malapropisms abound.  Just two &ldquo;for-instances&rdquo;:
the confusion of Yiddish intensives in translation,
*yet* and *already*, by the *Los Angeles Times'* travel editor Bruce
Hamby: &ldquo;...I'm ready to cry, 'Enough, yet!' &rdquo; (March 25,
1979); and the mistaking of *shmegeggi* [*shmegege* 'jackass'] for
*shmear* by Jean Bach in a remark to Arlene Francis on New
York's WOR radio Dec. 24, 1979: &ldquo;When I was a little girl I
had German...kuchen and the whole shmegeggi.&rdquo;

If we are not witnessing what the maverick psychology
professor A. A. Roback predicted fifty years ago—a flooding of
English by Yiddishisms—we are certainly seeing a high tide.
Appropriate indeed would be a sail on each of those two
Connecticut boats, *L'Chayim* and *Mahia*: i.e., we should live
(and be well) and enjoy!

## Down to Earth in a Low Country
*Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium*

[Second Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

&ldquo;We cut off their heads and then let the blood drain
out,&rdquo; the Michigan State professor told his European
visitor cheerfully.  He was describing his laboratory's experiments
on frogs.  &ldquo;But in our reports,&rdquo; he continued, &ldquo;you'll read
that we decapitate and subsequently exsanguinate them.  Oh,
why must scientific publications always be so studded with
learned expressions that even well-educated outsiders can
hardly make sense of them?&rdquo;  He would have had less reason
for complaining if he could have drafted his reports in Dutch.
In Holland, even the most pedantic scientist would not think of
using Latinisms like *decapitate* or *exsanguinate*.  He would
rather write *de kop afsnijden* 'sever the head' and *laten
leegbloeden* 'let bleed until empty.'  And no reader, whatever
his education, has any difficulty in understanding such phrases.

This is by no means the only instance where scientific
terminology is more accessible to the general public in Dutch
than in English.  When a doctor in Holland diagnoses pneumonia,
he need not give his patient a lengthly explanation but
simply tells him that he is suffering from *longontsteking*.  The
word literally means 'lung inflammation' and thus conveys, in
everyday language, the essence of what a lay person normally
wants to know about his condition.  Numerous medical terms
are equally unesoteric in Dutch, such as *hersenschudding* 'brain
shaking,' i.e. concussion or *hersenvliesontsteking* 'brain-membrane
inflammation,' i.e. meningitis.  Even the science of
medicine itself is in most cases referred to in words whose
meaning a child can grasp, namely *geneeskunde* 'the knowledge
of curing' or *geneeskunst* 'the art of curing.'  This terminological
transparency is, as we shall see, not restricted to the sphere of
medicine.

Stressing the relatively high proportion of Latinate terms
in English may seem a sheer platitude.  We all know that
English, unlike Dutch, is not a &ldquo;pure&rdquo; Germanic language but
derives from Latin and Old French as well.  A higher frequency
of vocables of Romance root is therefore unsurprising.  All this
is true, but it is beside the point here.  The purpose of this
article rather is to highlight a practical consequence of this
situation: whereas a considerable proportion of English scientific
terminology is compounded from recondite elements (usually
of Latin or Greek origin) and hence abstruse to the
uninitiated, Dutch offers in many such cases an expression that
is made up from everyday words so that any layman can
understand it.

Let us look at another example.  When an English-speaking
child is confronted for the first time with the word *polygon*, he
needs an explanation.  Then, after having been taught what the
word stands for, he has to deal with another problem: how to
retain the meaning in his memory.  He will have to learn the
relationship between the new word and the signified object by
rote, because the components of the word are of no help in the
memorization process.  Indeed, they are literally Greek to him.
On the other hand, a Dutch child has no such difficulties.  The
corresponding word is *veelhoek* 'many-corner,' which is self-explanatory,
even with the limited vocabulary of a youngster.
And the meaning can be recalled at any moment since the
components constitute a built-in mnemonic aid.  In short, this
scientific term offers him no more problems than, say, the word
*keyhole* does to an English-speaking child.  This is so for many
other geometrical expressions as well: *schuine zijde* 'slanted
side,' i.e. hypotenuse; *kromme* 'a bent one,' i.e. curve; *raaklijn*
'touching line,' i.e. tangent; *middelloodlijn* 'middle lead line'
(*lead* = 'plumb'), i.e. perpendicular bisector; *zesvlak* 'six-plane,'
i.e. hexahedron.

Geometry itself is called *meetkunde* 'the knowledge of
measuring.'  Incidentally, the ending -*kunde*, which occurs in
the names of many branches of science, is obviously a cognate
of *ken* (in the sense of 'range of knowledge').  So alongside
*meetkunde* 'measuring ken,' we have *rekenkunde* 'calculating
ken,' i.e. arithmetic; *stelkunde* 'positing ken,' i.e. algebra; and
the other subdivisions of *wiskunde* 'certainly ken,' i.e.
mathematics.

Picturesque and sometimes amusing instances can be
culled from other parts of the curriculum as well: *stikstof*
'choking matter,' i.e. nitrogen, from *scheikunde* 'sundering
ken,' i.e. chemistry; *kernsplitsing* 'kernel splitting,' i.e. nuclear
fission, from *natuurkunde* 'nature ken,' i.e. physics;
*rangtelwoord* 'rank count-word,' i.e. ordinal numeral, from
*spraakkunst* 'language art,' i.e. grammar; *vleeseter* 'flesh eater,'
i.e. carnivore, from *plant-en dierkunde* 'plant and animal ken,'
i.e. biology; *Stille Oceaan* 'Calm Ocean,' i.e. the Pacific, from
*aardrijkskunde* 'earth-kingdom ken,' i.e. geography; *melkwegstelsel*
'Milky Way system,' i.e. galaxy, from *sterrekunde* 'stars
ken,' i.e. astronomy.

Some of these examples may give the impression that a
scientific discussion in Dutch sounds like sophisticated baby
talk, but that's because I have told only half the story so far.
The full truth is that most of the learned expressions used for
scientific notions in English (and other Western languages) are
also known in Holland.  They form part of the vocabularies of
many people and are to be found in dictionaries, albeit adapted
to Dutch spelling conventions.  So, for *philosophy*, we have the
choice between *filosofie* and *wijsbegeerte* 'desire for wisdom,'
just as in English one may either use *penultimate* or *last but
one*.  In fact, it's quite normal for Dutch scientific terminology
to occur in pairs composed of a &ldquo;difficult&rdquo; and a homier
variant: *ephemerid* can be translated as *efemeride* or as *eendagsvlieg*
'one-day fly'; also in the figurative sense; *hypothesis*
as *hypothese* or as *veronderstelling* 'under-setting,' and so on.

Similar pairs exist in English as well (although to a lesser
extent, I feel).  In both languages they may present a problem
to the user: sometimes the twins are absolutely interchangeable,
sometimes not entirely, sometimes not at all.  It seems
indeed true that there is a time and a place for everything!  The
system of usages that govern this interchangeability in Dutch is
much too intricate to be set out here in full.  Nevertheless, a
few remarks may be of interest to the English-speaking reader
because they can help him to discover analogous patterns in his
own language.

In the first place, when is a pair really a pair?  Words like
*uneatable* and *inedible* must have been synonymous at one
time, but now many people feel that they have slightly
different meanings (in certain contexts at least) and should not
be confounded.  Such pseudo-pairs are encountered in Dutch
too.  The nearest equivalent of *melancholic* is *melancholiek*, but
we also have the word *zwartgallig* 'with black bile.'  Although a
literal translation of its Greek twin, the latter represents a
slightly different nuance of gloominess.  Perhaps it's more like
'atrabilious'!

Secondly, even when two vocables appear to have identical
meanings to the layman, an expert may have his doubts.
Scientists favor unambiguous words that designate sharply
defined notions.  Anatomists would rather say *esophagus* (or
spell it *oesophagus*) than *gullet* because nobody knows exactly
where a gullet begins or ends, and, anyway, the word has more
than one meaning, even within the field of anatomy.  For
similar reasons, a Dutch geologist prefers *vulkaan* 'volcano' to
the pictorial but imprecise *vuurspuwende berg* 'fire-spitting
mountain.'  On the other hand, he would have no objection to
alternating *eruptie* 'eruption' with *uitbarsting* 'outburst,' the
latter giving no rise to confusion in a given context.  Dutch
scientists seem to be more often in a position to use such a
demotic term than their English-speaking colleagues.  To come
back to *gullet*, the Dutch equivalent is *slokdarm* 'swallowing
gut,' an earthy expression but quite precise and therefore not
unfit for a professional text.

But we had better not attempt a full-scale analysis here.
Even when all parties agree that the scholarly and the vernacular
members of a given pair of scientific terms have exactly the
same meaning, their interchangeability is nonetheless subject to
a maze of unwritten rules.  It may be a matter of context, of
spoken or written language, of tradition, &ldquo;good manners,&rdquo;
prudery, and so on (cf. *abdomen* versus *belly*).  Sometimes it is
a matter of class, and often one of generation.  There are also
euphonic considerations, individual quirks, linguistic chauvinisms,
snob habits (&ldquo;arcane = chic&rdquo;), and inverted snobberies
(&ldquo;simple = honest&rdquo;).  We shall not dwell on these variations,
but there is one aspect that should not go wholly unmentioned:
the fluctuations of usage in the course of time.

Preferences for learned and for familiar words change over
the years.  Nowadays, it has become somewhat outmoded to say
*staathuishoudkunde* 'state household ken' for *economics* or
*aardkunde* 'earth ken' for *geology.  Weerkunde* 'weather ken,'
i.e. meteorology, and *kruidtuin* 'plant garden,' i.e. botanical
garden, are definitely out (except in Belgium: linguistic developments
in Flanders do not always run parallel to those in
Holland, because they are partly determined by political
considerations).  Anatomical atlases have done away with the
somewhat bluff *pisbuis* 'piss tube,' i.e. urethra.  The *grote
lichaamsslagader* 'big beating vein of the body,' i.e. aorta, is
also about to go; it was marvelously descriptive, though quite a
mouthful!  On the other hand, new self-explanatory expressions
are constantly being coined for the goodies that this age keeps
bestowing upon us.  *Rekentuig* 'calculation gear' for *computer*
has not caught on, but *ongevalsheelkunde* 'accident healing
ken' for *traumatology* seems to have a future.  But enough of all
that.

A completely different question is the semantic content of
those easy-to-understand Dutch words.  As several of the preceding
examples suggest, many apparently native expressions
are really calques of Greco-Latinate terms that have international
currency in the world of science.  Here are a few more:
*dierenriem* 'animal belt,' i.e. zodiac; *mierenzuur* 'ants sour,' i.e.
formic acid; *knaagdier* 'gnawing animal,' i.e. rodent; *vierling*
'fourling,' i.e. quadruplets; *zelfmoord* 'self-murder,' i.e. suicide;
*Onbevlekte Ontvangenis* 'unstained begetting,' i.e. Immaculate
Conception.  Spells of Germanic chauvinism have left us with
unseemly agglutinations like *boldriehoeksmeting* 'ball three-corner
measuring,' i.e. spherical trigonometry, and uncritical
calquing made us adopt a few misnomers holus-bolus: *buik-spreker*
'belly speaker,' i.e. ventriloquist.

In other cases the translation is freer, or more explicit than
the original, or the two are not related at all: *aardolie* 'earth
oil,' i.e. petroleum; *schuilnaam* 'hiding name,' i.e. pseudonym;
*veelwijverij* 'many-womenship,' i.e. polygamy; *verloskunde*
'delivery ken,' i.e. obstetrics; *sterrebeeld* 'stars picture,' i.e.
constellation; *Maria Hemelvaart* 'Mary's passage to heaven,' i.e.
the Assumption; *vallende ziekte* 'falling disease,' i.e. epilepsy;
*kinderverlamming* 'children's paralysis,' i.e. poliomyelitis;
*heelal* 'whole all,' i.e. the universe.

Readers familiar with other Germanic languages may well
observe that all this is not descriptive of Dutch alone but
applies equally to German and the Scandinavian languages.
Indeed, many of the quoted instances are mere German loan
words, facile calques of calques.  Nevertheless, some of them
are Dutch originals, as are the following examples: *letterkunde*
'letters ken,' i.e. literature; *buikloop* 'belly run,' i.e. diarrhea;
*godgeleerdheid* 'God learning,' i.e. theology; *hoogleraar* 'high
teacher,' i.e. professor; *dierentuin* 'animals garden,' i.e. zoo;
*kraakbeen* 'creaking bone,' i.e. cartilage; *vermenigvuldigen* 'to
manifold,' i.e. to multiply.

Let us conclude with a few curiosities.  Some seemingly
simple words are tricky because they have come to express two
dissimilar notions, e.g. *zenuwarts* 'nerve doctor' for both *neurol*-
*ogist* and *psychiatrist*.  Others are sheer folk etymology, like
*scheurbuik* 'ripping belly' for *scurvy* (Lat. *scorbutus)*.  And a
few are—as already pointed out—outright misnomers, such as
*blindedarmontsteking* 'blind gut inflammation,' i.e. appendicitis,
and *eiwit* 'egg white,' i.e. protein.  But the &ldquo;wrongness&rdquo; of a
word has never been a reason to eliminate it from the
language.  Or is there anybody out there who is willing to give
up the word *atom*, just because the thing has subsequently
been found to be fissionable?  That would indeed beat the
Dutch!

## A Short History of Punctuation
*John Bateson, Berkeley, California*

[Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

Without punctuation words run together and writing is
difficult to read it should surprise no one therefore that
the system of stops pauses expressions of uncertainty interrogation
and emphasis and the marking of direct speech which
helps the reader understand writing is integral to almost every
language indeed punctuation is so much a part of written
communication that it is largely taken for granted at one time
though punctuation did not exist

Pinpointing the origins of punctuation is difficult, and
much work remains to be done on the subject.  Part of the
problem is defining what is meant by the term *punctuation*.  In
Hebrew texts of the fifth and sixth centuries and perhaps as
early as the first century B.C., single, double, or triple points
were placed above consonants to indicate preceding or following
vowels.  Hebrew as a spoken language was dying out at this
time, and scholars were worried that correct pronunciation of
the sacred texts would be gradually lost.  To preserve the
traditions of pronunciation and intonation for literary and
religious purposes, the system of points was instituted to
denote vowel sounds, since the Hebrew alphabet was composed
of consonants only.  This system was widely used; but
should it be considered punctuation?  Its function was unrelated
to the present function of punctuation, which is to clarify the
meaning of writing.

Greek inscriptions written before the fourth century B.C.
were continuous; that is, words and sentences were not
separated.  It was Aristotle who first noted the division of topics
into paragraphs, although scholars of today disagree whether
paragraphs were initially marked by dividing strokes between
them or by horizontal lines (called *paragraphos*) under the
beginning of a line in which the topic was concluded.  Fragments
of Plato's *Phaedo*, found at Gurob, have evidence of
paragraphs ending with a double point (:) as well as short
dashes separating different speeches.  Before Plato, Euripides
used a wedge, or sideways &ldquo;V,&rdquo; to mark changes of speakers in
his play *Antiope*.  Again the question arises, however: do
paragraphs and speaker markings constitute punctuation as we
now define the term?  Moreover, far from indicating general
practice, the above were isolated instances and might only
show that ancient Greeks knew such marks had value.  Since
the marks were not commonly or systematically employed, it is
possible to conclude that they were generally thought to be
insignificant.

Most etymologists attribute the invention of punctuation
to Aristophanes of Byzantium, who was the librarian of the
museum at Alexandria in 200 B.C.  Aristophanes devised a
system of points corresponding to our comma, semicolon, and
period to mark short, medium, and long sections of writing (the
sections were divided according to rhetorical theory).  The
points followed the last letter in each section and were placed
at the bottom, middle, or top of the letter, depending on the
length of the section.  (In short sections the point was at the
bottom, in long sections at the top.)  Since all writing at that
time was done only in majuscules, or capital letters, it was easy
to distinguish the three positions.

In addition to points, Aristophanes is generally credited
with creating the virgule, hyphen, apostrophe, and quotation
marks.  The virgule, which sometimes appeared as a slash and
other times as a long comma, was inserted between words
where the meaning might seem ambiguous.  The hyphen served
to denote compound words and was drawn as a curve or line
under the adjacent letters.  The apostrophe varied from a curve
or straight accent to a mere point; besides marking elision it
was placed after foreign names to note their origin and was
used to distinguish two consecutive vowels and double consonants.
Quotation marks in the form of crosses, horizontal
strokes, waved strokes, or wedges (perhaps evolved from
Euripides) were placed in the margin to draw attention to a
quotation.

Aristophanes' system was intended for the textual work of
scholars and was little used by scribes.  It was not until the
Renaissance that modern Greek punctuation became established
and Latin punctuation, which had borrowed from the
Greek system of points but used the points irregularly, without
adhering to their meaning, was incorporated.  Between Aristophanes'
day and the Renaissance, there were two important
developments in the history of punctuation.

First, during the seventh and eighth centuries, handwriting
changed from majuscule to minuscule letters.  This led to
capitalization, or a way of noting which words have more
value.  It also produced ascenders and descenders, which made
writing more difficult to read without punctuation marks.

Second, Charlemagne, King of the Franks and Holy
Roman Emperor from 768 to 814, and Alcuin, director of the
palace school, spirited an educational revival that resulted in
improved spelling and punctuation in biblical and liturgical
texts.  Until the eighth century only a degraded form of
Aristophanes' system was in use, consisting of two marks, the
point and the colon, with the colon's purpose simply to indicate
an intermediate stop.  (Frequently the colon was replaced by an
inverted semicolon or what is now the exclamation point.  This
symbol was not used for true exclamation, however.  It is
widely believed that today's exclamation point comes from the
Latin word *io* 'joy', with the one letter placed above the other.)
By the eleventh century, Aristophanes' system was restored;
moreover, two new punctuation marks—including one called
*punctus interrogativus*, which strongly resembles the question
mark of today—had been added to indicate both a syntactical
break and a change in inflection.  These marks derived from the
musical notation used in Gregorian chants.

In 1453, Constantinople, the centre of Greek culture, was
attacked and conquered by Ottoman Turks.  Many Greek
scholars migrated to Western Europe and there sparked intense
interest in Greek literature and writing.  When Italian printer
and editor Aldus Manutius set up a printing press in Venice in
1490, many of the books that came from the press were
popular editions of Aristotle, Aristophanes, Thucydides, Sophocles,
Herodotus, Demosthenes, and Plutarch, all printed in
Greek.  Greek punctuation was used so that the modern
comma, colon, and period—as well as the apostrophe to
indicate an omitted letter—became, by the time of Aldus's
grandson (also named Aldus), standard for writers and printers.
The Latin question mark of a comma over a point was
maintained but the comma was enlarged to look like the upper
part of our present question mark; the Greek question mark, a
point above a comma, became the semicolon.

Aldus Manutius the younger explained the markings in a
book called *Orthographie ratio* (&ldquo;System of Orthography&rdquo;).
Even more important than the exposition is the fact that in this
work Aldus became the first to state that the purpose of
punctuation was to clarify syntax; therefore punctuation should
make for an orderly and systematic arrangement of phrases,
clauses, and sentences.  Earlier printers, like Gutenberg, Fust,
and Schoeffer in Germany (who used only the point and colon)
and Sweynheym and Pannartz in Italy (who used the point and
colon and added the semicolon for abbreviation), had no clear
conception of the purpose of stops.  As a result, early printers,
like early writers, employed few marks.

By the end of the sixteenth century, the system of
punctuation as described by the younger Aldus was widely
used, albeit inconsistently.  Usage was predominantly based on
elocution; punctuation marks came to identify pauses of one
(comma), two (semicolon), and three (colon) units, which might
be observed by a reader, especially if he was reading aloud to
an audience.  It was an age of drama, poetry, oratory, and song,
and great attention was given to spoken language.  However,
there was a second school of thought at the time that believed
pauses of varying lengths to be arbitrary and saw punctuation
as a means of clarifying the grammar of a text.  As pauses in
speech and breaks in syntax do not always coincide (speech
being more flexible than syntax), the two schools were in
conflict.  By the end of the seventeenth century the second
school had prevailed.

The evolution of modern punctuation in English is related
to the rise of writers like Jonson, Hobbes, Dryden, Defoe, and
Swift, who favored a shorter and less complex sentence
structure than Donne, Hooker, and other writers of &ldquo;earsplitting
eloquence&rdquo; whose work was modeled on Cicero's.
Shorter and simpler sentences meant less punctuation was
necessary.  Less elaborate prose also led to further standardization
of the punctuation system and produced a better understanding
of what punctuation can do and need not do.

Today, the drive toward fewer punctuation marks continues—&ldquo;to
the point of insufficiency&rdquo; according to noted linguist
Jacques Barzun.  Modern readers tend to be distracted by the
heavy punctuation in the prose of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries.  Today, even if the writing were as ponderous
and involved as, say, Sterne's, many of his compounded
punctuation marks would be omitted.

It is unlikely that the move to lighter punctuation will be
reversed, at least in this century.  Newspapers and magazines,
which often seem overly preoccupied with brevity, continue to
proliferate, setting the tone for present writers.  Narrower
columns and smaller type also play a part because they make
punctuation more noticeable.  Numerous commas and semicolons
in a newspaper sentence, for instance, would be more
hindering than helpful.

On the other hand, punctuation probably won't die out as
it did following Aristophanes, even though present writers who
have difficulty mastering punctuation might sometimes prefer
that it did.  The system of pointing (&ldquo;punctuation&rdquo; derives from
the Latin word *punctus* 'point') is too valuable.  It provides
humor when it is used incorrectly, as Shakespeare does deliberately
in *A Midsummer Night's Dream*, but, more important, it
helps writing become more understandable.  Proper punctuation
even makes it possible to make sense of a sentence that
has the word *had* eleven consecutive times:

>Jim, where Bill had had &ldquo;had had,&rdquo; had had
&ldquo;had&rdquo;; &ldquo;had had&rdquo; had had the teacher's approval.
>
>No system that can do that will ever be lost entirely.

## Winners of the VERBATIM $2500 Contest

The judges have judged, and the winners of the VERBATIM
Essay Contest have been notified.  More than 150 entries were
received, and the choices were whittled down to ten.  The
winners are:

>First Prize: $1000  
Lillian Mermin Feinsilver, Easton, Pennsylvania,  
&ldquo;Yiddish for Fun and Profit&rdquo; (which appears
in this issue)
>
>Second Prize: $500  
Harry Cohen, Brussels, Belgium  
&ldquo;Down to Earth in a Low Country&rdquo;
>
>Other Prizes: $250 each  
John Bateson, Berkeley, California  
&ldquo;A Short History of Punctuation&rdquo;
>
>Rebecca Christian, Decorah, Iowa  
&ldquo;The Language of Consuming Passions&rdquo;
>
>Richard L. Faust, New York City  
&ldquo;Language Crimes: The Case of the Contending
Relatives&rdquo;
>
>David L. Miles, Charlevoix, Michigan  
&ldquo;No Sex, Please, We're English&rdquo;

Many very good articles were received, and we were quite
pleased with the number and quality of the submissions.  Our
commiserations and thanks to the losers; our money, thanks,
and congratulations to the winners.

Watch for the announcement of our next competition,
which is as yet unscheduled.

## The Language of Consuming Passions
*Rebecca Christian, Decorah, Iowa*

[Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

In my family, food is treated as reverentially as conversation.
Since we all regard eating and talking as the noblest, if not
the only, worthwhile human endeavors, it is little wonder that
we have developed our own language about food.

There is no place in it for those clich&eacute;d staples of food
writers—the &ldquo;robust&rdquo; stew, the &ldquo;piquant&rdquo; sauce, and the
&ldquo;amusing&rdquo; wine.  Instead, we speak of the &ldquo;prance and a half,&rdquo;
the &ldquo;wad,&rdquo; the &ldquo;pick,&rdquo; and the &ldquo;nice little supper.&rdquo;  To the
uninitiated, our consuming passion can be disconcerting.
Recently, my newly acquired brother-in-law declined to participate
in a communal &ldquo;pick&rdquo; with the astonishing intelligence
that he wasn't hungry.

&ldquo;What has *that* got to do with it?&rdquo;  my father demanded
severely.  The rest of us gaped at the alien in our midst.  Even
after a seven-course meal, we can always find room for what
Winnie the Pooh called &ldquo;a little something.&rdquo;

A &ldquo;pick&rdquo; is akin to &ldquo;a little something&rdquo; and usually
consists of an array of leftovers from a &ldquo;prance.&rdquo;  A &ldquo;prance&rdquo; is
a meal on which the hostess has labored for at least a week.
The term originated with my mother, who for twenty years
prepared elaborate holiday spreads two times annually, at
intervals only a month apart.  As the third decade dawned, she
served notice that she would no longer &ldquo;prance with a turkey&rdquo;
at *both* Thanksgiving and Christmas.  This gave rise to visions
of a giant turkey waltzing through the kitchen with Mama in
his arms.  The term stuck, as did a derivative, a &ldquo;prance and a
half.&rdquo;

The &ldquo;prance and a half&rdquo; applies when a hostess has
worked herself into a genuine lather over a meal.  If she has
spent hours poring over recipes to find the perfect blend of
dishes, if she has ferreted out obscure ingredients in dusty
ethnic markets, if she has strained these ingredients through
cheesecloth, if she has marinated them in olive oil, if she has
pulverized them with a mortar and pestle, then her Herculean
effort will be rewarded with the accolade &ldquo;a prance and a
half.&rdquo;

A &ldquo;pick,&rdquo; then, features a better class of food than mere
leftovers.  Rarely is the food reheated.  During a &ldquo;pick,&rdquo; dining
etiquette is suspended.  A table is not laid, nor is the Almighty's
blessing sought.  &ldquo;Picks&rdquo; are usually eaten standing up at the
refrigerator, without utensils.  One may coo appreciatively,
pigeon fashion.

In contrast to a &ldquo;pick,&rdquo; ordinary leftovers heated up and
passed off as a meal are called a &ldquo;heppy-seffy.&rdquo;  This rather
whimsical expression came our way from a visiting southern
belle.  She who offers up the &ldquo;heppy-seffy&rdquo; is made to feel
somewhat defensive.  Thus she deals the plates around the table
with narrowed eyes and calls out with an air of challenge,
&ldquo;Hep yoresef.&rdquo;  If the diners examine the food too critically—
before even sampling it—she will snap that she's had a busy
day, and wasn't up to &ldquo;horsing&rdquo; with cooking.  &ldquo;Horsing&rdquo; is
short for &ldquo;horsing around&rdquo; and gives a pejorative nuance to the
usually laudable &ldquo;prancing.&rdquo;

A meal that is prepared with the proper respect for
ingredients but that entails far less work than a &ldquo;prance&rdquo; is
called &ldquo;a nice little supper.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Nice little suppers&rdquo; are served
only to guests one knows intimately, and only on weeknights.
Even &ldquo;nice little suppers&rdquo; always feature &ldquo;beast,&rdquo; or at least
&ldquo;bird.&rdquo;  Carnivores all, we take relish in using these designations
instead of the more euphemistic &ldquo;beef&rdquo; and &ldquo;poultry.&rdquo;
Chicken, even when it is young and tender, is often called &ldquo;ol'
hen.&rdquo;  This is a legacy of the family's roots on the farm.  There,
chickens were not sacrificed for food until, tough and elderly,
they had reached the nadir of their egg production.  One uses
convenience mixes and packages sparingly, even for a &ldquo;nice
little supper.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Store boughten&rdquo; food is disdained by my grandfather,
patriarch of the clan.  He is from the south and opines that
eating fruit-flavored gelatin is &ldquo;raht next door to not eatin'.&rdquo;
My mother is very much her father's daughter in that regard.
She once startled a timid visitor by declaring, quite without
provocation, &ldquo;I cannot *stand* canned soup.  In fact, I don't even
like people who *like* canned soup.&rdquo;

If you have made something &ldquo;from scratch&rdquo; but failed,
Aunt Ruthie will reproach, &ldquo;You didn't love it enough.&rdquo;
Likewise, Granny claims love and instinct are the ingredients
that assure perfect alchemy in food.  When begged for the
recipe for her incomparable noodles, she will be no more
specific with measurements than &ldquo;a half-eggshell&rdquo; of water and
a &ldquo;smidgen&rdquo; of salt.  Should you want to know how long to
beat, pound, knead or whip, she replies, with the hooded eyes
of Mona Lisa, &ldquo;'Til it's raht.&rdquo;

Like a &ldquo;pick,&rdquo; a &ldquo;wad&rdquo; is also eaten standing up.  A
&ldquo;wad,&rdquo; however, is a solitary piece of inferior, if not disgusting
food.  The diner falls upon it with little pleasure, merely to
quiet the beast in his belly.  Physically satisfied but psychologically
famished, he will probably succumb to a &ldquo;binge&rdquo; before
long.  &ldquo;Binge,&rdquo; in our tribe, has a narrow meaning.  To &ldquo;binge&rdquo;
is to devote oneself single-mindedly to a large quantity of a
given delicacy—polishing off a pint jar of artichokes, a pound
can of Spanish peanuts, or a soup-bowl full of hot fudge sauce.
&ldquo;Binges&rdquo; are undertaken alone and in stealth, which gives them
a verboten quality that heightens the enjoyment.  An occasional
&ldquo;binge&rdquo; is tolerated—nay, even expected.  Evidence of too
frequent &ldquo;binging,&rdquo; on the other hand, is considered faintly
perverse.  Eating and socializing are so interwoven that the
chronic lone &ldquo;binger&rdquo; gets the same reputation as one who
drinks alone before lunch.

As opposed to a &ldquo;binge,&rdquo; an &ldquo;org,&rdquo; short for &ldquo;orgy,&rdquo; is
undertaken by a group.  &ldquo;Org&rdquo; may also be used as a verb.  An
&ldquo;org&rdquo; is often inspired by batters, doughs, or other elixirs in the
middle stages of production.  Like sharks sniffing blood in their
waters, &ldquo;orgers&rdquo; gather intuitively from all corners of the
house.  Those who gather to lick the beaters from Aunt Ruthie's
brownies or who crouch over the ice-cream freezer to catch the
drippings off the paddle are said to be &ldquo;orging.&rdquo;  One who has
partaken so ambitiously of an &ldquo;org&rdquo; that he must lie belly up,
like a dead goldfish, is sympathetically diagnosed as &ldquo;orged
out.&rdquo;  Mama will urge him to &ldquo;take&rdquo; a little Coca-Cola to settle
his stomach.

At night, however, restless spirits who prowl the pantry
are &ldquo;grazing.&rdquo;  When a term fits, we borrow it.  I first read about
&ldquo;grazing&rdquo; in a magazine article lamenting the decline in public
morality.  &ldquo;Grazing,&rdquo; the outraged author explained, is what
supermarket managers call the behavior of certain mothers
with small children who frequent their stores.  As the mother
herds the children along, she stops long enough to open a box
of cereal or crackers, and sneak the kids a quick &ldquo;wad.&rdquo;  Then
she replaces the box on the shelf before moving on.

&ldquo;Grazing,&rdquo; to us, has a depraved connotation.  A &ldquo;grazer&rdquo;
is usually wild-eyed and clad in rumpled pajamas as he forages
from cabinet to cabinet, perhaps swiping his forefinger through
the peanut butter jar and then the honey jar before dipping it
into a bag of coconut or miniature marshmallows.  Likely as
not, a fellow insomniac plagued by nocturnal demons of his
own will hear the rustling and stumble down to join him.  If
there is nothing to titillate the palate in the house, the
&ldquo;grazers&rdquo; may adjourn to an open-all-night deli to &ldquo;get us
something good to eat.&rdquo;  Sometimes this phrase is abbreviated
to &ldquo;get us something,&rdquo; the quest for nourishment being
implied.  My father's approach is more pugnacious, when he
declares his intention to &ldquo;get ahold of something good,&rdquo; as if
he must first wrestle it to the ground.

Other verbs we find useful are &ldquo;oinking,&rdquo; &ldquo;hunkering
down,&rdquo; and &ldquo;making bilge.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Oinking&rdquo; is not to be confused
with stuffing down a &ldquo;wad.&rdquo;  One &ldquo;oinks&rdquo; such food as potato
chips or jelly beans, nutritionally worthless, but pleasing to
some individuals nonetheless.  An &ldquo;oinker&rdquo; is not necessarily
fat.  My sister is the quintessential &ldquo;oinker&rdquo; but keeps her
weight to a wraithlike 103 pounds.  This she accomplishes
through a regimen of strenuous exercise and a diet comprised
chiefly of Chablis and cheese-flavored tortilla chips.

To &ldquo;hunker down&rdquo; is to eat wholesome, plebeian food—
&ldquo;vittles&rdquo;—in awesomely large portions.  But only children young
enough to require a high-chair &ldquo;make bilge.&rdquo;  &ldquo;Bilge&rdquo; is the
viscous substance that results when a tot mixes foods like peas,
mashed potatoes, ground meat, and pudding with his hands.
The high-chairs of &ldquo;bilgers&rdquo; can be cleaned only in the shower.

Infants not yet able to manage solid foods are described as
&ldquo;blissing out&rdquo; at the climax of a vigorous workout at breast or
bottle.  A &ldquo;blissed out&rdquo; baby's lips part involuntarily, and his
eyeballs roll ecstatically back in his head under flickering
eyelids.  I have only once seen an adult in that condition—my
friend Johnny, on the eve of his nuptials to an exquisite
ballerina.  As I recall, they had pretty good &ldquo;goobers&rdquo; at that
wedding reception.  &ldquo;Goober&rdquo; is, of course, a colloquialisim for
peanut.  We have expanded &ldquo;goober&rdquo; to mean any small food,
such as a cocktail sausage or raw vegetable, which is easily
managed by the hands and serves as an appetizer or hors
d'oeuvre.

Granny is probably right when she contends that there is
an essential connection between food and love.  It is perhaps
Freudian that the terms we use for appetite are so closely
related to sexual desire.  In fact, my lusty husband has pronounced
himself &ldquo;horny&rdquo; for imported Godiva chocolates and a
cup of espresso—very hot, very black.  I myself was once
inspired to quote Ezra Pound's love poetry as I chose an
unusually beguiling lobster from a restaurant tank.  &ldquo;Your eyes,&rdquo;
I whispered to my squirming selection, &ldquo;are my Sargasso Sea.&rdquo;

Hunger is always accorded the utmost respect in my clan,
on a par with financial insolvency and unrequited love.  During
a trip to Spain, I discovered how satisfying it was to declare
&ldquo;Tengo hambre.&rdquo;  My family was enchanted with the translation,
&ldquo;I have a hunger.&rdquo; &ldquo;I am hungry,&rdquo; we decided, sounds
feeble by comparison.  Now the youthful contingent of the
family has taken up the urgent cry, &ldquo;Hiyamunger!  We got
hunger!&rdquo;  This chant is the signal for a pizza to be ordered for
delivery, which reminds me that writing inevitably develops a
ferocious appetite.  What remains of last night's &ldquo;beast&rdquo; brisket
dinner beckons me.  I must repair to the refrigerator for a
&ldquo;pick.&rdquo;

## No Sex, Please.  We're English
*David L. Miles, Charlevoix, Michigan*

[Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

In Italy recently, a friend who spoke a self-taught yet
passable basic English chided me for being *un neutro*, which
amused but puzzled me until he explained, &ldquo;You have no sex in
your words.&rdquo;  To an Italian, that is very important.  He was, of
course, correct in that English gave up, centuries ago, in one of
the most sensible moves the language ever made, gender
differentiation in all but a few of its nouns.  He felt the
language lacked an essential component, a &ldquo;spiritual&rdquo; side
even, having had the notion ingrained in his every mode of
thought since he heard his first word.  And he never questioned
the validity of this at-times confusing classification system.  It
just simply was, is, and probably always will be.  The peculiarities
of association it fostered never concerned him for one
moment.  Most of the European languages likewise have
retained this quirk, an irksome and seemingly unnecessary bane
to English speakers trying to fathom it and all the frustrating
grammatical acrobatics it entails.  Multifarious cultural conceptions
of sexuality—or lack of it—and gender assigned to objects
with or without animistic qualities, people in various stages of
growth or position, and abstract ideas formulated since the
preliterate dawn have baffled investigators since linguistic
science began.  But linguists cannot decide whether natural and
obvious sexual differences influenced grammatical gender or if
grammar in flux over centuries assigned arbitrary and sometimes
illogical labels as ideas changed.  Masculine assignations
are thought to have come from a perception of something as
active, mature, concrete, large; feminine as passive, weak,
quiet, small; neuter as inactive, general, indeterminate, impersonal.
Hundreds of nouns entered a gender categorization less
from their intrinsic active or passive, large or small, &ldquo;male&rdquo; or
&ldquo;female&rdquo; qualities than the way they came to be pronounced,
modified, and spelled, their final letters and suffixes the agents
that placed them in their destined slots.  Pursuers of knowledge
in the Romance languages (here only French and Italian will be
used as examples) usually find a satisfactory proportion of
agreement among the two-gender attributions bestowed by a
common Latin ancestry.  But let them plunge afterward into
three-gender German and their previous grudgingly accepted
notions turn topsy-turvy, and they surface crying for help.

To begin at the beginning, the words for &ldquo;gender&rdquo; and
&ldquo;sex&rdquo; themselves receive a more macho, Mediterranean emphasis
in masculine-oriented France and Italy, whereas in cooler,
maybe less assured Germany both words are conveniently
neuter to avoid argument.  But why a feminine &ldquo;sexuality&rdquo; in
all three tongues?  Perhaps in the deep primordial stirrings of
the unpredictable id a man should be attracted by it but dare
not display it.  German diminutives usually contract to a sexless
base.  Maidens are feminine by definition, including a German
*Jungfrau*, virginity intact; but let her be a *M&auml;dchen* or *Fr&auml;ulein*
not yet capable of reproducing herself and she finds her
femininity neuterized.  Likewise is a *M&auml;nnlein*—a 'little man'—
not even that.  Twain put his finger on it: &ldquo;In German, a young
lady has no sex, while a turnip has.  Think what overwrought
reverence that shows for the turnip, and what callous disrespect
for the girl.&rdquo;  Then she grows into a feminine *Frau*.
Hebrew absorbed German to form idiosyncracies of Yiddish,
but at least Yiddish abandoned Teutonic indifference in the
warm Semitic sensibility that made *mejdt* (from *M&auml;dchen*)
feminine where it belonged.  A German capacity for motherhood
restores her femininity, but her female totality of *Frau*
and *Mutter* is lopsided.  The neuter &ldquo;false friend&rdquo; *das Weib*,
coguate with *wife*, has led more than one poor soul into
linguistic trouble.  (Some German-English dictionaries even add
to the problem.)  The current connotation is closer to 'broad'
than 'bride.'

Odder yet in Romance languages and in German is the
position of husbands or lovers if they sire a child—&ldquo;paternity&rdquo;
is feminine in all three tongues.  To top that off, so are &ldquo;virility&rdquo;
and &ldquo;manhood.&rdquo;  German does have a second word for &ldquo;manhood,&rdquo;
but it takes the side of neuterdom.  Taking the distaff
side in German are, of all things: masculinity, maleness,
manliness, manly vigor, bravery, courage, manly dignity, man
and male collectively (*Mannsbild*), and a *Mannsperson*.  But
even women who have overstepped the bounds of socially
acceptable femininity have been unsexed by the language.  *Das
Mannweib*, an amazon or virago, is a neutered female.  Grammatical
*Maskulinum* and *Femininum* are both neuter.  The idea
of feminism is also neuter.  Even Vienna, that ineffably feminine
city, has been desexed into neuter *das Wien*.  Strange
people, those Germans.  But wait.  Across the border, French
masculinity is also feminine, while feminism is masculine
(likewise for both in Italy), and grammatical *feminin* is masculine.
To top this off, that ineluctably female part of the female
anatomy, the vagina, is masculine.  Strange people, those
French.  As if that were not enough, women in all three
countries carry their children in masculine uteri.  Androgynous
German women can have an alternate female womb.  And all
these children are conceived via eggs produced from masculine
ovaries (but in Italy an ovary can be bisexual).  And every
woman in Italy, France, and Germany wears a masculine
brassiere.  Strange people, all.

Italians sail feminine boats on a masculine sea full of
feminine water, Frenchmen masculine boats on a feminine one
(Where does the root of the difference lie, and why?), while
Germans in a neuter *Boot* can't make up their minds about
neuter water in large quantities.  Their thoughts larger than a
puddle range from manly &ldquo;lake&rdquo; *(der See)* to womanly &ldquo;sea&rdquo;
*(die See)* on the same word, masculine *der Ozean*, to neuter *das
Meer*, an all-encompassing hermaphroditic-neutero overview.
The French fly male airplanes through male air, Italians pierce
a male craft through female air, the indifferent Germans neuter
through unfulfilled female.  It begins to sound like a hetero-homo-bi
mixed-doubles invitational.

At table, on any masculine day of a feminine week in all
three tongues except for the Italian Sunday yanked into
femininity from such crass company, Romance cuts with
masculine knives, German with neuter (food for thought,
there); all three find female characteristics in a fork's prongs
(strangely, Spain sees them as phallic); French spoons are
rounded female forms, male for some reason in Italian and
German.  Masculine butter tops the same bread in France and
Italy; German feminine butter finds her efforts wasted on
neuter bread.

Twain again: &ldquo;...In Germany a man may *think* he is a
man, but when he comes to look into the matter closely, he is
bound to have his doubts; he finds that in sober truth he is a
most ridiculous mixture; and if he ends by trying to comfort
himself with the thought that he can at least depend on a third
of this mess as being manly and masculine, the humiliating
second thought will quickly remind him that in this respect he
is no better off than any woman or cow in the land.&rdquo;  His
mouth and feet are male, his nose and hands female, eyes and
ears neuter.  Romance finds feet and hands to be likewise, but
roving Romance eyes are all masculine.  Male hearts beat inside
male breasts in Italy and inside female French breasts, but
neuter hearts throb inside female breasts to the north.

These people of many parts all inhabit a feminine earth,
yet the French and Italians are close to masculine lands, the
Germans again undecided, even in *das Vaterland* and *das
Mutterland*, an atavistic idea so strongly feminine in Romance.
For this idea, Romance fights female battles for feminine glory
in ladylike wars, but Germany wages female battles for male
glory in masculine wars.  In peacetime, they all find protection
under the watchful eyes of matronly police forces manned by
virile cops.

Germany is unique in Europe in finding femininity in the
source of life, our sun, then in a recalcitrant, obtuse flurry of
confusion calls sunshine masculine and sunlight neuter.  Not far
behind, but on the other side of the looking glass, is Romance—
the great masculine ball of fire gives off a feminine shine.  To
further the muddle, Romance lovers spoon beneath a feminine
moon while less ardent German lovers—again unique among
Europeans—see only the man in it.  And to bring the ridiculousness
full circle, Romance moonshine is male, but Germany has
to have its night light and shine both confusing ways as before.

In the arts, what must a female singer feel like at the
realization that the operatic status she enjoys is a male one?
Not the parts written for her (excepting those few trouser
roles), but the range in which she sings them—high sopranos
down through contraltos are all masculine.  In France, a
countertenor might feel all the more acutely the implied slur
that his vocal range has a certain prissiness to it, for *une haute-contre*
here is feminine.  So are Boris Godunov and Don
Giovanni, for that matter, for in France *une basse* is female,
*profondo* or not.  Black and white pianos are neuter, curved
violins womanly in Germany, but masculine in the others;
flutes are manly in Italy but feminine in the others.

Botticelli could never have painted *La Primavera*, so full
of gorgeous females in divers guises, in the exact manner he
did had he been born a Frenchman or German, both of whose
springtimes are of the male persuasion.  At least each language
agrees that winter is masculinely harsh, also autumn, time of
harvest but not of planting.  Summer is too, except in Italy,
where it can be torrid as a temptress.

None of the three can agree on much of the natural world,
either.  Male rain patters on a neuter German field; female rain
soaks male fields in France and Italy.  (Frenchmen protect
themselves from the elements with male coats, Italians with
female ones, while the Germans wear all three—*der Mantel, die
Jacke, das Jackette*.)  France has two sexes of lightning and
thunder, Italy only two of lightning.  Male waterfalls cascade in
Germany, female in the two others; nothing cascades in a
female German desert or masculine French and Italian ones.
German mountains are male, not so in the other two; Italian
plains are male, not in the other two.  The feminine forests of
Italy and France can't compare to their masculine woods, vice-versa
in Germany; at least the upright trees in all of them are
male.  Even the stars in the all-masculine sky are different when
seen from femininely oriented Romance eyes and masculinely
based German ones.

And so it goes through those tongues of the world which
still insist the universe and all it contains can be viewed
according to an arcane system of categories and assigned their
places in the great cosmic scheme of things.  Even so, they can
come to virtually no agreement by what standards this should
be done, nor do they ever consult one another before doing so.
All languages give birth from the constant fecundity of new
ideas and things, but those with gender retention not only have
to decide what to name each new child but what sex to
proclaim it (or, in Germany, whether it even deserves a sex),
and who, really, has been granted or assumed the authority to
assign one?  Criteria differ not only over linguistic and national
borders but also within them, serving only to compound the
confusion.  So English, both American and British, with &ldquo;no
sex&rdquo; in its words, thank you, blithely goes its merry way,
keeping itself relatively simple in its verb structure and its
gender repudiation, not presuming to impose its views or
wishes upon those who have difficulty enough getting a grip on
this world.  It realized wisely a long time ago that if nobody can
agree on how the elements of creation might be winnowed and
pigeon-holed, maybe they ought not be winnowed at all.  Less
really is more.  Small wonder English is fast becoming the
standard communicator of the world.

## Language Crimes: The Case of the Contending Relatives
*Richard L. Faust, New York, New York*

[Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

The knock on my office door was as gentle as a heartbeat.  I
thought at first that I had imagined it, but when I looked
at the glass-paneled door with my name on it—AHA (readable
from either side)—I saw the outline of what looked like a little
girl, and I wondered why she would be coming to the office of
a PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR.

&ldquo;Come in,&rdquo; I said, and a porcelain doll entered my office.
She was clearly oriental, probably Chinese (like my ancestors),
petite, delicate, beautiful as a plum blossom, and not a girl at
all, but a young lady.

&ldquo;Are you Mr. Aha?&rdquo;  she asked, with temple bells in her
voice.

&ldquo;I am.  Please sit down.  Why have you come?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Someone is trying to kill my great-grandfather.  Perhaps
you have heard of him—Sum Won Hoo.  I am Wanda Hoo.&rdquo;

The Hoo family was famous in our area; it had produced
many politicians, nominative types who were always running
for one office or another, but most of them died tragically, and
quite young.  Some said there was a curse on the family.  In
fact, I recalled that only old Sum Won and Wanda were left.
The old man was about ninety, fabled to have made his fortune
in the China trade before World War I.

I nodded and asked, &ldquo;Why don't you inform the police?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It is a rather delicate matter because we think we know
who it is.&rdquo;  She paused, then added, &ldquo;His cousin, Hoom.&rdquo;

There were old rumors of tension between the Hoo and
Hoom clans, of jealousy leading to Tong wars and disappearances,
even of attempted assassinations.  No one knew exactly
why.  The police could find out nothing.

My honorable ancestors often said, &ldquo;Ask the obvious
questions first.&rdquo;  I went to the heart of the matter and asked,
ungrammatically, &ldquo;Why would Hoom want to kill Hoo?&rdquo;

She hesitated.  &ldquo;It's because of the tontine.&rdquo;

The answer stunned me.  &ldquo;What's a tontine?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It's a kind of business arrangement, an insurance plan,
whereby a group of participants buy a shared annuity, and as
each participant dies, it is agreed that the final survivor will
receive the whole amount.  It was very common among maritime
families, a form of gambling.  We orientals love to
gamble.&rdquo;  She lowered her head.  &ldquo;Now I think the tontine was
a big mistake.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Your great-grandfather is a member of a tontine?&rdquo;

&ldquo;Yes.  He and his two cousins and a friend entered into an
agreement seventy years ago.  The friend, who was older, was
named Whence, and he died quickly, with no family to mourn
him.  The one cousin, Hoom, I have mentioned.  But the fate of
the other cousin, Hooz, is a sad tale.  At the turn of the century,
Yu No Hooz was a strong young man, able to pilot a junk, fight
off pirates, and navigate across the Pacific.  The month before
he was to marry, he began to lose his mind.  Some say a villain
put powdered dragon bone into his wine.  At any rate, Hooz
became extremely possessive; he thought he owned everything.
He began to relate in a possessive way to animals and things,
not just to people.  Hoo and Hoom were shocked that their
cousin could lose his human orientation.  Hooz's bride-to-be
drank poison rather than enter into a humiliating marriage.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Where is Hooz now?  Is he dead?&rdquo;

&ldquo;No.  He was committed to a mental institution in Denver
sixty years ago, and there he languishes.  The Jespersen Foundation,
which manages the tontine, has declared him legally
unable to inherit.&rdquo;

I thought for a moment.  With Whence and Hooz out of
the running, only Hoo and Hoom were left.  No wonder Wanda
thought Hoom was trying to kill Hoo.

&ldquo;What was the nature of the attempt?&rdquo;

She pulled an envelope out of her purse and handed it to
me.  The address was clearly printed: Sum Won Hoo, at the
address of his famous mansion.  Inside was a single sheet of
white paper with a large &ldquo;W&rdquo; printed on it in red.

&ldquo;He received this four days ago and immediately collapsed.
We have him in the emergency ward of the Pronoun
Resuscitation Institute; his situation is critical.  I still have hope
because he has been in and out of comas many times before
this.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Did anyone talk to Hoom about this?&rdquo;

&ldquo;No.  Hoom disappeared three days ago,&rdquo; she informed
me, &ldquo;as soon as word of the attack was made known.&rdquo;

I decided to take on the case.  Wanda added that she was
Hoo's sole heir, all the others having died or been mysteriously
killed off, and she felt herself in some danger now.

&ldquo;Do you know who Hoom's heirs are?&rdquo;

She paused.  &ldquo;He has only one, just like our clan.  His
family too has suffered many tragedies.  His great-grandson,
Will Hoom, is his only living descendant.&rdquo; She added, &ldquo;Will
and I went to the same college.  We both wish the tontine
madness would end.&rdquo;  With lowered eyes, she whispered,
&ldquo;Perhaps one day we can end the terrible separation that is
causing the competition.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Does the W mean anything special to you?&rdquo;

&ldquo;No,&rdquo; she replied.  &ldquo;Unless, of course, it refers to Will, or
to my name, Wanda.&rdquo;

After she left, I went directly to consult with my friend
Billy Emerald, lex guard at the Oakland dictionary depot.  He
had not heard of the tontine, but he knew Hoo and Hoom had
been fighting for many years.

&ldquo;Aha,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;we guards have been watching the battle.
Hoom is definitely weaker and seems to be losing.  His only
strength is in his objectivity; he prides himself on being able to
avoid subjectivity in all things.  Hoo, on the other hand, accuses
him of often being distant from his antecedents, of being a
humble follower, even of associating with preppies and following
them.  It was a scandal twenty years ago.  To counter that
story, Hoom has endowed a famous prep school and takes great
interest in education.  Hoo is totally media-oriented, attaching
himself closely to celebrities and famous subjects.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Where is Hoom's prep school?&rdquo;

&ldquo;It's called the Spenser Academy and is up in Riverstone.&rdquo;

&ldquo;Thanks, Billy.&rdquo;  The trip to Riverstone was short.  If Hoom
could be found anywhere today, it would be at a fashionable
prep school.

The headmaster at Spenser, Mr. Parsing, was a stickler for
rules, but he arranged for me to talk with some of the senior
students.  I walked over to their dormitory, a clean well-lighted
place, and knocked on the door of a suite for four.  Their names
were on plates just under the room number: B. Low, A. Cross,
B. Hind, and N. Too.  I was told that they were exemplary
preps.  All four were studying in the living area.

&ldquo;Has anything unusual happened in the last three days?&rdquo;  I
asked.

Silence.  Then Low said, &ldquo;Nothing.  We're studying for midterms
now.&rdquo;

&ldquo;What about strangers on campus or strange phone calls
or deliveries?  Any differences in routines?&rdquo;

Nothing.

My oriental ancestors always said, &ldquo;Ask the river and the
ocean may respond.&rdquo;  I looked at their buttoned-down shirts
and took a wild guess.  &ldquo;Who does your laundry?&rdquo;

They all laughed and said, &ldquo;Shur Ting, on Main Street.
Maybe you'd like to see the fortunes we found in our pockets
today?&rdquo;

They each pulled out small strips of paper like fortune-cookie
sayings and presented them to me.  They all had the
same message: Hold Onto Old Meanings.

&ldquo;Capital,&rdquo; I said to myself, &ldquo;a capital idea.&rdquo;

I thanked them and hurried down to Main Street.  The
case was nearing the end.

There in the steaming back room of Shur Ting's Laundry,
I found Hoom, busy putting shirts in packages and tucking
adages into the pockets.  What better place for a rich old
Chinese gentleman to hide than in a Chinese laundry?  &ldquo;You
must come with me,&rdquo; I said, and he came quietly.

The scene in the hospital room was like a scroll painting—
the dying patriarch in bed, surrounded by the two young heirs
and his equally elderly cousin.  On the edge of the group was
the private investigator.  But I was also the artist who had
arranged the tableau.

&ldquo;Honorable Hoo,&rdquo; I began, talking to the silent figure in
the bed.  &ldquo;Let me assure you that Hoom did not mail you the
almost fatal letter.  At first I thought it was a W but I soon
realized my mistake when I recalled that my ancestors often
said, 'The view from the South is not the same as the view
from the North.'  The W was actually an M, and that is the
letter you saw.  Of course, the M has been the indicator of the
major difference between you and your cousin all these years.
When you saw the M, you assumed it was from Hoom, who
often tried to irritate you.  High blood pressure did the rest.  But
if you had had time to examine the postmark on the letter, you
would have discovered it was sent from Colorado.  It was Hooz
who mailed it, hoping to create dissension.&rdquo;

Hoo blinked his eyes and smiled like a Buddha.  Hoom
shuffled, ill at ease in Hoo's presence.

Wanda spoke.  Just as she had started the case, she
presented a solution to the whole affair.  &ldquo;Dear great-grand-father,&rdquo;
she began, &ldquo;may I ask your permission to marry the
man I love, Will Hoom, the great-grandson of Hoom?  He will
ask you officially if you agree.  We love each other.  Why must
the tontine continue?  We can bring the families together after
all these years.  Please give us your blessing.&rdquo;

The rest is history.  In my office the next day I read the
announcement on the society page—&ldquo;W.  Hoo to marry W.
Hoom.&rdquo;  From now on, I thought, the relationship would be
carefully shared, each one relating in his or her special way.
The fight was over.

The wedding a few weeks later was lovely; Wanda looked
wonderful.  I was listed in the guest book as &ldquo;friend of
relatives.&rdquo;

My palindromic name has made me sensitive to spelling
oddities, and, as I was writing up the case in my office, I
pondered the significance of certain letters, especially first and
last letters.  And I thanked my oriental ancestors for giving me
an A.


#### EPISTOLA {Graeme Hirst}

Mr. Koplow's remarks [IX, 4] on *analog* and *digital* are a
little misleading.  An analog computer is one that represents
quantities by physical analogs—for example, the number 5
could be represented by 5 volts or 5 degrees of rotation—and
performs computations upon them by physical manipulation of
the analogs.  A nonlogarithmic slide rule is a simple analog
computer that represents quantities by length, and can add two
numbers by adding the two lengths to get the analog of their
product.  (Normal slide rules, of course, represent logarithms of
quantities and multiply the quantities by adding the lengths,
but the principle is the same.)  On the other hand, a digital
computer represents a quantity as a set of symbols (in effect,
digits) and performs computations upon them by means of
symbol-manipulating procedures.  The physical realization of
the symbols, electronically or otherwise, is irrelevant to the
procedures themselves.

Likewise, an analog watch represents time with an analog,
namely the rotation of its hands; a digital watch uses symbols.
As digital stereo systems start to become common, we may see
nondigital records referred to, quite correctly, as *analog
records*: the groove of the record is an analog of the sound
wave that is recorded.

A small note about Mr. Urdang's article is the same issue
on word processing and computers: Stupidity and illiteracy are
as rife in the computer world as anywhere else.  Be assured that
many computer professionals are concerned about raising
standards.  At Brown, courses in writing are required of all
students majoring in Computer Science; it's not a perfect
solution, but it helps.

*[Graeme Hirst, Brown University]*

## Baragouins and Penguins: The Celtic Connection
*P. Emlyn Stephenson, Swansea, Wales*

[Prize Winner, VERBATIM Essay Contest, 1983]

&ldquo;British English&rdquo; is something of a misnomer.  For the
language of Boudicca and Arthur—the language of the
Ancient Britons—has contributed surprisingly little to the word-stock
of English.  The same is true of three descendants of
Brythonic Celtic, namely Welsh, Cornish, and Breton.  Yet small
though it is, the Brythonic legacy is none the less real for that.
What follows is an exercise in etymological rehabilitation.
Goidelic Celtic has been omitted from the writer's purview
since the Irish and Scots contribution has received a relatively
full lexicological airing.  Budding Gael-diggers are, however,
referred to the following: *banshee, bog, brat, brogue, caber,
carrageen, clan, claymore, dudeen, gab, galore, gob, gombeen,
leprechaun, piggin* (whose marriage to the Norse *wassail* is
consummated in the pub name, &ldquo;Pig and Whistle&rdquo;), *plaid,
ptarmigan, shamrock, shillelagh, slogan, slug* 'a mouthful,'
*smithereens, spalpeen, sporran, tanist, tory, twig* 'to suddenly
understand,' and, of course, *whiskey*.  Those who detect a
phoney ring to any of these should note that the Irish word for
ring—*f&aacute;inne*—may well be the etymon of *phoney*, and is
unreservedly hailed by Thomas Pyles as &ldquo;the noblest contribution
of Irish to American English.&rdquo;  The derivation of *humbug*
from the Irish *uim boig* 'false coin' would provide a perfect
partner, but it is, alas, groundless.  With the death of Ned
Maddrell in 1974, Manx Gaelic expired as a &ldquo;mother tongue,&rdquo;
leaving *carvel* (a native form of carol) as its only English
epitaph.

Direct Old English borrowings from Brythonic are of the
ground, but extremely thin on it: *down, tor, coomb, pool, brock*
'badger,' and, with Anglo-Latin mediation, *peat*.  Strangely
enough, Gaulish, which became extinct shortly after the Roman
conquest, has been a far more prolific source of Celtic loanwords.
About 180 Gaulish words, largely agricultural, were
absorbed into Latin and thence into Old French or its dialects.
By the sixteenth century, a number of these had duly found
their way into English: inter alia, *gravel, car, chariot, lawn,
lees, league, crease, marl, skein, sock* 'ploughshare,' *socket,
truant, vassal, valet, javelin, arpent, gob* 'lump, mouthful,'
*gobbet*, and possibly, via the latter duo, *job*.  The hypothesis,
subscribed to by Littr&eacute;, that *Druid* originates in the Gaulish
*derw* 'oak' (a druidic deity, sacrament, or both) is certainly
plausible and finds some support in the Welsh spelling
*derwydd*.

By the end of the sixth century, Brythonic had begun to
separate out into its three constituent parts.  *Ass* may have
entered Old English via the Old Welsh *assen*.  However, the
Old Irish *asan* is also a contender for this honor and, in any
case, we are dealing here with an ultimately Indo-European
root.  The earliest genuinely Welsh borrowing, which appears in
the anonymous *Cursor Mundi* (ca. 1300), is *crag*, from the Old
Welsh *creik* 'rock.'  Later in the fourteenth century, *bodkin,
maggot, flannel, bug*, and *lubber* all make their debuts.  *Bodkin*
is probably connected with either the Welsh *bidog* 'dagger' or
the synonymous Gaelic *biodag*.  Though it is now customary to
endow *maggot* with a Teutonic provenance, it has also been
etymologized as the Middle Welsh *maceiad*, akin to *magiaid*
'worms' and *magu* 'to breed.'  *Flannel* (originally *flanyn* or
*flannen*) almost certainly derives from the Welsh *(g) wlanen*,
ultimately *gwl&acirc;n* 'wool.'  *Bug* has been traced to the Middle
Welsh *bwg* 'ghost,' and the eighteenth-century *bugaboo* finds its
parallel in the Welsh *bwcibo* 'hobgoblin, scarecrow' and the
Cornish *buccaboo*.  Similarly, the Welsh *bygel* may have provided
the English *bogle*, which, in turn, became the nineteenth-century
*bogey*.  As with maggot, *lubber* is usually ascribed a
Teutonic origin, but Skeat, for one, prefers the Middle Welsh
*llob* 'a dolt' or *llabbi* 'a stripling.'  Unfortunately, Skeat's
Celtophilia occasionally overreaches itself.  His proposal of *llob*
as the source of the verb *to lob*; his assimilation of *dudgeon* to
the Welsh *dygen* 'malice'—though at the time of *dudgeon's*
debut, *dygen* meant 'sadness'; and his attempt to base *dandruff*
on *ton drwg* 'bad surface' are all very interesting but ... as the
*Oxford English Dictionary* tactfully puts it, &ldquo;historically and
phonetically baseless.&rdquo;  On firmer ground is *coracle*, which
occurs in Salesbury's *Dictionary in English and Welsh* (1547)
as the English equivalent of *kwrwgyl* 'round boat,' and the
archaeological term *cromlech*, which is used in Owen's *Pembrokeshire*
(1603), from the Welsh *crom* 'circular' *llech* 'slate.'
*Gambrel* 'a stick for supporting carcasses' also appears at about
this time.  Probably a loan from Old French, ultimately rooted
in the Celtic *cam* 'crooked,' it has also been traced directly to
the Welsh *cambren* 'swingle-tree.'  Interestingly, *cam* has, in
addition, been posited as the source of the dialectal *game* or
*gammy*, meaning 'lame.'  Though this is rejected by the *OED*
on semantic grounds, it should be noted that *cam* is a common
Celtic sobriquet for the lame.

In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Welsh
contribution turns culinary.  *Flummery* 'a cold oatmeal pudding'
is nothing more than a transliteration of *llymru*, from the
adjective root *llymrig* 'harsh, raw.'  The initial &ldquo;f&rdquo; is symptomatic
of the English phonetic perplexity with the sibilant
Welsh &ldquo;ll.&rdquo;  Shakespeare does, of course, follow the same
escape-route by converting *Llywelyn* into *Fluellen*.  *Pikelet* 'a
type of crumpet' originates purely and simply in the Welsh
*bara* 'bread' *pyglyd* 'pitchy.'  It is interesting that the homonymous
*pike* may well be an Anglo-Saxon borrowing from Insular
Celtic, as evidenced by the Welsh *pig* 'point' and the Gaelic *pig*
'pike.'

*Eisteddfod*, which is first used in an English work in 1822,
is, of course, a direct loan from Welsh, meaning literally 'a
sitting or meeting.'  From 1822 we traverse more than a century
into the world of the royal kennels.  *Corgi*, from *cor* 'dwarf' *ci*
'dog,' is first attested in Welsh in 1342, but its entr&eacute;e into
English had to await royal patronage of the breed in the 1920s.
Before we leave Wales we should, perhaps, give a mention to
*lad* and *lass*.  These thirteenth century English entrants have
been the source of much speculation and controversy.  For *lad*,
one school of thought favors the Irish *lath* 'youth, champion.'
*Lass* is then posited as a contraction of *laddess*, itself formed
from *lad*.  Henry Bradley, on the other hand, suggests that the
Middle English *ladde* coincides with the adjectival form of the
past participle of the verb 'to lead,' the original meaning thus
being 'one led in the train of a lord.'  The relation of *lass* to *lad*
he sees as merely coincidental, *lass* probably deriving independently
from the Scandinavian *laskw* 'unmarried.'  However,
Skeat and his sympathizers understandably plump for the
Middle Welsh *llawd* 'lad' and *llodes* 'lass.'  Whatever the
validity of their argument, it is interesting that a Welsh cognate
of *llodes—herlodes*—is given by Dr. Johnson as the most
probable origin of that other thirteenth-century entrant, *harlot*.
Modern etymology does, of course, postulate a link, through
Old French, with the Old German *hari* 'army': thus the
signification of &ldquo;camp follower.&rdquo;  Alas, the same Teutonic root
almost certainly accounts for *harbor*, thereby putting paid to
George Borrow's attempt to folk-etymologize that word to the
Welsh/Gaelic *aber* 'riverine estuary or confluence.'

Perhaps Borrow could have still spoken littorally—and
more convincingly—about *quay*.  For although mediated by Old
French, it is either of Gaulish origin, or directly from the Old
Breton *kai* 'fence, enclosure.'  Breton, the descendant of the
language spoken by the sixth-century refugees from Wales and
Cornwall, understandably boasts but a small legacy in English,
and all words have been mediated by French.  *Mien* possibly
derives from the Old Breton *min* 'beak, snout' though, like
*quay*, there may be an older Gaulish provenance.  Again, *tan*
may have a Gaulish root, or derive from the Breton *tann* 'an
oak.'  Moving into clearer etymological waters, we encounter
the paradox that whilst Frenchmen have consistently dismissed
Breton as a worthless *baragouin* 'patois, gibberish,' the origin
of that pejorative is undoubtedly Breton.  The word has been
deployed in French since the late fourteenth century, though
its English importation had to wait till 1613.  Littr&eacute; gives two
etymologies.  Firstly, the exclamation of Breton soldiers on first
encountering *bara gwenn* 'white bread.'  Secondly, and more
cogently, the customary supplication of Breton pilgrims to
French innkeepers: *bara gwin* 'bread, wine.'  The persistence
of the surname *Painvin* in southeast Brittany provides corroboration
for the latter, though the fact that a whole family in
Roscoff is cognominated *Baragwenn* lends some credence to
the former.  The nineteenth century witnessed the English
importation of three more Breton words.  Though *bijou* had, by
the time of its English appropriation, developed the extended
meaning of 'trinket,' it originates in the Breton *bizou* 'fingerring,'
from *biz* 'finger.'  We conclude with two archaeological
terms.  *Menhir* appears in 1840, from the Breton *men* 'stone' *hir*
'long.'  *Dolmen* occurs in Jephson's *Brittany* in 1859.  Though
almost certainly from the Breton *taol* 'table' *men* 'stone,' some
authorities prefer the Cornish *tolm&ecirc;n* 'hole of stone.'

It is somewhat poignant that if *tolm&ecirc;n* were, indeed, the
genuine etymon, its Anglicization would have postdated the
expiry of the Cornish tongue by over eighty years.  In 1777,
Dolly Pentreath—the last native speaker—was interred at
Mousehole cemetery.  Even so, Cornish boasts a more substantial
lexical epitaph than its longer-living cousin, Manx.  As one
might expect, the Cornish legacy fully reflects that region's
piscatorial tradition.  A cookery book dated 1430 includes the
first recorded use of *gull* in English.  The *OED* favours the Welsh
*gwylan* as source, but W.B. Lockwood argues convincingly for
the Middle Cornish *gullen*, adding that the *en* was probably
dropped because it was still the plural suffix in the southwestern
English dialects of the time (the Old Welsh *assen* probably
suffered a similar fate).  It is interesting that the French cognate
*go&eacute;land* emerged from none other than the Breton *gwelan*.  In
all three Celtic languages, the word finds its root in the verb
*weep*.  To locate the remaining trio of Cornish loanwords we
must sink beneath the waves.  *Brill*, European flatfish, appears
in 1481 as a transliteration of the Middle Cornish *br&ycirc;thel* (the
intervocalic &ldquo;th&rdquo; is silent), from *br&ycirc;th* 'speckled.'  *Wrasse* is
probably a late seventeenth-century misspelling of the dialectal
*wraffe*, ultimately the Cornish *(g)wr&acirc;gh* 'old woman.'  Finally,
and a century later, the mackerel shark makes its alternative
debut as the *porbeagle*, and, according to the Cornish lexicographer
Morton Nance, owes its misleading canine moniker to
either the Cornish *porgh-b&uuml;gel* 'swineherd' or the equally
Cornish *porth-b&uuml;gel* 'port herdsman.'

It is, however, on the shores of the New World that the
maritime tradition of the Celtic nations has found its most
exotic lexical manifestation.  In 1568, one hundred men were
put ashore by Sir John Hawkins in the Gulf of Mexico.  In
sworn evidence subsequently published in Peckham's *True
Report* (1583) and Hakluyt's *Principall Navigations* (1589), one
of these men—David Ingram—claimed to have walked some
two thousand miles along Indian trails to the region that is now
Maine.  His peregrinations apparently brought him into contact
with pillars of gold, elephants, red sheep, and a flightless bird:
&ldquo;exceeding fatte and very delicate meate, they have white
heads, and therefore the Countrey Men call them Penguins.&rdquo;
The bird was the now-extinct great auk, which was found in
abundance off Newfoundland during the sixteenth century.
The name *penguin* was later, of course, transferred exclusively
to its cousin in the southern hemisphere.  But it is the unspoken
minor premise of Ingram's &ldquo;syllogism&rdquo; that is so exciting,
namely that in Welsh *pen* means 'head' and *gwyn* 'white.'  But
why, one may ask, should the indigenous &ldquo;Countrey Men&rdquo; use
a *Welsh* epithet?  In the context of Elizabethan proto-imperialism,
the answer is quite simple.  The Tudors themselves were of
Welsh extraction and only too willing to deploy Welsh mythology
against rival Hispanic claims to the New World.  Thus
Madoc ab Owain Gwynedd—an obscure North Walian princeling
whose only factual claim to bardic fame had been his
nautical bent and eventual disappearance at sea—was euhemerized
by Tudor propagandists into the pre-Columbian discoverer
of America.  And if, as the story went, Madoc had landed in
America circa 1170 and had introduced, along with Christianity,
the Welsh language, then it was not beyond the bounds of
imagination that vestiges of that language should remain
enshrined in contemporary Indian speech.  Royal patronage of
the Madoc myth did, indeed, enable Welsh writers to indulge
their imaginations almost without limit.  Nahuatl virtually
became a Welsh dialect overnight, and Montezuma a descendant
of Madoc.  Locations as diverse as Curacao (supposedly
from the Welsh *croeso* 'welcome') and Cairo (Welsh *caer* 'city')
fell prey to what can only be termed a spate of etymological
irredentism.  Bible-bearing Welsh-speaking Indians were, of
course, being spotted everywhere.  And, throughout, the Welsh
provenance of *penguin* remained unassailed.  Even a relatively
sober lexicographer like Johnson is willing to reject Grew's
derivation from the Latin *pinguis* 'fat' in favor of the Welsh
claimant, and, as late as 1755, to uncritically accept his
predecessors' chair-bound conviction that the bird possessed a
white head.  However, the fact that the great auk sported a
black head with merely two white patches should not prompt
us to throw out the etymological baby with the mythopoeic
bathwater.  In the first place, bird names are of notoriously
uncertain application.  One need only refer to *albatross, grouse*,
and *pelican*.  Secondly, one may surmise that the label was
originally applied to the snow-capped island on which the auks
were first sighted.  Indeed, early references to *penguin* are
usually related to the island as well as the bird.

If we discount the possibility of Welsh Indians, we are, of
course, left with the question of whether it was a Welsh, as
opposed to Cornish or Breton mariner who first coined the
neologism.  We shall never know; the lexical outcome would, in
any case, have been identical.  It would be nice to think that it
was none other than Davy Jones, that legendary bugaboo
whose name might itself be a distant echo of *Shonee*, the Celtic
sea-god.  But perhaps that would be to stretch the &ldquo;suspension
of disbelief&rdquo; beyond the bounds of willingness.  And who wants
to be accused of flanneling on behalf of baragouins?  Only an
ass of a lubber!

## A Partridge for Christmas
*Walter Hayes, Ann Arbor, Michigan*

For twenty-eight years, from 1950 to 1978, I had a Partridge
every Christmas.  No postman was ever so eagerly
awaited as the one who would bring this annual reminder that
the old gentleman was alive and well and still contributing to
the wonder and wisdom of everybody who loved the English
language.

Many writers, printers and publishers have celebrated
Christmas with special editions, mostly ephemera, for their
friends.  Cambridge University Press did for some years.  Allen
Lane, founder of Penguin Books, gave up sending Christmas
cards in 1960 but more than made up for the omission the
following year when he wrote: &ldquo;I have decided I will no longer
burden the Christmas mails with expressions of wit and
sentiment.  Instead of a card, I propose, as the spirit moves me
and the occasion warrants, to send a book or keepsake...&rdquo;  In
1961, therefore, his friends received a limited edition of *The
Trial of Lady Chatterley*.

Chicago's excellent Lakeside Press began to send special
editions of the Lakeside Classics to their friends as long ago as
1902 and they are still going strong.

Eric Honeywood Partridge, the great lexicographer of his
long day—one of the few fit to look Samuel Johnson in the
eye—began his Christmas Partridges in 1927 and, except for
one year during the Depression and two or three during the
Second World War, continued until 1977, when the usual four-page
leaflet printed on heavy white card was replaced by a
smaller postcard and an apology.  Owing to the cost of printing
and envelopes, he explained, &ldquo;I am regretfully obliged this year
and any others left to me, to send you a meagre postcard.&rdquo;

He could not, however, give up the habit complely, and
the following year—which was the last year of his life—he sent
another small but more characteristic postcard with some
typical comments about his *Dictionary of Catch Phrases* which
&ldquo;succeeded to a degree that surprised the publishers and 'more
than somewhat' startled me.&rdquo;  He died on June 1, 1979, at 85
years of age.

His Christmas cards—essays, extracts from books in progress,
commentaries on his published work—were a marvelous
compendium of insight and autobiography and present a
revealing picture of an extraordinary man.

Eric Partridge was born on a sheep farm in New Zealand
in 1894.  He left school at sixteen to become a trainee teacher
in Australia, and won a scholarship to the University of
Queensland.  He joined the Australian infantry in April 1915
and served in Egypt, Gallipoli, and on the Western Front in
France.  In 1921 he went to Oxford and worked simultaneously
on two degrees.  After lecturing at the Universities of London
and Manchester, he gave up teaching to become a full-time
man of words.

Much as he hated the war—he was never more than a
Lance Corporal—he confessed that in his four fighting years he
learned more than in the rest of his life, and it was in the blood
and mud of Gallipoli that he first divined his future.

In one of his Christmas cards he wrote: &ldquo;The fighting
services have always generated more slang than any other trade
or profession; they are, in a sense, closed corporations, vast and
human, grave and gay, commendable and reprehensible,
marked by a variety of activities and evoking an invincible
camaraderie.  From all walks of life and from all social,
educational, cultural levels, men intermingle, exchange ideas
and enrich one another in innumerable and incalculable ways.

In slang and colloquialism and catch phrase they find and form
a freemasonry of speech.  No school, no university, no civilian
trade or profession can begin to equal a fighting service as a
beneficent hotbed and an indirect developer of natural and
vivid speech.  In 1915—1918, I made not a single linguistic note;
verbal memory sufficed, mine happening to be fairly good.&rdquo;

This freemasonry of speech began to enchant a wider
audience when he published *Songs and Slang of the British
Soldier* (with John Brophy) in 1930; *American Tramp and
Underworld Slang* (of which he was assistant editor) in 1931;
*Slang Today and Yesterday* in 1933 and *A Dictionary of Slang
and Unconventional English* in 1937.

Partridge went back to war when the Second World
conflict broke out and served another four years in the Army
and the Royal Air Force.  Out of these experiences came *A
Dictionary of R.A.F. Slang*, in 1945, and *A Dictionary of
Forces Slang*, in 1948.

My earlier Christmas cards from him have disappeared,
but I remember being astonished by these reminders of his
enormous output.  Johnson described a writer of dictionaries as
a &ldquo;harmless drudge,&rdquo; and perhaps it seemed so to him for he
was an indolent genius, but Partridge—who never had a full-time
assistant—did not make it seem so.  He also knew that, like
Johnson, he lived by the revenues of literature and he had
chosen to develop a branch of that great bank of knowledge
which pays small dividends.

The 1961 card, which is the earliest I still possess, again
discussed his torrent of work and three new books which had
come out that year: *The Smaller Slang Dictionary, Adventuring
Among Words*, and *Comic Alphabets*.  These, he observed,
&ldquo;amount to nothing more imposing than opuscula, one of them
a parergon or, as the Anglo-Saxon fanatics would say, a by-work.&rdquo;

In a piece written about Partridge in 1951 by Edmund
Wilson and titled &ldquo;Eric Partridge The Word King,&rdquo; Wilson
expressed the view that &ldquo;one cannot help having the feeling
that Partridge has been overexpanding&rdquo;—and it was hard to
disagree.

Still, they had much in common.  For some years, Partridge
had suffered the same anxiety over the deterioration in
cultural standards that so concerned Wilson himself.  The moral
and intellectual disruptions of the war had brought about a
deterioration of literature and the arts, and Partridge's Christmas
card for 1966 reflected his anger.  It was actually a revised
version of an article he had written for *The New York Times
Book Review*, where it appeared on September 18, 1966, and
is, I think, the nearest he ever came to invective.  It was a
trenchant defense of everything he valued and a testimony to
everything he stood for.

He called it &ldquo;The Envious Ones&rdquo; and tilted his quill
against the levelers who feared superiority of mind and spirit.
Even worse, they envied it; therefore, they pretended to
despise it.  Lacking these qualities themselves, they could
neither admire them nor see their necessity in other people.

He concluded: &ldquo;To degrade language is to degrade
civilization.&rdquo;

The title of his 1967 Christmas card was &ldquo;Tail Wagging
the Dog,&rdquo; and it was an apology for having published no new
books that year.  There were two new editions of previous
works, and he did explain that for the third edition of *A
Dictionary of the Underworld, British and American* he had
completed a revision which included a mere 75,000 new words,
rather more American than British.  He had also revised that
small masterpiece, *Shakespeare's Bawdy*.

In 1968, he was back to autobiographical reminiscence in
a card entitled, &ldquo;How did you come to write your *Dictionary
of Slang*?  Or, indeed, your *Usage and Abusage*?&rdquo;

He explained that he was lucky with his parents.  Although
&ldquo;only a farmer,&rdquo; his father knew Greek and Latin and French
and spoke very &ldquo;good&rdquo; English.  He revealed that his father had
once quietly condemned him for devoting four years to a
subject so &ldquo;shabby&rdquo; as slang, and that it took him ten years to
admit that &ldquo;perhaps I hadn't been so very wrong to do so.&rdquo;  His
mother, he added, &ldquo;always backed me up.&rdquo;

In 1969, in a card called &ldquo;Below The Surface,&rdquo; he praised
T. S. Eliot and his friend and fellow finder-of-words, Christopher
Fry, for having turned poetry from stylized diction to
natural diction, loving the way that Fry was able to impart &ldquo;an
agreeable colloquialism&rdquo; to his poetic drama, and praising both
Kipling and Steinbeck for their ability to render &ldquo;the technical
and difficult, non technical and easy.&rdquo;  He had learned to call a
spade a spade and not a bloody shovel in the trenches of World
War I, and he remained in love with simplicity and directness
in language.

In 1973, Partridge reported at Christmas on perhaps the
most popular of his books which he had recently started
writing, *A Dictionary of Catch Phrases*.  For this, he read and
absorbed source material from the 1530s to the 1970s.  He
noted with favor Ring Lardner and Damon Runyon and Robert
Benchley.  &ldquo;Those Americans,&rdquo; he wrote, &ldquo;who feel that Britain
is basically 'hostile' towards them might more wisely remember
that we in Britain and the Dominions have always welcomed
and enjoyed American humour.&rdquo;

The following Christmas produced a further report on
*Catch Phrases*, and I was reminded how few people appreciate
the enormous amount of reading that is involved in
lexicography.

When he began to write *A Dictionary of Catch Phrases* in
September 1973, Partridge had devoted five years of reading to
this project alone and a month or so putting the entries into
alphabetical order.  His reading included Dickens and No&euml;l
Coward, Will Rogers and *The New Yorker*.

The card of 1975 was a thank-you to all the correspondents
and friends who had helped with *A Dictionary of Catch
Phrases*.  They came from all over the world.  His American
correspondents included Professor Harold Shapiro of the University
of North Carolina, Norris Davidson, a retired Philadelphia
network commentator, and, inevitably a military man,
Colonel Albert Moe of the U.S. Marine Corps.

My Christmas card for 1976 contained a handwritten
message.  For some time I had got into the habit of sending him
a bottle of champagne on his birthday, but I could never get
out of the habit of calling him &ldquo;Mr. Partridge.&rdquo;  This gaunt,
venerable Colonial could not have been more friendly, but I
always addressed him formally.  He shook me out of it in
typical fashion in his eightieth year.  On the card he wrote:
&ldquo;Dear Walter, For heaven's sake, let's drop the Mister!!  Puts
years on me.  Eric.&rdquo;

1977, as I have said, brought the Christmas letter cards to
an end and, perhaps because the cards ended, we corresponded
more frequently.

He always pretended never to expect the regular champagne.
In a note after his eightieth birthday, he wrote: &ldquo;At
about noon today, Fortnum and Mason delivered a long
cylindrical mysterious parcel; and when I saw the name on the
delivery slip, I said, 'Well, I'm damned if you haven't sent me a
'commemorative!'  And so it was.  Now living in the home of
friends (my wife's in a nursing home, 3 yrs, 8 months now), I'll
share the bottle with 'em this evening.  Glad it came to-day, not
yesterday; they had 'laid on' an attractive evening for me; had
been given, by friends, a lunch at the Savile.  Bless you.  As
ever.&rdquo;

The Savile Club in London, to which he was elected in
1950 and where I was sometimes bidden to dine, was one of
his four great places.  The other three were desk K1 at the
British Museum Library, Lord's cricket ground, and the Oval
cricket ground in London—for cricket in summer was the only
thing that could get him away from his books and the only
form of holiday I ever knew him to take.

Only his body let him down.  The mind was still tickety-boo
to the end.

I still think of him often and especially at Christmas.
Peace on Earth and goodwill to all lexicographers still strikes
me as a splendid toast.  Champagne eventually exhausts its
bubbles, but Partridge left his behind.  There is nevertheless
something missing each December, and my ear, I suspect, is
less anxious for the postman's knock.  So won't somebody make
all those Partridges into a book?  1984 is his centenary year, and
would there by a better way to say Happy Christmas and
100th birthday at the same time?


#### EPISTOLA {W.N. Smith}

In &ldquo;Meretricious Words&rdquo; [VIII, 3] Bryan Garner explained,
*hooker*: 'one who hooks or entraps, often in a happy manner';
20th century.  Then Frank E. Day [IX, 1] proposed that the
usage began during the Civil War when Gen. Hooker allegedly
received prostitutes in his quarters.  Garland Hicks [IX, 3]
suggested that the term referred to camp followers in general,
and not specifically the ones allegedly enjoyed by Gen. Hooker
personally.

The prostitutes may have been called *hookers*, but the
term predates the Civil war, and Gen. Hooker should not carry
the etymological burden.  The homographical coincidence of his
name and the slang term was undoubtedly the source of coarse
humor and the stories related by Day and Hicks.

From the *DAE*:

*Hook* (Perhaps influenced by Du. *hoek*, 'corner,'
'nook.'

A sharp bend in the course of a river or channel
{1670—}... 1848 Bartlett 179: This name is given in
New York to several angular points in the North and
East rivers; as, *Corlear's Hook, Sandy Hook, Powles's
Hook*....

*The Hook*: A district in New York City [situated at the
southwest corner of Manhattan island and bounded on
the south and west by Corlear's hook of the East
river]... *Hooker*: 1859 Bartlett 201.  A resident of the
Hook, i.e. a strumpet, a sailor's trull.  So called from the
number of houses of ill-fame frequented by sailors at
the Hook (i.e., Corlear's Hook) in the city of New
York...

John Russell Bartlett was a lexicographer, bibliographer,
and ethnologist.  *A Dictionary of Americanisms: A Glossary of
Words and Phrases Usually Regarded as Peculiar to the United
States* was a standard work of reference—1st ed., 1848, New
York; 2d ed., 1859, Boston; 3d ed., 1860, Boston; 4th ed., 1877,
Boston.  He was a contemporary of the John Bartlett who
compiled *Bartlett's Familiar Quotations*.

Some etymologists accept Bartlett; others are skeptical of
colorful etymologies and note that the earliest citation refers to
a red-light district in Norfolk, Virginia.

In a letter dated Nov. 18, 1845, written at Edenton, North
Carolina, by T. Houghton, a student at the University of North
Carolina, he advised a friend that *&ldquo;if* he comes by way of
Norfolk he will find any number of pretty Hookers, in the Brick
row not far from French's hotel&rdquo; (Norman Eliason, *Tar Heel
Talk*, Chapel Hill, 1956, pp. 71, 124, 129, 277).

The writer capitalized the word *Hookers*, which suggests
that it is derived from a proper name, the Hook (district); but
it isn't compelling because he also capitalized *Brick*.

However, if Bartlett was correct, it is certain that the
word would have been delivered at once to Norfolk by
merchant seaman.  Virtually all commercial and personal travel
was by water.  New York City was the largest city, largest port,
and the commercial center of the U. S. Norfolk then had more
maritime commerce and shipping than any other town in
Virginia and was the port for the northern part of North
Carolina.

Also, sailors of the U. S. Navy would have circulated the
term.  The huge Brooklyn Navy Yard was established on
Wallabout Bay in 1824 and was about one half mile south of
the Hook.  In Bishop Davenport's *Gazetteer*, New York, 1842,
the entry for Norfolk includes, &ldquo;The handsome marine hospital
is on Washington Point, one mile distant, and a short distance
up the river is a large U.S. navy-yard.&rdquo;

*[W.N. Smith, Tulsa, Oklahoma]*

## Etymological Overlap: Analogous Derivatives in English
*Bryan A. Garner, Austin, Texas*

>&ldquo;So now they have made our English tongue a
gallimaufry or hodgepodge of all other speeches.&rdquo;—
Edmund Spenser

>&ldquo;I know that some will say it is a mingle tongue.
And why not so much the better, taking the best of
both and the other?&rdquo;—Philip Sidney

The etymological potpourri that we know as the English
language has unquestionably benefited from the diversity
of its sources.  In the Renaissance, writers of English freely
borrowed foreign words—mostly from Latin, French, and
Greek—when they sensed lacunae in our word-stock.  Thus
William Caxton, who introduced printing into English in 1477,
is credited in the *Oxford English Dictionary* with the first use
of *abjure, admiration, affability, apparition, calumnious, capacity,
contumelious, desperate, factor, ingenious, inhuman, nuptial,
quasi, seduce, sumptuous*, and *turpitude*.  Other of
Caxton's loanwords have not fared so well: for example,
*exsidion* 'extirpation' (a nonce-word), *exercite* 'army,' *magistration*
'command' (also a nonce-word).  Sir Thomas Elyot, the
great early 16th-century word-borrower, also had his lexical
successes *(animate, attraction, education, excrement, exterior,
frugality, irritate, persist, ruminate*) as well as his failures
*(allective, applicate, assentatour)*.

Amid the xenophilic inundation of the English lexicon
during this period, however, many words were brought into the
language not so much to fill gaps as to satisfy particular writers'
penchants for the far-fetched.  Our historical dictionaries contain
a superabundance of strange and ridiculous formations
(many of which appeared only once in the language), coined by
fervent neologists with little or no sense of the lexical exigencies
of the time.

One such ridiculous word, which surfaced late in the
Renaissance, is *celeripedian* (Latin *celer* 'swift' + *ped*- 'foot'),
meaning 'swift footman.'  Henry Cockeram recorded the word
in his *English Dictionarie* of 1623.  In fact, Cockeram very
likely coined *celeripedians*, as at least 200 obsolete verbs are
known only through that work.  Cockeram's brand of whimsical
lexicographic invention (almost an oxymoron) was short-lived,
to the credit of subsequent dictionary makers.

Inevitably, as a result of copious borrowing and because of
the affinities of Indo-European languages, words composed of
analogous etymological elements began to crop up in English.
Some of these were calques, or loan-translations, arrived at
consciously by analogical agglutination.  Thus Dan Michel's
French work *Remorse of Conscience* was translated anonymously
in approximately 1340 under an analogous title:
*Ayenbite of Inwyt*.  Dickens, in an essay entitled &ldquo;The Growth
of English Words,&rdquo; described the calques in Wycliffe's version
of the New Testament:

>Sometimes Wycliffe employs a Latin word, as Resurrection,
at other times he translates it, the Agen-rysynge
(or again-rising); so also the word Except appears as
Out-taken, thus, Out-taken women and children, for
Except women and children.

Doubtless many etymological equivalents, unlike those in
Wycliffe's writings, arose unconsciously.  It is often difficult in a
given case to trace whether the Anglo-Saxon analogue was
arrived at purposely or inadvertently.  The best clues occur
where an author uses the Romance term and then glosses it
with the Saxon equivalent; some authors actually refer to their
neologizing and attempt to rationalize it.  In other instances it
seems that the affinities of Indo-European languages, in conjunction
with rampant borrowing, gave rise to the creation of
etymological analogues.  It is interesting to note that, whether
or not consciously derived, many of these analogues, having
coexisted in English for many centuries, retain the same basic
meaning, while others have, to varying degrees, been differentiated
in meaning.  In some instances the connection seems quite
remote.

What follows is a small compilation of etymological synonyms
in English.  One finds that the words composed of the
rarer analogues have generally retained similar senses close to
root meanings.  Those composed of more common morphemes
have often strayed from the literal meanings, so that the
analogous formations now bear little resemblance to one
another.

Whether the etymological synonyms have diverged or
remained constant in meaning, it is useful to enhance our
awareness of equivalences in English affixes and roots, for we
thereby acquire a greater sensitivity to our language, its origins,
and its nuances.  The list should illustrate a point made by
Coleridge more than a hundred fifty years ago:

>It may be doubted whether a composite language like
the English is not a happier instrument of expression
than a homogeneous one like the German.  We possess
a wonderful richness and variety of modified meanings
in our Saxon and Latin quasi-synonyms, which the
Germans have not.

In the three columns listed below, such etymological
analogues as are attested are matched horizontally, showing
derivatives from Greek, Latin, and Anglo-Saxon elements,
respectively.  It may be worth pointing out that although
compound words made up of certain elements of another
language exist in English, the &ldquo;mother tongue&rdquo; did not
necessarily contain the compounded form, i.e., the compounding
was done in English or French.

| GREEK                     | LATIN                        | ANGLO-SAXON          |
| ------------------------- | ---------------------------- | -------------------- |
| prolegomenon              | prologue                     | foreword             |
| prophesy                  | predict                      | fortell              |
| thesis                    | position                     | placement            |
| enchiridion               | manual                       | handbook             |
| prolusion                 | prelude                      | foreplay             |
| hyperopia                 | supervision                  | oversight            |
| anomalous/anomic          | illegal                      | unlawful/lawless     |
| agnostic                  | nescient                     | unknowing            |
| anonymous                 | innominate                   | unnamed              |
| .......                   | terra firma                  | [solid] ground-shaky |
| sarcophagous              | carnivorous                  | meat-eating          |
| somatic                   | corporeal                    | bodily               |
| anthropophagous           | hominivorous                 | man-eating           |
| hypogeal                  | subterranean                 | underground          |
| hypodermic                | subcutaneous                 | .......              |
| epilogue                  | (postscript)                 | afterward            |
| hypothesis                | supposition                  | .......              |
| metathesis                | transposition                | .......              |
| synthesis                 | composition                  | .......              |
| antithesis                | (contra-)(op-)position       | .......              |
| .......                   | legislator                   | law-giver            |
| metamorphosis             | transformation               | .......              |
| metaphor                  | transfer/translate/transport | .......              |
| periphery                 | circumference                | .......              |
| synopsis                  | conspectus                   | .......              |
| entomology                | insectology                  | .......              |
| syllable/syllepsis        | conception                   | .......              |
| prodrome                  | precursor                    | forerunner           |
| .......                   | previous                     | foregone             |
| peritomy                  | circumcision                 | .......              |
| periscopy                 | circumspection               | .......              |
| anacoluthon               | non sequitur                 | .......              |
| polyglot/pangloss         | multilingual                 |
| .......                   | innocent                     | hurtless             |
| sympathy                  | compassion                   | .......              |
| empathetic                | impassioned                  | .......              |
| prognosis/prognostication | prescience                   | foreknowledge        |
| .......                   | portable                     | bearable             |
| .......                   | fraternity                   | brotherhood          |
| .......                   | sorority                     | sisterhood           |
| tele[vision]              | [tele]vision                 | farsightedness       |
| eulogy                    | benediction                  | .......              |
| morphology                | formation                    | .......              |
| proscenium                | .......                      | forestage            |
| .......                   | premonition                  | forewarning          |
| prolepsis                 | precept                      |
| prothesis                 | proposition                  | .......              |
| .......                   | pospartum                    | afterbirth           |
| .......                   | transgress                   | overstep             |
| .......                   | superscribe                  | overwrite            |
| .......                   | superficial                  | overdone             |
| .......                   | incredible                   | unbelievable         |
| .......                   | culpable                     | blameworthy          |
| .......                   | influx                       | inflow               |
| anthology                 | florilegium                  | .......              |
| .......                   | superfluity                  | overflow             |
| .......                   | preclude                     | foreclose            |
| .......                   | presentiment                 | forefeeling          |
| .......                   | retraction                   | drawback             |
| .......                   | succeed                      | undergo              |
| .......                   | substantiate                 | understand           |
| .......                   | ingress                      | instep               |
| .......                   | induction                    | lead-in              |
| .......                   | disinter/exhume              | unearth              |
| symphony                  | consonance                   | .......              |
| .......                   | infidelity                   | faithlessness        |
| .......                   | excrescence                  | outgrowth            |
| theism                    | deism                        | .......              |
| .......                   | eruption                     | outburst             |
| .......                   | expatriation                 | outlandishness       |
| .......                   | duo/duet (etc.)              | twosome (etc.)       |
| cardiac                   | cordial                      | hearty               |
| .......                   | fugacious                    | flighty              |
| pyrotechnics              | .......                      | fireworks            |
| analphabetic              | illiterate                   | unlettered           |
| apocalypse                | revelation                   | .......              |
| diaphanous                | transparent                  | see-through          |
| .......                   | exonerate                    | unload/off-load/     |
| .......                   | .......                      | unburden             |
| .......                   | inimical                     | unfriendly           |
| .......                   | omnipotent                   | almighty             |
| .......                   | inevitable                   | unshunnable          |
| .......                   | precede/antecede             | forego               |
| cacophony                 | dissonance                   | .......              |
| hysteron proteron         | preposterousness             | .......              |
| .......                   | incogitant                   | thoughtless          |
| .......                   | extirpate/deracinate         | uproot               |
| .......                   | homunculus                   | manikin              |
| .......                   | contradict                   | gainsay              |
| .......                   | infinite                     | endless              |
| .......                   | avuncular                    | uncle-like           |
| .......                   | mortmain                     | deadhand             |
| cephalgia/cephalalgia     | .......                      | headache             |
| .......                   | insulate                     | island (vb.)         |
| polycephalic              | .......                      | many-headed          |
| chirography               | .......                      | handwriting          |
| geophagous                | .......                      | dirt-eating          |
| .......                   | depilate                     | unhair               |
| exlex                     | .......                      | outlaw               |
| anamnesis                 | reminiscence                 |
| .......                   | prelibation                  | foretaste            |
| .......                   | expectation                  | outlook              |
| .......                   | export                       | carryout             |
| .......                   | exclusion                    | shutout              |
| .......                   | ejection                     | outcast              |
| .......                   | eman(cip)ation               | handout              |
| .......                   | explication                  | unfolding/foldout    |
| .......                   | erect                        | outright             |
| .......                   | extend                       | outstretch           |
| .......                   | eversion                     | turnout              |
| .......                   | effusion                     | outpouring           |
| .......                   | non obstante                 | notwithstanding      |
| .......                   | intercessor                  | go-between           |
| symmetrical               | commensurate                 | .......              |
| symbiotic                 | convivial                    | .......              |
| syndrome                  | concurrence                  | .......              |
| syngeneic                 | congenital                   | .......              |
| .......                   | effluvium                    | outflow              |
| .......                   | multiplicity                 | manifold             |
| .......                   | postcenal/   postprandial    | after-dinner         |
| .......                   | supercilious                 | highbrow             |
| coprophagous              | merdivorous                  | .......              |
| anodyne                   |                              | painless             |


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;The previous weekend, the Green was the site of the
Guilford Fireman's Bizarre.&rdquo;  [From the New Haven (Connecticut)
Register, July 21, 1983, page 38.  Submitted by Mary-Louise
Bean, Guilford, Connecticut, who, as she did not
attend, has no idea of what could have been going on.]

## English English by Philip Howard
*Philip Howard*

Earlier this summer *The Times* of London, God bless her
and all who hack in her, carried the following headline on its
back page: WHO THE UNIONS WANT.  This provoked Mrs. Galina
M. Carter of Cambridgeshire to write to us at VERBATIM in
grief and anger:

>Is there nothing that can be done to stop this erosion
of the correct use of 'who' and 'whom'?  English is fortunate
in having a minimum of cases and genders, and
it seems to me that the basic structure of the language
should be maintained, even though the language must
remain flexible and subject to contemporary change.  I
find it distressing when a newspaper with the high
standards and reputation of *The Times* allows such slovenly
writing and editing.  I suppose the fault lies with
the schools.  But perhaps by publicizing and criticizing
we may be able to influence the trend away from such
carelessness.

Sorry, Mrs. Carter.  We must try to do better.  The truth of
the matter is that we and the rest of our contemporaries have
increasing difficulty with the inflections of our pronouns.  There
are various reasons for this.  One of them, as Mrs. Carter herself
points out, is that our schools no longer teach grammar in any
systematic way.  Indeed a representative of the teacher's biggest
union recently told a Parliamentary select committee that
grammar and spelling were trivial subjects and should not be
taught in schools.

The Sixties generation of boys came out of school thinking:
&ldquo;I don't have to wear a necktie; I can grow my hair long;
and I can spell how I want.&rdquo;  The girls had similar thoughts
appropriate to their gender.  These young men and women are
now the sub-editors and compositors who produce our newspapers.
Consequently there has been a relaxation in the strict
rules of old-fashioned style and grammar, causing grief and
pain to readers who were born before the Sixties.

A connected reason or consequence of the change in
attitudes of the Sixties is that the case-endings of our pronouns
are quite rapidly withering away, as the dual case, for example,
of Old English faded away nine centuries ago.  THE MAN WHO
THE UNIONS WANT in the headline still looks illiterate, and
should not have appeared in *The Times*.  But, when answering
the telephone, today it would sound pedantic and unfriendly to
say: &ldquo;Whom am I Speaking to?&rdquo;  All but the most rigid
upholder of Victorian values say: &ldquo;Who am I speaking to?&rdquo;  (if
they don't say: &ldquo;Who's that?&rdquo;), which can be conveniently
smudged into: &ldquo;Who'm I speaking to?&rdquo;  Only the learned owls
of Oxford and Cambridge still hoot &ldquo;To-who, TO-WHOM&rdquo; on
every occasion when they should use the accusative.

The A-D section of the Yellow Pages of the London
Telephone Directory has a full page advertisement in huge
print which runs: IF YOU DON'T KNOW WHO YOU WANT ...
BUT YOU DO KNOW WHAT YOU WANT.  I think that their
copywriters would justify the use by saying that *who* sounds
colloquial and matey, whereas *whom* would sound prissy and
magisterial.

An even odder relative confusion substitutes *whom* where
*who* is correct.  This is odd because in general *whom* is avoided
in colloquial registers as being old-fashioned and punctiliously
correct.  But when some some other words intrude between the
nominative relative pronoun *who* and its verb, it has become
conventional to write *whom* instead of *who*.  For example, it is
still correct to write: &ldquo;Ronald Reagan, who is President.&rdquo;  But it
is becoming correct, or at any rate customary and in due
course idiomatic, to write and say: &ldquo;Ronald Reagan, whom he
reminded his listeners was President of the United States...!&rdquo;

I suspect that this peculiarity is didascalogenic (on the
analogy of iatrogenic diseases); as in also, for instance, *It's hard
on we girls*, and *the wine-waiter who served my wife and I*.  We
are in a state of uncertainty about the inflections of our
pronouns because of uncertainty in the teaching of grammar,
and, when put to it, in a panic, we often plump for the wrong
inflection.

The aberrant use of *whom* as a nominative has decent
precedents.  You remember *The Tempest*: &ldquo;Young Ferdinand,
*whom* they suppose is drown'd.&rdquo;  Remember even higher
authority, with an interrogative rather than a relative pronoun:
&ldquo;He saith unto them, But *whom* say ye that I am?&rdquo;  Of course,
both the Greek and the Vulgate of Matthew XVI, 15, have the
accusative (and of course infinitive) here, because accusative
and infinitive is the Greek and Latin construction for asking an
indirect question.  No doubt the translators of the *Authorized
Version*, and Wyclif and Tyndale, were influenced by their
classical training.  Maybe Shakespeare was also (or maybe)
writing in a hurry, he was confusing his grammar with another
way of putting the phrase: &ldquo;Young Ferdinand, *whom* they
suppose to be drown'd,&rdquo; an English accusative and infinitive.

Over here we have increasing confusion about the cases of
our pronouns.  How is it over there?  We still try to get them
right in *The Times*, because our readers were taught grammar,
and care for such precision.  But in the long run, by the next
century, I do not believe that there will be many cases left in
our pronouns to trouble the subs and compositors.  A pity,
would you say?  Well, up to a point, Lord Copper.  Anything
that reduces the distinctions of English coarsens its use.  But
the principal object of language is to communicate meanings
precisely.  And the gradual loss of the last surviving inflections
is not going to impede communication greatly.  In the
meantime, we shall try to use our pronouns properly in *The
Times*.

### BIBLIOGRAPHIA: [*Dictionary of Newfoundland English*](https://utorontopress.com/9780802068194/dictionary-of-newfoundland-english/)
G. M. Story, W.J. Kirwin, and J.D.A. Widdowson eds., (University of Toronto Press, 1982), lxxii + 625pp.

The title of this book begs the question.  It is not a
dictionary of all the English spoken in Newfoundland; nor is it
a dictionary of Newfoundlandisms.  It is, broadly speaking, a
dictionary of what is distinctive and characteristic of Newfoundland
English.  It is thus closer in conception to the
*Dictionary of American English (DAE)* than to the *Dictionary
of Americanisms (DA)*, while it is closest in scope and format to
*A Dictionary of Canadianisms (DC)*.  The editors, in fact,
approve the *DC's* definition of a Canadianism as a &ldquo;word,
expression, or meaning which is native to Canada or which is
distinctively characteristic of Canadian usage though not necessarily
exclusive to Canada.&rdquo;  They thus enter regionally relevant
senses of such general English words as *bay, coast, harbour*,
and alongside such true dialect items as *bawn*, 'meadow, expanse
of rocks on which salted cod are dried,' *coalies* 'playing-cards,'
*hapse* 'hasp,' and *shoreyer* 'American common eider.'

Much of the scope and stature of the dictionary comes
from the range of the editors' sources and their responsible
treatment of them.  Of their printed sources they say: &ldquo;Our aim
was to read intensively the body of literature devoted to the
island of Newfoundland and coastal Labrador from its beginning
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries down to about
1850, and thereafter to read and excerpt more selectively as the
volume of material became more extensive&rdquo; (p. xxi).

Fourteen and a half two-column pages of the Bibliography
authenticate material taken from oral sources, found in the field
records collected specifically for the dictionary and in a
treasure hoard with the engaging name of MUNFLA.  This
acronym does not represent the sound coming from the nostrils
of the dragon guarding the hoard but stands for the Memorial
University of Newfoundland Folklore and Language Archive.
This collection, begun in the early 1960s, now contains a
formidable array of cards, manuscripts, questionnaires, and
tapes, identified when cited in the dictionary by the letters *C,
M, Q,* and *T,* respectively.  Field records are identified by the
letter *P.*  The citation of each such item includes a speaker's or
collector's code and the date of accessioning or recording.

The editors go out of their way to justify their use of oral
sources, but it is hard to see why they felt it necessary, for oral
sources are an important aspect of traditional Newfoundland
culture.  Philip Howard's recent comment just does not apply in
this case: &ldquo;I believe that the criticism of the *OED* for
neglecting spoken English is largely mistaken.  It seems that a
new word or new use is written down somewhere almost as
soon as it is coined&rdquo; [VERBATIM, IX,3].  That may be true of
current English, and it may be true now in St. John's and
Cornerbrook, but it certainly was not true (at least until
recently) in &ldquo;Fogo, Twillingate, Morton's Harbour, all around
the circle.&rdquo;

The actual treatment of entry words is marked by precision
and austerity.  Phonetic respellings, for example, given in
*IPA,* are provided &ldquo;only when there is firm evidence from
speech or tape, when the regional stress pattern is distinctive
...when the spelling of the headword is misleading... or
when the recorded variants are potentially useful for dialectologists&rdquo;
(p. xxix).  Pronunciations are, therefore, fewer than seal
hairs in a flipper pie.  In many cases they are not missed, but
not in all.  One would like to see them, for example, for
*babbish*, also *babbage, babeesh*, ('strips of animal hide'), for
which there are two oral citations and for which the DC (under
*babiche)* shows stress on either syllable.  On the one hand, the
editors may be playing safe in their reluctance to give pronunciations;
on the other, they are often leaving the reader in the
lurch.  (Similarly, but perhaps with better cause, the editors
have eschewed the use of using labels, not caring—or daring—to
indicate whether words are slang or colloquial, archaic or
obsolete.)

Respellings, when given, are part of what is called the
headnote.  To quote the editors yet again, &ldquo;The main body of
the headnote is taken up with the comparative evidence
presented in other pertinent historical and regional dictionaries,
lexicons of other languages, and a variety of published works
found to be useful&rdquo; (p. xxix).  This procedure is an extension of
that used in the *Dictionary of Jamaican English (DJE)*, in
which the notes, being less compressed and more discursive,
are easier to read and more entertaining.  One problem with
these comparative references is that they assume the reader has
to hand the *OED, OEDS, EDD, DAE, DA, DC, DJE,* and some
other English dictionaries, as well as Dineen's *An Irish-English
Dictionary, Joyce's English As We Speak It in Ireland*, and a
few other frequently cited references; another is that the use of
these same headnotes is expanded whenever the editors decide
to give etymological information, which they do sometimes
directly and sometimes indirectly.  Thus *livyer* 'a permanent
coastal settler,' after the citing of forms and of occurrences in
other dictionaries, is overtly referred to the *OED* treatment of
*ier* with the direction to compare *lovyer, millier* (entered as
*millyer),* and *shoreyer*.  On the other hand, the entry for *caplain*
(the fish, merely includes in the comparative references a
mention of the *Tr&eacute;sor de la langue francaise* entry for French
*capelan* (fr Provencal), the accepted etymon.

Basically, the editors do not give etymologies where they
are adequately given elsewhere or where there is no firm basis
for a derivation.  It would, however, be helpful if they indicated,
as *DFE* does, when the etymology of a term is unknown.
Words such as *bavin* ' &ldquo;splits&rdquo; used for kindling' or *killick* 'a
type of anchor,' for instance, are referred to the *OED*, so the
reader may well look there for an etymology.  In each case,
however, the *OED* says the origin is unknown or obscure,
though sume suggested sources are given for *bavin*.  The editors
scrupulously avoid controversy.

The definitions themselves are clear and concise, and they
make good use of references to other entry words.  These, set
within an entry in small capitals, may be used as defining
synonyms or may be preceded by &ldquo;See,&rdquo; &ldquo;See also,&rdquo; or &ldquo;Cp.&rdquo;
There is a hierarchy of references implied here, but the precise
use and differentiation of these different types of routing
signals is nowhere explained.

Phrases and combinations are given as subentries after the
Oxford pattern, and one cannot help wishing the editors had
followed the more current and predominantly North-American
pattern of consistently entering compounds as main entries.  As
it is, some are and some are not, and some simple entry words
exist only as carriers of subentries for combined forms: for
example, *cropping* (for *cropping shed* and *cropping time*) *stark*
(for *stark-naked tea*—no milk or sweetening), and *cross* (adjective,
adverb, and noun, for several combinations each).  Yet
*cross-handed* is a separate entry and has *cross-handed dory* and
*cross-handed skiff* as subentries.  Where, then is the reader
meant to look?

The citations are, as one would expect, one of the
strengths of the dictionary.  It seems that the earliest known use
of a word is given first, followed by as many other citations as
seem useful or justified.  The editors are to be congratulated on
using, as they say, &ldquo;a greater number of illustrations than is
customary in some historical dictionaries&rdquo; (p. xxxiii).  It is
surprising, though, how many entries are supported by one
citation only, whether written or spoken.  Some entries have no
citation at all but only a reference to a source.  Thus *feck*, of
which the total entry reads, &ldquo;feck n A fine goose feather used
in oiling the works of a clock.  (1027 *Christmas Messenger* 47)&rdquo;
What is this *feck?*  Has it anything to do with either *feck* in the
*OED*, with *feck* as a verb meaning to steal *(OEDS)*, with
*feckless*, or even with *fitch?*  The editors don't know and so
offer no suggestions.  As elsewhere, they present what evidence
they have and leave the rest of the work and worry to the
reader.

Finally, with reference to the presentation of material,
mention should be made of the excellent typography.  It seems
to be modeled on that of the *DC,* and the same ragged-right
margin and even more generous space between entries give
each page an open, inviting appearance.  One could wish that
the *OED* pattern had been followed in the setting of part-of-speech
labels in italics, to distinguish them more clearly from
what follows, especially as they are sensibly not followed by a
period.  It also makes sense to have dispensed with periods after
such other abbreviations as *comb, phr, cp*, and *esp*.  It would,
however, have been useful if a clearer typographic break could
have been made between a comparative reference or other
headnote discussion and an immediately following definition.
There are no pictures, but there is a ghastly map that seems
more appropriate to students of oceanography than to those of
dialectology: it is good on bathymetric contours but does not
identify the Avalon Peninsula (mentioned in the Introduction)
or any town or city other than St. John's.

On the whole this book is excellent—a fine scholarly
achievement, to be as eagerly welcomed as it has been long
awaited.  But there are several ways—some minor and some
quite significant—in which more help could have been given to
the reader.

*[Patrick Drysdale, Abingdon, Oxfordshire]*

## Crossword Puzzle

<!--- Need crossword image ---> 
 

**Across**

1\. Place a hidden bet on your plant.  
5\. Remove that attitude from within the State of Delaware.  
8\. This worker can be a driller after the State of Louisiana.  
9\. Grow?  No, I rush helter-skelter.  
11\. In truth, look back to a rubber cushion in half the Navy.  
13\. Reproduce to find a symbol after rhenium.  
15\. Incongruity: half of Ronald in two-thirds of ivy.  
16\. Stupefied, ate pi in olive drab. 10 Lordliness?  He hugs satin.  
18\. This pliable fabric cheats relatives.  
19\. The pie was a pie-eyed victim.  
21\. Ought, aught, and naught.  What's missing?  
23\. This vegetable can alternately be a suffering.  
25\. A musical instrument is hiding in the latest udometer.  
26\. Estimates tell us there's a giant among kings.  
28\. Bicycles definitely designate ages.  
29\. Herb can logically be removed from allowance.

**Down**

2\. Prohibition is mirrored in the historic &ldquo;O, grab me.&rdquo;  
3\. Pole came with the boat, but, upset, turned to Danish money.  
4\. Long ago, there was gold in you.  
5\. Common, yellow, and flowery, but best-dressed in the wild.  
6\. Sullenly, you tangled with a teepee.  
7\. Salary could mean tips' end, in uncertain presentation.  
8\. Affection in a fog could flower.  
12\. Season it, you'll hear in time.  
14\. Related to the buttercup, they adorn monastics.  
17\. Diminish that idle, confused chatter.  
18\. A family group is disagreeable with the borders of democracy.  
20\. The lower part is in opposition to female deer.  
22\. Ordinarily but excitedly it becomes a Hawiaiian feast in the South.  
24\. It could be liquor, but is a popular flower.  
27\. Sesame, retrospectively becomes condensed literature.


### SIC! SIC! SIC!

&ldquo;For a month he laid in the berth watching the ships
depart through the porthole.&rdquo; [From *The Yukon Breed*, by Lee
Davis Willoughby.  Submitted by Betti Slack, Boulder,
Colorado.]

[Internet Archive copy of this issue](https://archive.org/details/stx_Verbatim_The_Language_Quarterly_v10n2_Autumn_1983)